Melius Inquirendum. Or A SOBER INQUIRY, Into the Reasonings of the Serious
Inquiry: Wherein The Inquirers Cavils against the Principles, his Calumnies
against the Preachings and practices Of the NON-CONFORMISTS Are Examined, and
refelled, And St. Augustine, the Synod of Dort, and the Articles of the Church
of England in the Quinquarticular points, vindicated.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his
Neighbor comes, and searches him out. Printed, 1678.

To the Ever, and much honored S. K. Esquire.
Worthy Sir!
I Received yours, which brought along with it, both its own welcome, the
assurance of your restered health, and continued Love, and also my own
entertainment, The serious and Compassionate Inquiry. I have now perused it
with as much seriousness as't was written, and returned it with mere clemency
then it deserves; and must confess my self cast down so much the lower by my
disappointments upon the Reading it by how much the flattering title had raised
me higher to expect from thence mere healing counsels. I have read of a Polish
Ambassador in Queen Hizabeths days, who at his landing whispered it abroad
that his Embassy was Peace, but when admitted to his Audience, threatened a war:
Her Majesty with invincible patience attended the winding up of his long-winded
Oration, and then cries out Heu quam decepta fui, Legatum expectavi, Heraldum
accepi! I expected a Dove with an Olive branch in his mouth, and I tread upon a
snake, with a menacing sting in his Tail! Just such another treat has your
Inquirer given me. The Title raised me on tip-tocs to see at length that famous
weapon-salve; which might consolidate the Churches bleeding wounds, but the
Book presents me with a weapon ready drawn to render them more wide, and more
incurable. You see, Real passion, will not long conceal it self under feigned
compassion, Nemo diu egit Hypocritam! A feverish preternatural heat in the
body, usually breaks out at the Lips! The Crocodiles tears, are but a ^ort
formal Grace, over his Prey, and yet his importunate stomach thinks his throat
cut till it be done! You are pleased indeed to recommend it to me, as an
Irenic, and when I said, it had rather the mien of a Military Tactick, a friend
of ours a little inclinable to be witty replied, it was neither the one nor the
other, but an innocent Game at Ticktack.

It Is come in fashion again I perceive to Lard lean discourses with grave
sentences, and therefore that you may not think I am cap't, let me remember you
of Seneca. Infeliciter aegrotat, ^ui plus periculi a medico, quam a morbo. That
Patients case must needs be desperate, whose Physician is a greater plague then
his discase: And that Church must certainly languish, quae nee morbum far
potest nee remedium, that can neither endure the Remedy, nor the Malady: It Is a
sad cheise, whether we will die of our wound, or our plaster. And therefore
your great Pretenders might do well to forbear their slighter Applications,
which do but exasperate the Humor, for the more we tamper with improper Means,
the less success must we expect from those that are proper, and proportionable.

I beseech you Sir! answer me with mere seriousness, and compassion, then this
gentleman makes inquiries, can you once imagine these Dissenters so
irreconciliably sallen out with themselves, as to maintein an utter (...) to be
disputed cut of a prison, into Liberty? to be argued cut of poverty into
plenty? out of imminent danger, into a safe Retreat? Can you really believe
them at such deadly sead with their own case, and Repose, such sworn enemies to
their own peace, as to be more ambitious of Ruin, then (...) are of self
preservation? That they should Court their Miseries, with the same passionate
Caresses, that other (...) do their Mistresses? that they should run over one
another Heads for the first grasp of Destruction, as if they rod post, all
upon the switch, and spur for a presentation to a warm parsonage? that what
ever pr^mises of fair and honest conveniences are offered; yet they are so
absurdly obstinate as to hold the Conclusion of self-created vexation? Believe
it Sir! (I know you believe it!) the Non conformists are Men, as well as their
Neighbors, as apprehensive of Trouble, as desireus of tranquillity. They have
their Interests, and honest concerns too, on this side Another world; Their
backs must be clothed, their families must cat, or die: and as, pudicitia, and
forma, so conscientia^, and integritate, in foro nil emitur. A good conscience
is not current coin, in this worlds markets; It will not purchase one dish of
meat, though with a good stomach, it makes most Excellent sauce; and will make
the soul, a noble feast ^lone. You ought not therefore, you cannot entertain a
thought, s^ unreasonable, so uncharitable, That any thing short of sinning
against God, and thereby exposing themselves to his displeasure, any thing on
this side polluting their Consciences and so making their best friend their
worst enemy, could be a temptation strong enough, to prevail with them to
expose to apparent hazard what ever they enjoy of accommodation to render their
Lives desirable.

You might perhaps please your self with a thought, That the Rhethorick of this
Discourse would proselyte one of whose intellectuals you had just cause to
think nothing but mean, and Contemptible. And had I found his Reasons as
Cogene, as his Style is fluent, his Arguments as hard, as his words are soft.
you could not despair of success upon Him, who is ever ready to offer himself
to be practiced upon at the satisfaction office: But he that would do his work
thoroughly upon an impartial Inquirer, must use Arguments of steel, as well as
words of Oil: And the Main thing I complain of in his Declamations is, that
whilst we surfeit upon Rhetoric, we are chapfallen for (...) of Reason; and
the hungry Reader sits picking his teeth like a Spanish Don, after an insipid
salade, as if he had dined upon the ox at Bartholomew fair. If ever you saw
the sign of the Porter, and Dwarf, you have seen the true scale of proportion
between his Mellifluous Language, and pitiful argumentation. And I am resolved
that no Importunity shall prevail with me to Accept A wellmeasured sentence, or
Labored period, for a Syllogism, where two gingling words stand for the
propositions, And a decent comely Cadence for the Conclusion: But this I will
freely own, that since there is a necessity (which yet we know no Reason for)
that the Nonconformists be Reviled, its some Comfort to be railed at in good
Language, and to meet with Dirty Matter wrapped up in clean linen. And since you
will needs have my judgment of the style, and dress, I shall only say thus
much. Cum omnis Arrogantia est molesta, illa Ingenii, and Eloquentiae, est
long molestissima. All Arrogance is indeed nauseous, but that of wit and
Rhethorick in a polemical treatise is a downright Vomit.

They that talk so Confidently that there can be No Unity hoped for among
Christians, without Uniformity: nor peace maintein'd, unless all Men be of a
scantling in their judgments, or at least, that (though indulged to retain
their different apprehensions) they be obliged to conform to the same practice,
in every circumstance, do seem to me to have entertained notions very unworthy
the Christian Religion, or perhaps to understand very little of the Nature, and
design of it. An Epicurean, can nuzzle in the same straw, with a swine of his
own stye: and truly it was well thought on; saevis inter se convenit ursis. But
Christianity enlarges our love to a greater Latitude, it raises our affections
to a Nobler pitch, cordially to embrace with the best Arms of Good will
whoever are Dignified with the Image of Christ, though not Distinguished with
our own superscription, nor express the fi^r strokes of our private
conceptions, why can we not love a Christian as he is such, though differing
from us in Innocent Accidents, as well as a Man, because he is a Man, though
his hair be of another Color, his face of another Symmetry; and complexion
then our own?

It Is true, we cannot without Abhorrence, and Recoil of Spirit behold those
Monstrous births, which nature (ever designing regularly, yet through the
ineptitude of her tools and Matter, miscarrying in her operations) does
sometimes affright the world with; Nor can we bear those prodigious heresies,
and uncouth blasphemies, the byblows of depraved nature, begotten by a Corrupt
Head, upon a debauched Heart, yet even toward these, we ought not to be more
monstrous in our behavior, then they are in their Nature; One sin will never
heal another. Rigorous impositions, will never Cure froward sentiments; It was
A B. of Hereford's prescription to cut of the Head, because it Aked; As some
Divisions, and errors are the works of the flesh, proceeding from pride and
passion, nourished by discontent or other unruly lust, so are some magnified
Remedies for those distempers, which smell as strong, and sav^ur as rank of
the flesh, as those very corruptions which they pretend to purge away.

They do but therefore delude themselves, and abuse others, whose great
Ambition it is to Reduce the world into a strict, and precise uniformity in
every minute punctilio, God has no where promised it, we have (...) Reason to
expect it; All conclude it unattainable, and many judge it not desirable. The
Healing Rule must be this. In necessariis unitas: in non-necessariis Libertas,
in utrisque Charitas. If our judgments and practices Center in things
fundamental, let a Latitude be allowed in the Non-necessary, and a charitable
temper be maintained in both, and then shall we see the welcome Dawnings of
primative peace, and glory. That Peace which fills up both pages in the gospel,
is not founded upon an assent to every inconsiderable Nicetie which an idle and
fruitful invention can broach, when he has little else to do, but in cherishing
a quick and vigorous spirit of mutual condescension, and forbearance of one
another under our dissentings. No external application can possibly reach this
inward grievance, purge out that (...), the Spirit of Malice, envy, hatred,
pride, Revenge, and the wound will heal of it self.

It will remain the eternal blot of Pope Victor's memory that he embroiled both
East, and west, with the quarto-decimane Impertinencies, when he might have
allayed those heats, and ferments of Spirit, by Removing the Subject of a
needless question, or Leaving (...) at Liberty as he found it; but I much
mistake my self if ever he, or his Successors in that usurpation, understood
the things that belonged to the Churches peace; whose solemn method it was to
set the Earth on a flame with sparks kindled from Hell, blown up by imposing
Pride, yet all along visibly justified with the specious Plea of uniformity.

N^w the Plea (in short) is this: Without Uniformity there can be no Unity, and
without Unity we must expect no inward love, Diversity of Opinions lead to a
diversity of practices, and these alienate the affections, which works it self
into factions, and parties to the disquiet and rending of the Church, and
hazard of the State. But these reasonings lie very naked, and open, to the
judicious and impartial Considerer. For our true Unity lies in the profession
of one God, one Lord Jesus Christ, one Spirit, and not in one Ceremony, and our
love will therefore be the more eminent, because it has these differences to
prove its truth, and exercise its' strength: And what ever the evil may be in
different apprehensions, the Remedy will never be by Halters, but Humility, and
Charity; for Humility will School me into this lesson, to think well of the
persons, and judge modestly of the principles of those ^at dissent when a
Halter will sooner break the neck, then conwince the judgment: It Is easy to
play the Hypocrite and practice what another pleases, but impossible to believe
what I please my self: But now, if these diversities of judgment, and practice,
shall boil up into Animosities, which through their ill management shall
endanger, or but seem to threaten the safety of the government: The Magistrate
in this case has a proper and specific Remedy of his own, entrusted in his
hands by divine right; viz. to Reduce Delinquents into the way of sobriety by
due punishments; leaving the sober, and peaceable Dissenters in the mean time
to reap the fr^its (...) their own innocence; with this singular Advantage;
that they can now learn by the (...), and exemplary punishments upon others, to
watch against these corruptions of their hearts, least they should break out
into (...) (...) practices unbecoming the Gospel which they do profess, and
should adorn.

How beautiful (...) is in the eyes of Men, and what deformity the difference
of Modes, Rites, forms of wors^ip carry along with it, rending Religion it
self less pleasing, and amiable in the eyes of curious and critical Spectators
is easily pretended; And with aequal right, and Reason might they complain,
that God has not made all Men of one size, one stature, and thence take
occasion to make goodly Declamations against the ugliness of the Creation.

The variety which we behold in the Universe, is not its Deformity, but its
beauty; As the eye is more ravished with Landscape, which enriches it with the
grateful interposition of Hills, and Valleys, Woods, and Champian, alternately
taking up the thoughts, and feeding contemplation with the natural
chequere-work of light, and opake, then if it were let out to loose it self in
the uniformity of a wast Horison, or empty prospect; so is the soul more
surprised with the glory of the Christian Religion, when various apprehensions
agree in the same substantial holiness, and several statures bear the Image of
the same God: one star differing from another in Glory, yet all shining with a
Light borrowed from the same fountain, the smallest eye of heaven filling up a
place in the Asterisms of those of the first Magnitude. If indeed all men were
soundly cudgelled into one e^n way of profession and practice, they whose
design it is to sleep out their days in ease, might enjoy themselves, and
their Acquists over Conscience, with more soft, and delicate touches of carnal
contentment, dreaming all the while that the world is their own; yet still the
minds of men would sit as uneasy under ^h Rigours, as he that pinches his body
with too straight a (...), only to recommend himself to acceptance by the new
and obteining fashion: And as we observe an uneasy suit. soon becomes an old
suite, so they that sit pinch't under a straight laced Religious form, do but
grumble, and make sow^ face^ waiting the good hour; when they may fairly and
honestly dise^ themselves of an ungrateful cumber.

What Advantage this Inquirer may promise to himself from (...) a way of
writing, I cannot Divine. The best use I conceiv^ (...) made of it, is to
support the evil Consciences of the (...) of their fury, a^ such tolerable
rates, that they may not (...) (...) souls in pieces: for persecution for
Religion, ^s an (...) so abhorrent to the common sight of Mankind, (...) (...)
thoug^ for a while perhaps it may contract a Lethargick d^ness, yet will awake
and mutter, and grumble (...): (...) ^ade a pandar to Coveteousness, or malice,
a (...) horse to base Revenge, or to held a Candle to the Devil; And when it
shall begin to lowre, and scold, it is no little gain that will make a sop for
that barking Cerberus, no small see will bribe it to hold its tong^e. But now
in comes one of these plausible Declamations, rending the principles of the
Dissenters so silly, their grounds so weak, their lives so wicked, their
practices so ridiculous, and yet of such treasonable, and schismatical
Tendencies, which ^uskes the clamor of Conscience, and like the jogging of the
Cradle rocks the pievish thing asleep again, as soon as it begins to whimper.

Really Sir! I cannot but exceedingly pity, and pray for a sort of persons of
your own Quality, who to their more refined Extract, having added all the
ornaments of posi^e literature, and those more graceful accomplishments fetched
(...) by Travel, and a fr^ converse in the world, besides that Honor which
they have bravely won in the Field, and creditably worn at home, have yet their
judgments so far imposed upon, their spirits so embittered by prejudices formed
from misrepresentations, as to become the instruments of other men's passions in
executing those severities, which their calmer thoughts, and more sedate
Advisements must needs Regret; And though a true generos^ English Temper,
valiant, but not cruel, may confidently claim the Magnanimous Lion (Cui satis
est prostr^ss*) as the Emblem of Courage mixed with Clemency, for his Crest,
yet some few of m^re Rigid inclinations, will depopulate and lay wast many a
mile about them, who when they behold an odd kind of Peace, as the happy fruits
of their cruelties, applaud themselves for persons of deep judgment, and great
success, ^yling Desolation, Universal quiet.

If you ask me why I have not underwritten my Name? besides that you know it
well enough without my subscription, you may be pleased to Remember what you
once told me, That Though Truth needs no Mask, she may want a helmet; and
seeing she desires no better, do not grudge her the Covert of Darkness.
Innocence knows no guilt that should Dye her face with shame, yet she
apprehends danger, which may make her Pale with fear. Truth seeks no Corners,
as to the justice of her cause; and yet she may seek a corner as to the
injustice of her judge. I am not conscious to my self of any evil Design, but
they who will call Preaching, Prating, will hardly scruple to call my Ears
Horns, and I am not to be judge in the Case.

I am Confident you commiserate ^ur hard fate, and the unequal Terms our
^ffing Antagonists impose upon us. They challenge us to a paper duel in the most
provoking Language such as would set an edge upon the most obtuse coward. If
Modesty, an ambition for peace, or love of retiredness tempt us to decline the
Combat we are then Posted up for Cowardice; but if we awaken so much spirit as
to take up the gauntlet, and return the mildest Answer, then Trusty R. gets it
in the wind, and immediately summons his Hamlets, raises the whole posse
Ecclesiae, and Spiritual Militia upon us, and strangles the helpless Infant in
the Cradle: A wary Answer may sometimes steal of the form before it is
started, then comes in Mr. Warden M. (the common Hunt) whistles out the whole
pack of his infallible beagles, pursues, runs down, catches the poor fugitive,
and then you know to seize a book is the most effectual way to Confute it: If
one in a thousand has the happy success, to escape this Inquisition, then the
New Smectymnuan Divines, or Convocation of the Coffee-house will reply upon it,
that they will, if it was pend with becoming seriousness and gravity, they have
one Reply. This is nothing but whining, or Raving: if the style be brisk't with
a dash or so of facetiousness, they have one word ready to Confute it. This is
Drollery, Burlesque buffoonry! A blank Imprimatur lay ready every week against
poor Robin, (the doughty second of the Friendly debate, and Ecclesiastical
Polity) creeps abroad; and to all bis blasphemies, obscaenities, scurrilities,
ribaldries, the privilege underwrites, This may be printed: If Mr. Sh. goes
big with some of his illegitimate Socinian foolcries, A Chaplain waits at the
door to midwife the brat into the World: But if a piece comes out with little
zeal for ceremonies, though in vindication of the old Doctrine of the Ancient
Church of England, it expects nothing but Lydford Law, first to be condemned,
and afterward perhaps to be tried: Against all which I see no other remedy,
but silent complaints, or it may be this short Rejoinder, Toll Legem and fiat
disputatio!

But I have already given you too much trouble, what remains must be mine own,
to study to be Master of a calm, serene, submissive frame of heart, which may
enable me to suffer like a Christian, for doing like a Christian! And if after
all I cannot escape the lash of virulent Tongues, and violent hands, yet at
Least I may not fall under the severer stings of my own Conscience.

I shall not need to beg of you to give this Paper a Leasurely, and impartial
perusal, it is so Agreeable to your own Nature, and that strict Law which your
own Wisdom has imposed upon you, Not to pass a final judgment upon any thing,
before you have duly weighed all things; that as I cannot suspect you will
decline your constant, and fixed Method in my single Case, so I can hardly
prevail with my self to ask that as a favor, which you in justice must needs
grant.

I shall only beg the pardon of this interruption given to your important
concerns, and if you smile sometimes at my simplicity, let that be the
sharpest correction, your affection will suffer you to give to

Honored Sir! Your much obliged Servant and most unworthy Friend. G. W.

The Introduction Considered, and the Enquirer's expected Advantag^s from his
Comparison between the Religion of the former and present Times, seasonably
disappointed.
ARhetorical Introduction is nothing but a Politic Shooing-horn to draw on an
incredible discourse more smoothly over the Readers tender Belief, in case he
should prove too high in the Instep: Or you may please to call it a L^sser
Wedge, prudently applied to a knotty piece to make way for a greater; For with
such grave Maxims, wise men arm themselves; To drive that Widge, not which is
best in it self, but which will go. The Learned Verulam observes, That they are
not those stincks, which the Nostrils straight abhor, and expel, which are most
pernicious; but such Air, as have some similitude with man's Body, and so
insinuate themselves, and betray the Spirits. Thus downright Railing Discourses
are in part their own Antidotes; and we stop our Noses at those fulsom
eructations of some writers, who have been c^rtainly fed a long time with
Carrion; whereas these more plausible Pe^s recommended to our gusto by the
Vehicle of supple phrase, and glib expressions, and with all Aromatiz^d with a
whiff of pretended Charity, creep into the affections, and so wit^ ease betray
the judgment; for Perit judicium cum re^ transit in affectum. When a
Controversy once gets f^ir Quarter i^ the ^ffections, it will soon undermine,
and blow up the understanding; so hard it is to persuade, that it can be Poison
which is sweet, or destructive to Nature which accommodates it self to the
Critical Humors of the Palate.

It has pleased, the Enquirer (upon Mature advice no doubt) to usher in the
main Body of his Discourse, with a Patherical comparison between the ancient
state of Christianity, and the pr^; and ^e very affectionately laments the
Change: wherein he imitates the vain humor of our young travelers, who at
their return unmeasurably praedicate the glories of foreign Countries; but can
find nothing but mean, and contemp^le to b^stow on their Native Soil: Whether
it be that they would be thought to know something more than those homebred
Sn^ls which never traveled beyond the sight, or smell of their own Chimneys,
or that they presume to shelter themselves under that Pretection which all
great Travelers are supposed to carry in their Pock^ts; Yet this is certain,
that far-fe^cht, and dear^ht, will recommend a very trite, and ordinary ^ory,
to the Acceptance and Admiration of the Many.

The Poets are never more transported into pleasing ecstasy, then when they are
gotten into the (...) of the Golden Age; and then the Rivers shall flow with
pure Nectar and Milk; The Trees distill Life Honey; and the prodigal Earth,
without cultivation gladly exhaust her Spirits, and spin out her Bowels to pay
Tribute to the satisfaction of Mankind; with a great many more Pedantick
good-morrows; But when once that Iron Age appeared with its Harder-face;
Pandora's Box was then opened, and whole Legions of Furies invaded the world;
But above all, Navigation and Trade, those two implacable enemies to all
Religion, were invented, and I cannot sufficiently admire, that amongst all the
Reasons mustered up against th^se Schismatical Evils, This Primitive one, That
they came in with the Iron Age, escaped our Enquirer's Industry.

As all good Christians are ready to give the Primitive times their due
praises, and as willing to lament the Degeneracy, and Apostasy of the present,
^o they look upon it as a piece of Incivility no modest person would be guilty
of, to spend all his Frankincense in embalmin^ the memory of the Ages Dead, and
gone; whilst the present, lie^ like a rotten ^arease stinking above-ground
without the courtesy of a (...) shroud to cover its nakedness. A vanity (to
say nothing more ^vere) noted by Wisdom it self, Eccles. 7. 10. Say not t^,
what is the cause that the former days were better than these: for thou do
not Enquire wisely concerning this.

Had this Genteleman concerned himself to appear a wise and impartial, as well
as a Compassionate Enquirer, he had never been guilty of that folly to pelt
witty Sentences and Apothegms at his Readers head. as Boys do Snow-balls, which
with equal ease, and execution, may be retorted For thus might a vulgar Ingeny
form a Panegyric of the singular Piety and exemplary Holiness of those
Primitive Christians. That they employed their Affections in keeping the old
Commandments, and never strained their Inventions to find out new ones: They
made no more Duties, nor Sins, than God had made and left the way to Heaven no
narrower, th. Gate no straighter than they found it: They judged him a good man
that squared his Conv^rsation, a pious man that modelled his Devotions by that
of ^he Word, though he knew* no other Rubric: They contented themselves with
Gospel simplicity, and durs^ not be wise above what was written, least, they
should prove learned fools: They understood what a Spirit of Bearing with, and
forbearing of one another signified; And the Fathers of the Church approved
themselves to deserve that venerable Character, who never dashed out their
childrens brains, because their Heads were not all of one Block.

That little wit which there is in these popular Trappings, is only this. To
single out the most eminent Instances of Refined Sanctity in the Primitive
times, and from thence to take the general measures of their Devotion, and then
again to cull out the most Infamous Examples of prodigious Villainies in the
present Age, and from thence to give us the Idaea of our Modern Piety; that is,
to make a misshapen Parallel between the Flower of those, and the Bran of
these days.

He that would make a right Judgment of the Wealth of a Nation, must not visit
the Hospitals only: He that would take a just Prospect of a Nations Fiety, must
not inform his Pencil from the Records of New- gate, or the Executions of
Tiburn: Or if he would be satisfied in the sweetness of a City, I would not
advise him to hang his Nose over the Vaults, and Common-shores: Or if he would
take the exact Height of the Nations Glory, let him not take instructions from
some depopulated Village: If we consider the best of the worst man, or the
worst of the best man; If we only view the Mole or Wart upon the fairest face,
and some single feature in the most deformed, we may easily betray our selves
in this false judgment; that Thersites was a great Beauty, and Absalom a
Gorgon: Thus if we will denominate the lapsed Ages from some eminent Rarities
of Virtue: or the present, from some notorious Examples of Impiety, we shall
never distinguish between the Commonwealth of Plato, and the Dregs of Romulus.

Suppose we, that some Tribunitial Orator, to exercise the gallantry of his Pen
in a Theme so common* and copious, would set himself to decry the Piety of that
other World. Let him Copy out the Treachery of Judas, exaggerate the Apostasy
of Demas* the Heretical pravity of Hymen^us, and Phil^us; let him enlarge upon
the Ambition of Diotrephes, the Blasphemies of Cerinthus, the Debaucheries of
the Nicolaitans; and above all, be sure to plie the Villainies of the Gnostieks,
with warm Clothes, and what a frightful M^dusa would that Age appear, if drawn
to the life by those Exemplars?

Suppose once more that our Orator had an itch to employ his mercenary Pen to
scrape acquaintance with some tempting preferment; to reconcile his lines to
the Genius of the present Age, and employ his Talents where he shall not lose
his oil, and pains, Let him with Apelles take up on trust the particular
Excellencies of the most exemplary Christians, let him borrow the single
beauties of meekness, patience, humility, charity, faith, selfdenyal,
constancy; that like the Sporades lie dispersed and scattered up and down the
world; let him A mass all the individual worthinesses that are not yet banished
to Heaven, and unite all these in one Table, and such a draught perhaps shall
not need to be ashamed to show its face before the most exact pieces of
proportion that are reserved in the Archives of Antiquity. And to speak a plain
truth, if one tenth part of what these men ascribe to their great Patrons in
their Dedicatory Epistles were true, I could easily evince that there are very
few who have the disposal of fat Advowsons, but are more Illustrious Saints,
than any of the Primitive Fathers, and perhaps we shall not need to except the
Twelve Apostles.

As he would scandalously reproach the stable fixed Providence of God, that
should conclude Nature to be almost worn off her legs, her Powers enfeebled,
her Spirits d^bilitated from the precotious deaths of those who dig their
graves with their teeth, and with the sheers of Luxury and Riot cut the thread
of their lives before Reason would say it was half spun out to its just length;
so would he no less maliciously blaspheme the steady Reiglement, and
superintendency of the only Head, and Governor of the Church, with the
efficacious influences of the H. Spirit upon the Souls of true Christians, who
from Hypocrisy the mother, and her daughter Apostasy of those who Court
Religion for her Dowry, shall conclude against the power of Godliness in those
Christians, which is very conspicuous to all who are not concerned in point of
self-preservation, and self-justification to decry real Holiness according to
the Primitive Pattern, whilst they would be thought the great Adorers of the
Primitive Times.

A practice well-becoming the Legions of Beelzebub, or the trainedbands of
Accaron, whose delight it is with the importunate Fly, to fix upon the galled
parts, exasperating sores with their venomous probos^es, which would heal of
themselves; whilst prejudice will not suffer them to take notice of the entire,
and sounder parts.

What Arguments our Enquirer has furnished A theism with to wound Religion,
which he would pretend to heal, I shall not need to observe, they are a
generation quick-sighted to epsy, and take their advantages without a Monitor:
But when I hear him L^ment, the palpable contra^ion of the li^es of the
Generality of Christians now, to the Rules of their own Religion, and that few
(...) the measures of their Actions, or the Rule of their lives from the New
Testament. I expect to hear others ask; why they should be more obliged to the
Humility, Self-denial, Sobriety recommended in the Gospel, than their Teachers?
who apparently conform themselves to the secular Grandeur, and swelling Pomp of
the most licentious times: And if a plain Truth might be spoken, without any
ones taking snuff, there can be no more Reason assigned, why the People should
be tied up to the Rules of the N. T. in their Lives, than Churchmen are to
make it the Rule, and Rubric of their Wors^ip: They who expect Primitive
Submission, must give Precedents of Primitive Moderation: And if they will
exact and challenge the Ancient Manners, let us see in them the Ancient
Examples: In vain shall Mother Crab command her ^aughter to creep forward, if
she confutes her instruction by creeping backward.

If then ^ters be really so Retrograde, and gone off from their true Centers;
yet it cannot become them to Condemn the World for being Wrong, who resolve it
shall never be Right. He that compla^s things are not as they were, and yet
Disputes that they ought to be as they are; shall never dispute me into a
Plerophory of his sincerity. They that confess a want of the Ancient
Discipline, which yet they will not restore, and complain at the same time of a
Defect of the Ancient Piety, which they pretend they cannot Remedy, do but weep
over the Vineyard which is laid wast, whilst they either pluck up the ^edge, or
refuse to repair the decayed Mounds and Fences; or deplore an Inundation of
Wickedness which is broken in upon us, and yet stand by the Sl^ce, and will not
shut it down, nor suffer others to do it, because they have no ^all to the Work.

All things in this lower World insensibly contract corruption, and with a
silent foot decline from their Original Integrity; so that every day furnishes
us with New Reasons to scowr off the encroaching Rust, and restore them to
their Primitive Brightness. He that ^ows against the Stream, must inc^ssantly
ply his Arms, and Oats, and work against the pressing importuni^y of the
Current, or else shall find himself unawa^es hur^ied down the Stream. -- Sic
omnia ^ato,
In pejus ruere, ac retro sub^apsa referri. Virg.


It was a seasonable Question of a Great Person many years ago; Why the Civil
State should be purged, and restored, by good and whelsome Laws, made every
Third or Fourth Year in Parliament, pr^iding Remedies, as fast as Time breede^h
Mis^s; and contrariwise the Ecclesia^al State should still continue upon the
Dregs of Time, and rece^ no alterations, now for this five and forty years, and
more? And I am sure its another five and forty years; and upwards, since that
Complaint was made.

It will then be very seasonable to complain of Modern Corruption, and cry up
Primitive Devotion in these Men, when they shall demonstrate a real willingness
to reduce what is amiss into order, to make what is crooked straight, by the
Primitive Rule of Reformation.

That the Conversations of those early Christians was Commendable, I readily
admit; that there is a wretched Degeneracy in our days, I sadly see, yet give
me leave to Note, and Detest the H^pocrisie of those who build S^tely Monuments
to, and bestow Ranting Epitaphs upon the Deceased Piety of the Former, and yet
destroy or discourage the Remaining Piety of the present Age: That pluck down
the Living Temples of the Spirit, that upon their Ruins they may build their
own Palaces* who first Stigmatize Primi^e Holiness with the Modern Brand of
Fanaticisme, and then persecute it; and the same time Canonize Primitive
Superstition, for the Christian Religion, and then Impose it.

But our Enquirer has marked out some of the peculiar Glories of those Elder
Times, and perhaps it may not be unpleasant to the Reader to run over with me
some of their Excellencies.

1 Of old to be a Christian, was to be all that is Holy, Just and Good, etc.
When I read these juvenile Declamations in praise of Virtue, I am ready to
snat^h the Answer out of his mouth, who replied in a Case not unlike: Quis enim
unquam vituperavit? I wonder who ever spoke one word against it? But it is easy
to strain a String till it breaks, which being screwed up to its just Height,
would bear its part in the Harmony. To be All that is Holy, All that is Just, All
that is Good; is the Glory of Him whom it is our Duty to imitate, our Folly to
strive to equali^e: In a limited sense, it is the Glory of those Blessed Ones,
who are Comprehensores; to be really Holy, truly Just, sincerely Good, is
pretty fair for those that pass under the Notion of Viatores: But if this were
the Character of Primitive Saintship^ the Apostle Paul must not have worn a Red
Letter in our Enquirers Calender, who professes Philip 3 12. 13. That he had
not already attained, neith^r was already perfect, ^or counted himself to have
apprehended; but yet he r^ched forth unto those things which were before; he
pressed toward the Man for the Price of the High Calling of God in Christ
Jesus.

2. Wherever Religion came, it was a Principle of Purity in Men's ^arts, Honesty
in their (...), and Peace (...) Kingdoms, etc. Wherever Religion came? Why
Religion may come, either in the Declaration of it, or in the Power* and
Cordial Acceptance of it. And I presume this Enquirer will not assert, That
wh^er Religion came in the former sense, it had those Blessed Effects in the
Purest Primitive Times; and I am confident he ca^ot deny, that wherever it
comes, in the latter sense it produces those Happy Fruits even in the worst of
Times. But so easy it is to render trivial, and common matter plausible to the
Ear, whilst we are cheated with a Charivary of Sounding Brass, or the Ditty of
a Tinckling Symbal.

3. But then the Christian Faith was not a Trick of Wit. In it self indeed it
was not, nor is so now; yet Crafty Knaves would venture then, (...), 2 Cor. 2.
17. to dilure the Pure W^e of Gods Word with the Watery Mixtures of their own
Inventions, and we have those still that will be showing such tricks of
audaeious wit upon it now.

What therefore he Quotes from Lactantius, any Man may venture to say, and
never hurt himself, or spoil his credit, Give me a firce and con^entious Man;
and if he will but apply himself to the Grace and Institutions of the Gospel,
he shall become as m^k as a ^mb: Let a covetous Person hearken to the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and he shall presently dispense his Money. Nay, for once I will
say as bold a word as that comes to. Give me the most inhumane, and barbarous
Persecutor, that without scruple of Conscience ^ats up Gods People like Bread;
and if he will but conform to the Doctrine of the Gospel, he shall be forced to
take out a new Lesson, and turn over a New Leaf, and of a Bloody Saul, become a
Paul; profess, or preach the same Jesus whom he has so ^utragiously persecuted:
Give me that Churchman, that seeks his Peoples Goods more than their Good; he
that heaps Ossa upon Pelios, and Olympus upon both, one Steeple upon another,
and a third upon the former, as if he hoped either to Scale or Purchase Heaven,
to take it by Storm or Surrender; and let him but attend, and give up himself
to those documents, which he either Preaches, or however Reads, and he shall
presently refund the Price of Souls, and errogate upon the Members of Christ,
what he had once squeezed out of Spungy Consciences.

But the Heathens could boast as much as this comes to of their Moral Precepts.
Invidus, Irac^ndus, acer, vin^sus Amator:
Nemo ad^ferus est ut non mitescere possit,
Si mode culinrae patientem commodet Aurem. Horat.


4. Then the Professors of Christianity were all of one Heart, and one Lip;
there was then but one Division of Men: (...) and (...), were the only Sects
the World was divided by: All Good Men were of one way, and all Evil Men of
another.

I have seriously considered for what juncture of Time this Eloquent Period was
calculated; and when those happy days did shine, that might deserve so fair a
Character: And I conclude it must he some Pre-Adamitical State, commencing with
the Julian Period; or at lawest that of Paradise, when we may probably
conjecture, That all Good Men were of one Mind, because there was but one Man
there. But if the Enquirer would acknowledge it as a favor, I would show him
how he might reconcile his Rhetoric to Truth, which is not often feazible: All
Good Men were of one Way, the Way of Holiness leading to Happiness; And all
Evil Men were of another Way, the Way of Sin and Impenitency which leads to
Misery: But so it is still, and thousands of Ages will never alter the Case.
But then to be of one Heart and Lip in the minuce Circumstances of Religion,
that I never heard All Men were, nor never expect they will be so on this side
absolute persection. The Roman Church even in the Apostolical Times, was not
without its Heats and Animosities: Some there were, who being weak in the
Faith, discerned not their Christian Liberty, but confined themselves to
Salades, and judged others that went beyond their Short Tedder, as Libertines,
and Men of a Latitudinarian Conscience, others who were strong, and understood
that Christ had emancipated them from the Yoke of Mosaical Ceremonies, used
their freedom, and these despised the rest, as a company of scrupulous
Coxcembs; What fierce bandyings and jostlings there were in the Church of
Corinth, whilst one Party hangs out the Eus^gns of Paul; another shelters it
self under the Headship of Peter; and perhaps a third not afraid to entitle the
Prince of Peace to their Quarrels, and draw in Christ himself to be the Head of
a Faction: And yet these were all Members of the same Church; and whilst
agreeing in the Substantials of Religion, the Apostle durst not strike in with
one Party, to crush the other, but maintains the Flame of Charity alive, amidst
the Sparks of their Contentions in things remote from the Foundation.

That great Promise that God would make his People of one Heart, and one Lip,
is either not understood, or not fulfilled; or if fulfilled in some measure,
yet the more Glorious Accomplishment thereof reserved for Times and Persons of
a more healing Temper, and to be brought about by more proportionable means,
than Gibbets, Halters, Fire and baggot, viz. the pouring out the Spirit of
Light and Love.

I think I may refer it to almost any one to judge; whether he be not most
ridiculously absurd, that shall so severely Animadvert upon our present
Divisions, when he may at such casie and cheap rates heal them all, and yet
will not. By some Men's Words you would think they hated Divisions implacably;
but by their actings, you would think they loved them as desperately.

Let the Primitive Rule of Reformation, of which the Reverend Dr. Pierce has
minded the forgetful Age, be severely attended to; To set what is crooked
straight, by what was from the Beginning; Let all the Churches Conform to it,
and Reform by it, and then will Discord be as great a stranger amongst
Christians as Peace is said to be at this day. Lay but the weight and stress of
Unity upon Necessaries, in the rest exercise Charity; and then, as we never had
Peace about the Institutions of Men, so we shall never have Wars about the
confessed Institutions of Christ.

The Christian Religion numbers it amongst its peculiar Glories, and choicest
Singularities, that it teaches us to maintain Brotherly Love, under differing
Apprehensions, and variety of Practices, in those lesser matters, which neither
weaken Holiness, nor cross the Design of the Gospel.

As God in the first Creation formed Men of differing S^es, various Statures,
and multiform Shapes and Complexions, and yet none quarrel upon that account;
none is so Apish to enact, the Fox shall cut off his Train, because the other
has none. None will impose his own Height as the just Standard of all others,
that he that is a Hairs-breadth taller shall be adjudged a Monster, and he that
is as much lower shall wear the reproach of a Dwarf: So in the New Creation,
it is none of Christ's design to reduce all Sincere Believers to an uniformity
in every Punctilio in judgment, and practice, but to perform a Nobler, and more
Glorious Work than this, namely to infuse such a Spirit of Love, and from
thence such Healing Counsels, to inspire into all his Disciples such
Moderation, such Condescension, that notwithstanding these diversties they may
all love as Brethren, and keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace;
and if in any thing, any one be otherwise minded, to wait till the God of Peace
from the Word of Peace should Reveal it unto him

Nor indeed is it any credit to the Religion of our Savior, to be represented
to the World, as if it taught so narrow and restrained a Charity that would
only embrace those that were Cast in the Mold with our own particular
persuasions; or to hang on a String only with those who jump in with our own
Points to a Tag: An Excellency, if it be one, to be found more eminently
amongst the Lions in the Tow^r, the Turks in their Mosques, or perhaps of old
in the African Conventicle, (much Reviled, and as much (...) who Monopoliz'd
Salvation to them that were Ex part (...).

But that which is the most pleasant in this Period, is, To see what a world of
Truth our Compassionate Enquirer has Massacred for the sake of one poor sorry
Climax. There are now (says he) Almost as many Opinions as Men, as many Parties
as Opinions, and as many Religions as either. That Almost may, I confess, do
him some service; it has in its days helped many a lame Dog over the Style: But
surely there may be great diversities of Opinions amongst them that are of the
same Religion; He might as well conclude, that the Spaniard and the French, are
of Two Religions, because the one buttons his Doublet upwards, the other
downwards. I have been much taken with a Decree that I sound in B. Iew^l, made
by Pope Innocent III. and might have become a far better Man.

Quoniam in plerisque partibus, intra (...) Civitatem, and Diocesim, permissi
sunt populi diversarum linguarum, habentes sub und (...), vario^ Ri^s, and
Mores, Distinct praecipimus, ut Pontifices hujusmodi Civitatum, provid^ant
viros idoneos, qui secundum diversitates P^ituum, and Linguarum, divina illis
officia Celebrent, and Sacramenta Administrent.

Forasmuch as in most places, in the same City, and Dioc^ss, there are people
of diverse Languages mingled together, wh^ under one, ^and the same Faith,
doreta in differing Ceremonies, and Customs; we do therefore expressly charge,
and command the Bishops of the said Cities, and Diocesses, to provide able
Persons* who may Celebrate amongst them the Divine Offices, and Administer to
them the Sacraments, according to their differing Languages and Ceremonies.

Differing Ri^es, and Observations, whilst left indifferent, will not make
differing Religions; what they may do, when imposed as the necessary Terms of
Communion, I shall not Determine.

Nay, that there are as many Parties, as Opinions, will need not only some
Grains, but whole Bushels of Salt to keep it sweet: Do we not see those of the
same Party indulge each other in their private conceptions; and none more than
they who most Triumph in a pretended Unity, and Uniformity, who can agree in
few things amonst themselves, and yet can sweetly accord to extirpate all but
themselves.

5. Time was (says our Enquirer) when Men Sacrificed their Lives in Testimony
to their Faith, as frankly as since they have done to their Passion, Revenge,
and Ambition. And Time is (says another) when Men will Sacrifice the Lives of
their Brethren, and the Peace of the Church to the same waspish Deities, and
their own Consciences to boot, to another Idol known of old by the Name of
Mammon. Such Elegant Orations have we penned about Time was, and Time is, that
I suspect they were indicted from Friar Bacon's Brazen Headpiece. But more
Anger still! Then was Charity counted as Essential a part of Religion, as
Censoriousness is now which too many. This is witty enough in all reason! And
one would not stick to break a Jest now and then, though it broke another
Head, or perhaps his own with the Splinters But Men are bad enough, and need
not be worse than they are: Censoriousness, is a Crime too Odious to be
Desended, and yet too Notorious to be Denied, to Cover a fault will make it
Two; but to justify it, will make it Many: But yet that any should make this
Censoriousness a part, much more an Essential part of their Religion, is an
Hyperbole too daring for my weak Faith to meddle with.

I have been considering into what place of Religion they can possibly crowd
it, whether into their Creed or Ten Commandments: The Papists have robbed the
people of just one half of a Sacrament, and then to give them their due, to
make them ample satisfaction, they have created five entire Sacraments, de
Nevo; They have craftily also purloyned the whole Second Commandment; but then,
because the Laity have an ^nkling that there were once Ten of them, lest they
should miss one out of the Decalogue, they have very discreetly split the Tenth
into a Couple: But where to wedge in this Censoriousness was a great
difficulty, and had continued so, had not some repealed the Fourth Commandment,
as purely Ceremonial; and therefore if any where, there it must go.

Some perhaps may Censure this Censurer as guilty of more Censoriousness, than
half the World besides; but such d^not consider, that we must ^llow for
shrinking in the Silk grograin Phrase of Rethoric^ns; what (...) flat, humble,
low, j^une expression had it been to have said; Truly Men are too C^nsorious!
But now the Style mantles, and the Language brisles, and burnishes, it comes
off with a Noble Grace, it fills the Mouth, and sounds augustly; to say, They
make it an Essential part of their Religion.

6. Nothing was then thought too good, or costly, for the Service of God, or
Religion; Men could not content themselves to serve God with that which cost
them nothing. It was one, a Julian, or such another, that envied the costly
Vessels wherewith Christ was served. Ay! Time was indeed, (and pity it is, so
good a Time had not its Wings clipped from flying away!) Time was, that Men's
Money burnt their Pocket-bottoms out, when the fire of Purgatory made it too
hot, for the most frozen Usurer to hold; but now Alas, That Time is past. --
And for the Brazen Head, it fell down, and dashed out its Brains! If these
things be truly, represented, and that the Glory of the Primitive Times did
consist in Pompous Devotions, Polished Altars, Gilded Organs, Sumptuous
Candlesticks, Embr^dered Copes, Silken Cowles; much good may it do them, we
neither envy, nor shall imitate their Inimitable Excellencies

If Julian envied the Plate wherein Christ was served, let him grow lean with
envy; but surely the Chronicles are hugely wide, if these matters be not mi^d:
The cost and charges at which the Primitive Christians were in the Service of
their God, and Savior, was quite another thing; they bestowed their hearts
upon him, bore reproach for him, laid down their lives, and whatever was dear
to them in defense of his Truth; Silver, and Gold they had none, and Christ as
little need of it.

However, that Age could not well upbraid the present with irreligion, if the
true measure of Gods Worship be to be taken from its exterior Garb, and
Splendour: As we cannot mock them with their Wooden Presbyters, so I am certain
they could not us with Wooden Chalices; at least in this one parti^ar I expect
he should retr^ct, and freely own, that for Costly Worship (which is the main)
we have theere out-vy'd the Primitive Times.

I shall not much con^rn my self to reflect upon that useful policy of those
who have imposed upon the Credulus World, a Belief, that whatever is devoted to
the Priests, is therein Consecrated to God, but yet I may silently admire the
easiness of those Ages that suffered themselves so tamely to be abused: And
above all, I cannot but wonder at the Chaldaeans, a People renowned for Wisdom,
that they could once be persuaded by the Priests of Bell, that his Hungry Deity
had devoured all that good Beef, and Mutton, which their blind Devotion offered
at his Altar. The Truth is, their own Belly was their God, and poor Bell, bore
all the blame of their gluteony. Thus what they got over their Idols back, they
spend it under his, or upon their own infatiable Paunches: It Is no new thing
for Sacred Names to give Patronage to Avarice: Thus the Kite soars aloft, as if
she designed Heaven, when her steady Eye is fixed upon the Prey below; and
Glorious Pretenses to endow the Holy Mother Church, had almost reduced the
Lay-world to Beggary.

7. In those early days the Christian Assemblies drained the Theaters. Ay! but
where is the Antithesis? But now (so it should have run) the Theaters have
drained the Christian Assemblies: But that had been a Repart^e too close, and
home for one that would be kind to himself. Had the Primitive Preachers exposed
their own Religion, they had never drained the Theaters; and if our Modern
Pulpits will drive that Trade, the Theaters will drain the Water, if not draw
the Grist from their Mill; for they know how to expose Religion more
ingeniously, and more effectually.

But what other issue must we expect, when some Clergymen shall frequent,
others plead for, and justify the Play Houses; when the Bears, with their
Decent, and Harmonious Bagpipes; the Fencers with their rattling Drum, shall
find fair Quarter, shall have free ingress, egr^ss, and r^gress, when yet some
Christian Assemblies are disturbed, and broken in pieces.

We poor folk, are apt to think, that we may venture a step or two nearer the
brink of the Pit, than our Teachers, and take a little more Latitude than our
Guides; for they are well paid for their Gravity, whilst we must be forced to
be sober and austere at our own proper cost and charges. It has been an old
observation: If Ministers be merry, the people will be mad; If they drink, their
people will be drunk; if they argue for the lawfulness of Theaters, and other
such Nurseries of good Learning, the people without scruple will frequent them:
And then have a care in good earnest, left the Stage plunder the Pulpit; and
the Theater drain the Chistian Assemblies, more effectually than the
Conventicles.

8. The Holy Men of those times that approached our Savior, had as it were
some Rays of his Divinity upon them, and their Faces shone, etc. And would he
indeed have these times talk of Rays, and Beams, and Shinings of Face? On
purpose perhaps, because they want new Matter for Ecclesiastical Burlesque and
Canonical Drollery! One such Expression as this dropped from the Tongue or Pen of
a Dissenter, had been enough to equip out a whole Fleet of Friendly Debates for
a Summers Expedition: But yet he has qualified it pretty well; they were but
some Rays; and as it were some Rays: And that may mollify as dangerous a word
as this, and save the Primitive Times a Satyr.

9. A Christian Church was then a College of Holy, and Good Men: Incomparable
Proof, that all Churches were either then Cathedrals, or at least Collegiate:
And truly they might have continued so still, had not Remissness of Discipline
in just Causes, and Severity of Discipline in slighty Causes endangered to make
them a Don of Thieves.

If the Church doors were strictly guarded, and the Church windows narrowly
watched, that none might come in by the one, nor climb in by the other, that
are unquali^ed: If Simoniacal Buyers, and Sellers, were soundly whipped out,
which have bribed their Admission by the Golden Key; and none denied Entrance
that claim Admission upon Christ's Terms, such as can produce Testimonial
Letters, from a sound Faith, and Holy Conversation, the Church might still be a
College of Good and Holy Men: But if some must be forced in, in spite of
their Teeth, though as unfit as Ignorance, and profaneness can make them; If
like the Americans they must be compelled to go to Heaven upon pain of death;
If others be excluded by the Palizadoes of Ceremonies, however meet Materials,
for such a Constitution, never hope the Church should be a Holy College, but a
Lazarhouse; for they that are of no Religion, will be of any Religion, rather
than be undone for being of none; and they that are really of any Religion,
will endeavor to go to Heaven in better company.

And such were the beauties of the Prime-primitive Confess^rs; but now there is
a sad Regeneracy; and that the Rend^r way not suspect I envy our Authors
Abilities, I shall give him a taste of his Excellencies in exposing the Mod^rn
Piety.

1. Now dry Opinions are taken for Faith. Oh what a lucky hint had here been
for one that was so (...) (...) to be ingenious? For dry Opinions (you know)
are very (...) matter, which will catch at the smallest Spark, and therefore
must needs set the whole World in a flame.

But 2. Men have been busy in making New Creeds, and have forgotten to practice
the Old. Whence Note for your Learning, and singular E^ification, that though
some mistake the Creed for a Prayer, yet it will serve without sensible error
for the Ten Commandments: And yet perhaps pra^ng a Creed is not so easy a
matter as he may imagine: Let Men but believe their Credenda, and practice the
Agenda, and they shall never be Reproached by me, for not practicing their
Creed, whether it be Old or New.

I am very consident the Innocent Reader takes it for granted, that the
Enquirer has all this while been comparing the Piety of Ancient days, with that
of the Present, as i^ stands at home amongst our selves: But he is merely
guiled; for all this gaudy Eloquence has been spent upon foreign Countries.
Such (says he) is the condition of the Greek, and Latin Churches. There it is,
that they are so busy in making New Creeds that they have forgotten to practice
the Old. Just as if one of Jobs Messengers should cry out in the streets, Fire!
Fire! And on startled at the Alarm, asks, Where? Where? Oh at (...) Escur^al!
At the Escurial! in Spain, near Madrid! Nay then we are well enough! I was
afraid it had been my next Neighbor Ucalegon; and therefore I hope we may have
time enough to remove our Goods. But Reader, be not too secure, for the Sparks
are already flown over into England: If we come nearer home (says he) I doubt
we shall not find things much better.

There is one piece of Justice, or Charity, which I must here demand, or beg of
my Reader; and 'ti this. That if the Enquiter has a privilege to suppose his
Searfire beyond the Seas, I may be allowed the privilege to suppose, that my
poor Bucket was bestowed there also; and that though the Tragedy of Mustapha
was acted in London, yet the Scene was laid at Constantinople.

That the British Churches were so famous for Religion in the first Times of
their Plantation; I am right glad to hear, and hope the News is true: But the
Evidence, and the Consequence do both exceedingly trouble me: The former is
slender, that if we touch it not very gingerly, like the Apples of Sodom, it
will moulder into dust, and the latter is so dangerous, that it concerns him to
handle it gently, lest it prick his fingers. And 1. for the Evidence; If the
presence of the British Bishops at the Council of Arles, be his best proof, it
must proceed thus. The British Bishops were present at the Council. Their
presence must presume their subscription to the Articles; Their subscription
must imply a virtual, and implicit consent of the British Clergy; and then the
consent of the Clergy must involve the Approbation of all the Churches: And
lastly, the Churches Approbation of the Articles must infer, that they
practiced their Creed, and that their Lives were so eminent for Holiness, that
they did as it were shine with some Rays, or Beams of Divinity. And here is a
Teame of connected inferences, that if one fails, the conclusion will be left
in the Mire. And therefore he has another proof to help it out at a standing
pull: At the Time of the Nicene Council, Britain was accounted one of the Six
Diocesses of the Western Empire. And then no Rational Creature can desire
clearer demonstration, that they were eximiously Holy; for if they were of any
Diocese, first, or sixth, it makes no great matter, provided it be but of the
Western Empire, it will infallibly conclude their Piety; though it had been
more clear in my mind, had it been a Diocese not of the Empire only, but the
Church. And then 2. for the Consequence, that seems very perilous; for if the
presence of the British Bishops at the Council at Arles implies their
Subscription, and that Subscription the consent of the Clergy, the Clergies
consent the Approbation of the People; and that infers their Holiness: Then
(say some) the Presence of the English Divines at the Synod of Dort, and their
Subscription to the Articles, will imply the consent of the Clergy, and the
consent of the Clergy the Approbation of the English Church; and there is no
remedy for it that I can see. If the presence of the one will evince the
Kingdoms Sanctity; the Presence, and Subscription of the other will much
stronger evince the Kingdoms Orthodoxy: For Subscription is a good step beyond
bare Presence, and so our Premises are stronger; And Sanctity is a good step
beyond Truth in the Understanding, and so our Conclusion is more modest.

We are now coming to lower Times, to the Catholic Times of Popery: And
Religion holds very good still, and runs ^lear: but there is no help for it, he
must tilt it, or it will run Dregs in the Reformation.

The Inhabitants of this Island (says he) have not been more famous for Martial
Prowess, than for Sincere Piety, and Devotion: For Polydore Virgil, an Italian,
and Erasmus a Dutchman, both of the Roman Communion, and (therefore be sure)
competent Witnesses, affirm there was more true Devotion, and Sincerity of
Religion in this Church, than in any one place of the World besides: Auditum
admissi, Risum teneatis? I have known a sober Horse break Bridle upon a far
less provocation: We will for once, to gratify this Enquirers longing, suppose
that there was more true Piety, and sincere Devotion amongst the English
Papisis, than among the Albigenses, and Wald^nses, than in (...), or wherever
else the Gospel had begun to dawne; but that I (...) Vir^il, and Erasmus,
should be competent Witnesses, and therefore competent Witnesses, because of
the Roman Communion, does a little ^tumble me; and that because it has ever
been as the (...), so the Religious Practice of those in Communion with Rome,
to Magnify those in Communion with Her, and as much to depretiate the Holiness
of all those that had once withdrawn themselves from her corruptions.

The Argument, such as it is, proce^ds thus. They that were of the Roman
Communion, must need^ be (...) competent witnesses of the truth of the
Devotion, and si^ccrity of ^he Religion of those of the same Communio; but
such, and so Qu^lified were this Polydore Virgil, and this Erasmus, and
therefore they must needs be supposed Test^s (...), comp^tent witnesses of the
Truth of the Devotion and sincerity of the Religion of those of the same
Communion, and such at that time was the Church of England: And the strength of
the Argument depends upon some old stable Maxims, which like the (...) are
never to be denied: As that, Ask his F^llow whether he be a Thief? And Birds of
a Feather are impartial in ^lazoning one another Vices. But yet if he will
define Piety, by Superstition, and Religion by blind Zeal, and Devotion by
hood-winked Obedience, Charity by a Merit-mongering Humor, laying out it self
in uncommanded Fopperies, idle Self-Macerations, Idolatrous Masses, Foolhardy
Pilgrimages, Dirges, Trentalls, Obits, Requi^ms, and such like Trash, and
Trumpery; I will not contend. Let Erasmus, and his fellow Polydore pass for
irresragable Evidence, and the Piety of those days out-shone that of their
Contemporaries, and Successors amongst the reformed Christians, Quantum
interignes Luna minores.

Well, but yet the Universal Pastor observed the Sheep of England to bear such
good Fleeces, and so patiently to submit to the Shearer, that he kept a
Vigilant Eye over his Flocks, and his Vigilance was Rewarded with the Golden
Fleece. This indeed quite shames the present Age, and dazles our Eyes with the
Luster of those Brightter Times. And here we are ^quainte* with two Notable
Secrets, 1. That the Piety of the English Sheep, th^n lay very much in
patiently submitting to the S^carer.

And surely were men but ingenuous to confess a known truth, they could have no
cause to reproach the present piety of the English Sheep upon that Account.
What they could desire more of the poor Sheep then the Fleece, unless they
would fl^a off the skin, and eat the flesh, I cannot imagine, And that can be
no profound policy in the Pastor; for the Fleece of the living. will give more
then the skin of the dead; Its much better Husbandry to strip them yearly of
their Coats, then once for all to cut their Throats; and it has past for
wholesome Doctrine in the days of Yore. Boni pastoris est p^cus Tondere, non
(...).

But 2. Another deep point is this, That the vigilance of the Pastor consists
in looking strictly after the fleece of the Flock. In which particular I know
no reason why the vigilance of former times should be so Idolatrously
predicated above that of our own.

We are come at length to the times of the Reformation; and whilst he engages
in a just, and sober commendation of them, there is n^ne shall more cheerfully
keep pace with Him, provided always he ^allop not too fast, and ride us quite
out of Breath: And the Glories of our English Reformation were as follows.

1. It was the most orderly, not brought in with Tumult, and Sedition, as most
changes are. Let God alone have the glory of so great a mercy! And such was
this; though indeed the Excellency of a Reformation, lies not only, or chiefly
in the still and silent manner of its Introduction, but in its Harmony with the
Primitive Rule of Reformation, which is to Reduce all things to their Divine
Patterns and Originals: Peace is mainly valuable for purity; And the freedom
from noises of Axes and Hammers in the building of Solomon's Temple, was, that
they might more severely attend to their Archetype. Where God gives Reformers
more peace, he expects from them more purity; And if they may work the safer;
he expects they should work the better: It were great ingratitude to Go^ if we
should account our Gospel cheap, because it came to us so: And as much vanity
to boast how our Ancestors got it, unless we can produce it as pure as they
left it to us peaceable.

2. It was the most Moderate, and Temperate. Moderation is a virtue very much
commended by those who never intend to exercise it. As an old griping Usurer
commends his Coin so highly, and loves it so dearly that he will not part with
one penny. The Reformation might be Moderate in a two sold Acceptance; either
first, moderate in our departure from Error and Corruption; or secondly,
Moderate, and Temperate in our approaching to the word of God: Now to resolve
to be moderately reformed either of these ways, ought not to be Recorded
amongst the Glories of a Church: There are few that would be moderately Rich,
moderately great; they fear no excess that way; all the danger is, least we
should be too immoderate, and unreasonable in obeying Christ's Commandments, and
conforming to the Aposto^cal Churches, The measure of our love to Christ, is to
love him without measure; The degree of our Obedience is to obey in the highest
Degree, and the Bounds of our Conformity to the Gospel, to set our selves no
Bounds but what Christ has set us; Gods Praise can suffer no Hyperbole, his
Love need fear no Paroxysme: As he that presumes ^e has Grace enough, may do
well to question whether he has any Grace; so he that is so confident he is
Reformed enough, shall tempt others to suspect he is very little Reformed:
There Is more danger of being Lukewarm in Reforming, than Scalding hot; and
though it be easy to be over righteous in imposing our own Inventions, it will
be impossible to be so in imitating Gods Prescriptions: But amongst all the
kinds of Moderation that were in the Reformation* one small quantity more of
Moderation toward their Brethren would have sweetened all; and yet they say
that wanted not at first, but is since much decayed. But the Moderation of the
first Reformers appears.

1. In that they did not purge out the good, because it had been formerly
abused, as the Humor of some is. This indeed argued their singular prudence,
and discerning Spirit: But yet there are some things not evil in themselves,
but made so by abuse, which without imputation of Humorists they might have
purged out. And this was Hezekiah's Humor, (if it must be so called) who made
the Brazen Serpent a Nchushtan; and scarcely that, when once it had been abused
to Idolatry, which yet had more to plead for it self, than those Good Things,
of which our Enquirer is so Tender. I mean the Signature of an old Ius Divinum.

Whatever is good in it self, or made so by Divine positive Law, and shall
afterward be abused to superstitious ends and uses, we must take some pains to
scowr off the filth, and file away the rust, and to wash away the soil that it
has contracted, and to vindicate it to its Native Beauty, and Integrity; but
for the Inventions of Men, I know no such service we owe them, to lie always
scrub^ing, and scowring, and rinsing, and when all is done, their obstinate, and
inveterate Leprosy, like that of Gehazi, will never be fetched out: And this
was the Humor too of Bishop Andrews. Sermon. on Phil. 2. 20. Whatsoever is taken
up at the Injunction of Man, when it is drawn into Superstition, comes under
the Compass of the Brazen Serpent, and is to be Abolished. And the Catholic
Moderator, who was a greater Friend to Moderation, than Reformation, was partly
of this Humor too: When the occasion of a Humane Cons^itution ^ases, and the
Abuses remain so great; it is no time to wink at them any longer. To stand
pecking at Abuses which have eaten themselves into the substance of an old
Custom* is like the endless labor of weeding Ivy out of an old rotten Wall,
the only way is to dig down the Wall it self: Nay the great Legislator of the
Jews, commanded them utterly to abolish all the Instruments, and Utensils of
Idolatry, and* ^ot to dally in Lopping, and Pruning, but to chop them up by the
Roots: Thus Lev. 18. 3. After the doing of the Land of Egypt ye shall not do,
and after the doings of the Land of Canaan ye shall not do, neither shall ye
walk after their Ordinances; ye shall do my Judgments, and keep my Ordinances.
And whether he will call this a Humor or no I know not. But this I know, R.
Moses, B^n. Maim^n, with whom agre^ no small Names, assures us, that this was
one Reason of many Negative Precepts given to the Jews, as not to Round the
Corners of their Beards; not to wear a Garment of Linsey-woolsey, nor to sew
their Ground with diverse Seeds; not to eat the Fruit of their Trees for the
three first Years, etc, Namely that they might not Symbolize with the
Idolatrous Nations. Nay further, if (...) w a Humor, the Church of England i
not ashame^, was not ashamed to own her self of it, in her discourse prefixed
to the Liturgy. The most weighty cause of the Abolishment of certain Ceremonies
was their Abuse: She knew well* that what was bred in the Bone, would never be
got out of the Flesh; That which was naught in the Egg, will never be good in
the Bird. It Is not washing, but burning, that must cleanse the Garment spotted
with the Flesh. And therefore she routed whole Legions of these Pompous
Trinkets, and had doubtless scattered the Reserves, and brought up her
practice, to her own Rule, had not some Tender Hearted Moderate Persons stood
by, wringing their Hands, and weeping for Tammuz; Oh deal gently, deal gently
with the poor distressed Ceremonies, for their Fathers sake.

2. Another Specimen of their Moderation is: That they did not Abolish a
Venerable Order, or Office in the Church, for the ill manners of them that bore
it. What Venerable Order, or Office this should be, because he is not so
open-hearted as to acquaint us, I have something else to do with my Conjectures
than to throw'em away upon such desperate uncertainties: If it was an Order of
Christ's Institution, the ill manners of those that bore it, might well warrant
the thrusting them out of the Office, but not the Office out of the Church: But
if it could not justly plead his Authority, no pretense of Usefulness to some
Imaginary Ends of I know not what Unity, and Order, will conciliate to it the
Honorable Epithete of Venerable, or secure its station in the Church of
Christ: As Christ, the only Lawgiver of his Church has made abundant provision
of Offices and Ordinances in his Church, to suit and Answer all the Necessities
of Believers; so of Officers too, to discharge those Offices, and administer
those Ordinances, and there is no need of Men's over-officiousness to supply his
pretended defects either in the one kind, or in the other. Indeed we pray, that
it would please the Lord of the Harvest to thrust in more Laborers for Number,
but not for Kind: They who shall assume to themselves a power to create New
Offices, may, by parity of Reason, claim an Authority to Erect New Officers;
for it is a thousand pities, that any but Humane Officers should be put to the
toil to Celebrate Humane Ord^nances; or that any of Christ's Ministers should be
put ^o the drudgery to administer any but Christ's own Ordinances; for indeed
they have their hands full of work enjoined them by their Lord, and Master, and
can neither spare time no^ strength supernumerary to expend in super^uous
Exercises: As Christ has annexed no promise of his Presence to any but his own
Servants, so no promise of success to any but his own Services: He that runs
upon Christ's Errand, his Master will bear his Charges; He that runs upon his
own Head, or the Heads of others, for ought I know must bear his own: It Is a
scandalous impeachment of the unquestionable Love Christ always bore to his
Church, once to imagine that he has not either provided work enough for his
Laborers, or that he has not apportioned Laborers enough for his Work. The same
Reproach will it be to his absolute Sovereignty over the Church, either to
pretend to supply his defects, and shortnesses, or to institute N^w Officers,
and Offices, which plainly imply it.

If it were only Vitium person^, the removing the scandalous, had been a
Plaster broad enough for the ^ound; bu^ i^ it proves Vi^um R^i, you may purge
all the Officers into their Graves before you can purge away the evil of the
Office, which like Tartar, is so ^aked, and Crusted to the sides of the Vessel,
that till you knock off the Hoopes, and take the Frame in pieces, no Art of Man
will free the Cask from a tang, at least of the old mustiness.

3. They were not of Opinion* that the Church could not arrive at Primitive
Purity, unl^ss it were reduced to Primitive Poverty: Purity, and Poverty, I
must needs say do Rhyme so sweetly, that no wise Man would have lost the
Melodious ^hime of two such Harmonious words for a small matter: But what if
the Church never propounded the Primitive Purity for her Pattern? If she did,
^he has run all the things in Controversy out of Distance; yet this I will
say, That if ever the Church be reduced to Primitive Purity, without some such
humbling Providence, and Refining Dispensation, which pur^ed the Primitive
Christians from their ^ross; or the effusion of such Measures of Grace,
Humility, Selfdenial, Condescension* as may Answer Primitive Poverty, very wise
Men, and her very good Friends are much mistaken.

4. Their Moderation appears in this. That though they found ^ome Ceremonies
then used that were superstitious* and dangerous, and thought too many
burdensome, yet concluded not all Decency in the Service of God was Popish. It
had been a Conclusion wild to ^rensie, to infer that all Decency was Popish,
because some Ceremonies were superstitious: Nay, though they all were so, and
had accordingly been (...): But this had been a sober and moderate Conclusion,
That because all Popish Ceremonies were superstitious and dangerous, the
Worship of God might be Decent without them: Gods Service was Decent before
they were born, and would be so again, if they were all in their Graves, as
well as dead, and rotten. And if those Decent Ceremonies had a Decent Bu^ial,
it were an Honor as great as those of a Nobler Extract, (...) Divine
Ceremonies had bestowed on them: I would seriously enquire of our serious
Enquirer. 1. If some Ceremonies were Abolished, because they were
superstitious, and therefore dangerous, why all the rest were not served with
the same sauce, that were equally, or more superstitious, and therefore more
dangerous? I think it is demonstrable, that all the superstition that ever stuck
to Holy Water, Cream, Salt, Spittle, Oil, was ^nnocency, to that horrid abuse
of the Sign of the Cross. But 2. (...) the Superstitions of the remaining
Ceremonies were capable of separation from them, why might not a little Oil,
and Elbowgreace have been bestowed on the rest, and their Lives saved? (...)
seems most of the Ceremonies were knocked oth' head, because they would not go
to the charge of Rearing them. 3. If many Ceremonies were a Burden, whether
were not half of that many, half as great a Burden, and so pro rato? And if so,
where was the Churches Commission to impose any unnecessary Burden upon the
Necks of Disciples. 4. If some of the old superstitious Ceremonies (when well
scraped, and wiped) were lest for Decency, and Comeliness in the Worship, why
where not the rest scummer'd up, that the Worship might be more Decent? For i^
Two or Three Innocent Ceremonies will add a Decency, Two or Three hundred will
have burnished it to such a Luster, as must have either ravished, or blinded
the Eyes of all Beholders? 5. Who shall insallibly assure us just how few will
be no Burden, and the imposing of them no sin? and yet ^ne more shall make them
all burdensome, and so the imposition of them to become sinful? Or just how
many to an Unite will render the Worship Decent; and the adding of one more
render all Deformed? If the Church; then why might not the Church of Rome in
her days have Determined the Question? Especially seeing that of all
pretenders, she alone challenges an infallibility, which is the most
considerable thing in this Case, when the Church must carry her hand even, and
cut by a thread, between Decency, and Indecency; A Burden, and no Burden? 6. If
the Church has a power to impose a load, (though a lesser load) has she a power
to communicate strength, though it be but little strength, to bear that little?
Especially seeing the Burden here must not lie on the Back, but the Heart; not
on the Shoulders, but the Conscience: She that pleads an Authority to
Institute, can she produce a power to Bless what she Institutes to any
Spiritual End? This encouragement we have from Christ, whose perogative it is
to impose; that he will give Grace to bear what he imposes, and thereby make
his Yoke casie, and his Burden light. Qui mihi est Oneris Author, idem erit
Ad^inistrationis Ad^tor, said Leo: And so Austin. Da quod jubes, and jube quod
vis. If any Church could incline the Heart toward her Testimonies; or give a
Heart to keep her Statutes, Judgments, and Commandments, and do them; or make
her Commandments not grievous: Let her multiply Ceremonies, till she is weary,
and spare not; Let her use her Discretion, and we shall use nothing but
Submission. But this dead weight sinks our Spirits quite. 7. Whether is not
such an assuming power exceeding dangerous in its Consequences; for upon this
Principle the Church may impose a round thousand of Ceremonies, if she will
say, and think them decent, and the Crow thinks all her young ones White, and
all are sond of the Brats of their Brains, as well as the Issue of their
Bodies; yes, and Ten Thousand more, if she will but decree they are not
burdensome; which she is the less a Competent Judge of; because Superiors who
command, do not feel that load, which Inseri^urs who must obey, do groan under:
So much of the Moderation of the Reformation.

3. The English Reformation was the most perfect, and complete in its kind. The
perfection, and compleatness of a Reformation, is to be taken from its
Agreement with its Rule, and Idea, which (say we) is the Word of God, and to
this we do unmovably adhere, till we have good security that they have found
out a better: All Perfection with us, is but Defection, and all compleatness,
Fancy, which is not measured by that Rule: It will therefore be the great Glory
of the English Reformation to acquit it self well in this point, wherein our
Enquirer will endeavor our satisfaction.

1. For Doctrine. This Church retains (says he) the most Ancient Doctrine, and
soundest Confession of I aith founded upon the H. Scripture: That the (...).
Scriptures are the foundation of Faith, we gladly hear some intimation of, and
shall lay up the concession against another time, whether the Church has
attended to this Rule in her Doctrinals, belongs to another Discourse.

2. For Government: He tells us, The English Reformation retains the most
Primitive Church Government. These things, are wisely, and warily penned,
(thought I:) A Scripture Creed, and a Primitive Church Government! Confession
sounded on H. Scriptures, and Government founded on a word called Primitive;
why shhould we not have a Confession sounded on something else than Scripture,
as well as a Government? Or why not a Church Government founded on the
Scripture, as well as the Doctrine? So that he has provided well for the
Doctrine; but for the Government it may sinck or swim for any Relief it can
expect from our Enquirer, except a hard word will do it: Primitive Antiquity,
is one of those Stulta Amuleta quae Controversi^ collo appendunturut Armilla
Maleficarum; Potent Charms. and Pompous Enchantments not to Cure, but Conjure
down a Controversy; for since (...) may be taken in a Latitude of three,
(...), five, or ((...) time of need) six hundred years after Christ, it would
be very hard if any Crotchet, Humor, and Fancy had not set up for it self in
that time, which shall be enough to entitle it to the Warrantie of the
Primitive times: Let him therefore prove it Scriptural, and so jure Divino, and
he has said more to me, than if he had run up its Pedigree through a Dozen or
more Centuries: But is not this short word [The most Primitive
Church-Government] a foundation too narrow for that High Boast, p. 2. That our
Church is of a sound, and healthful Constitution, I think I have sufficiently,
though briefly manifested in the Introduction. Briefly and suffciently? The Two
most desirable Qualifications in Argument and Evidence that may be! And surely
it must de brief enough, which is comprehended in this one Sentence: The
English Reformation retains the most Primitive Church Government: but whether
it be sufficient or no, let the Reader look to that.

3. For the Liturgy. That is (as he thinks) the Best accommodate to reconcile,
and unite Men's Devotions. And how well it has answered its end, and the design
of its Institution. I shall say the less, because others will say the more;
some say it has distracted more Devotions, than ever it united: And others;
That it has accommodated them as much as could be expected from a Humane
Contrivance, that had no more of Christ's Authority for its institution, and
therefore could expect no more of his Blessing for the success. That this, or
any other Liturgy was an Expedient appointed by Christ to unite Men's Devotions,
he may explain, and attempt the proof of at his best leisure: But that Christ
has not been wanting to his Church in leaving her the proper and sufficient
means for the advancing of Devotions, and uniting affections we are satisfied,
and so fully contented, that we shall seek no further.

That Protestants in the days of Edw. VI. ^d Rejoice in the Liturgy,
Dissenters will not deny: An English Liturgy left free, was better than a
Latin Mass: Half a Loaf, was much better than no Bread: To them who had been in
such Da^kness, and Bondage, any Light, any Liberty were most grateful. The
first Original of Liturgies (as is expressed in the Preface to our own) was,
that the whole Bible should be read over (or the greatest part of it) once
every Year; intending thereby, that the Clergy, and especially such as were
Ministers of the Congregation should by often reading, and meditation of Gods
Word, be s^rred up to Godliness themselves, -- And further, that the People, by
daily hearing of the Holy Scriptures read in the Church, should continually
profit more in the Knowledge of God; -- But these many Years past, this Godly,
and Decent Order of the Ancient Fathers ^ath been^ so altered, b^oken,
neglected, by planting in unce^^ain (...), Legend^* Responds, Verses, vain
Repetitions, Commemorations, and ^^nod^ls, that etc. And moreover, whereas St
Paul would have such Language spoken to the People in the Church, as they might
understand; and have profit by hearing the same? The Service (...) this Church
of England has been read in Latin to the People, which they understood not, so
that they have heard with their Ears only, and their Heart, Spirit, and Mind
have not been edified thereby. From hence we are evidently taught, First, that
the true Original of Liturgies, was only an Order for the Methodical Reading of
the Scriptures for the benefit of an ignorant Clergy, and sottish People; and
Secondly, that that wherein the Reformers gloried to have outdone Popery, and
edified the People, was, that they had procured them their Wo^hip in a Language
understood.

When therefore I hear these Popular Harangues: How happy this Church and
Nation was in Edw. VI. days: In what Glory and Majesty the Prince Reigned, in
what Peace and Concord the Subjects lived, how Devout, and Pious an Age that
was: I am ready to think, that as the Graves of Patients do hide the faults of
Physicians, so the follies and vanities of those days are buried in their own
graves too; for Dr. Heylin had almost persuaded me. That the death of that
Prince was none of the Infelicities of the Church of England. But our Enquirer
has set him right again; and his days were the Golden Age of Reformation, his
Reign the Glorious Pattern of Peace, and Concord; and so shall continue till
the next occasion those Men have to reproach the Reformation, and then Edw. VI.
days shall be an Infelicity again, and as great a prejudice to Religion as
ever. So easy it is for a cunning Orator with his orient Colors, to fill up
the wrinkles of a furrowed Face, and again to deform the most Beauteous
Complexion, just as it pleases Master Painter.

The total sum of all, is thus much. The Primitive times were Glorious for
Piety; in Polydore Virgil's days, and those of Popery, there was a great deal
of Sincere Devotion; In the beginning of the Reformation, affairs were in an
excellent posture, but now all is degenerated, and a Lukewarm Neutrality, and
Lazy Indifferency, has overspread the Face, and crept over the Heart of
Religion. And what should be the matter? What is the Reason of this sad change?
Why!. Men are not so fond of Ceremonies as they used to be, and People have
resolved against the building of Churches, and endowing them.

But let us hear him Lament the change. All Zeal then, cold Indifferency now.
Then all Harmony, now all Discord. Then the Society of the Church was so
venerable, that to be cast out by Excommunication, was as dreadful as to be
Thunder-smitten: But now it is become a matter of some Men's Ambition to be cast
out. Then few, or none, but frequented the Church; now the Church is become the
Conventicle, and the Cinventicle the Church, as to frequency. Then the
Liturgy, and public Prayers were counted a principal part of Gods Worship;
now they a^ nothing without a Sermon. Then there were few things that were
scrupled; but now its become the great point of Sanctity to scruple every
thing. It will be time for me, and the Reader, to take our leave of this
learned Introduction, when we have observed, and returned a few things. 1. That
the true Reason why there is more Discord now, than at that time, is, because
there are more difficult terms of Peace, and Concord. Several things were then
in use, which were not imposed: Many were permitted to discharge their
Ministerial Functions without subscription to the new terms, and conditions of
Communion: It was pretty well in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, before A. (...).
Whitguift could strain Conformity to it is height; and yet they are now screwed
much higher. Restore Indifferent things to their Ancient Liberty, and we shall
soon arrive at our Ancient Amity. 2. That Excommunication has so much lost its
former Authority upon the Conscience, and become so like a Brutum Fulmen, is to
be imputed to these Reasons. 1. Because that Thunderbolt is darted out for mere
trifles, some have been delivered over to Satan for a Groat; Now it is a sure
Maxim. That nothing will bring a Law sooner into disuse, and contempt, than
the Disproportion of the penalty to the Offense: It will be difficult to
persuade weak understandings, that that can be of God which has but one sort of
punishment for all sorts of Crimes, and the same Rigor for Virtues, as for
Vices: To be delivered up for a Penny, exposes to the same inconvenience as if
it were a Pound; and it shall fare as ill with him that scruples at a Ceremony,
as with him that commits Whoredom; and some say, the former has more evil in it
than the latter, though you throw in Drunkenness, Swearing, and half a dozen
more such into the reckoning. 2. It has been made an Engine, to gratify some
Men's Passions, and exonerate their Spleen upon the Innocent; and nothing
renders Jupiters Thunder more despicable, than when the wretched Salmoneus
shall dare to imitate it. 3. It has been so frequently practiced in pecuniary
matters, that Men discern it not to be a Spiritual Weapon; Money has been a
Lock to shut Men out of Heaven, and a Key to let them in again. 4. They that
have been ejected by that (...), find no evil consequences in their ejected
state. In the Primitive times it was therefore terrible, because Christ
abbetted his own Ordinance, administered for his own Spiritual Ends, in his own
Regular way; but now Men dare not trust Christ with his own Work, but have
supplied his vengeance with a Significavit, a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo,
delivering Men over to the Sheriff, whom thereby they call the Devil by craft,
but otherwise the Excommunicated Person cats his Bread, and drinks his Wine
with a Cheerful Heart, because the Lord has accepted him. 3. That so few
frequent the Church, is, because they have either been scoffed, or railed, or
beaten out of doors, or barred out by Conditions, not comporting with Scripture
Rule, and Warrant Men know that Christ must be their Judge; to him they must
give an account of their Souls, and Worship, in the Great Day; and therefore
they are willing to Worship God according to his Will revealed in his Sacred
Word, unless any can give them Counter-security to save harmless, and
indemnifie them before his dreadful Tribunal; And if they must suffer for such
resolved adherence to a Scriprure Religion, they have only this humbly to
reply. Daveniam Imperator, Tu Carcerem, Ille Gehennam. Christ threatens a Hell;
the Law only menaces a Goal. 4. That the Liturgy was then counted a principal
part of Gods Worship, we cannot help: We judge, that none but God can make the
least, much less a principal part of Gods Worship: God only knows which way he
will be Worshipped with Acceptance: And it is our grear Happiness, that he has
acquainted us with that Will of his in his Word, to which we apply our selves
for our Directory, and are not sollicitous about Apocryphal Rubrics. As to
matters concerning Religion, Nature Teaches no further, than the Obligation to
the Du^y; but leaves the particular determination of the manner of Obedience to
Divine Positive Laws: So we are instructed from the Author, of Origin. Sacrae,
p. 171. 5. That it is now become the great point of Sanctity to scruple every
thing; was not spoken with that regard to Honesty and Truth, as might have been
expected from a Compassionate Enquirer: They scruple being Holier than Christ
has commanded them, wiser in matters of Religious Worship, than the Scriptures
are able to make them: They scruple giving up their Consciences to those whom
they see no great reason to trust, till better evidence be given how they
regard their own: They scruple all Retreats in Reformation, and all Retrograde
Motions toward Evangelical Perfection and Purity; and they with our Enquirer
would scruple a little more this overlashing, That it is an Essential part of
some Men's Religion to be Censorious; And a great point of Sanctity to scruple
every thing. Let him then continue to Lament the change, and we will pray that
God will make a more through change, reducing Doctrine, Worship, Discipline to
the Word of God, the only Rule of Reformation.

PART. I.
CHAP. I.
A Sober Enquiry into the Apocryphal Causes of Nonconformity, pretended by the
serious Enquirer: St. Augustine, and the Synod of Dort Vindicated; the Articles
of the Church of England Cleared. The Learning, Preaching, and Conversations of
the N. C. modestly justified, against the scandalous Reflections of the
pretended Compassionate Enquirer, but without Recrimination.

AFter a very short Epistle, (or to speak Canonically, that which stands
instead of the Epistle) to very little, and a tedious Introduction to much less
purpose, the Enquirer falls full drive upon the Causes of the separation from
the English Reformed Church. In imitation of the French Ambassadors Musicians,
who would needs give the Grand Seignior a fit of Mirth; but were so cruelly
tedious in tuning their Fiddles, that the Sultans Patience was quite worn out,
and he could not be persuaded to hear the first Lesson.

Now the Causes are either Apocryphal, and pretended, or Canonical, and Real;
and it is a wonder to me, when his Invention was once broached, that he did not
feign this for another Cause of separation, that such Heterogeneous Causes
should be bound up together in the same Volume, and Covers.

For these Apocriphal Causes, let it not beget another scruple, in your
Captious Heads, whether they are pretended by Dissenters, or only pretended by
this Enquirer. to be amongst their pretenses; for it will come all to one,
there being some collateral matters, which it shall go hard but he will entice,
or force into the Discourse, or else the Reader might have sung wh^p Barnaby!
and Retreated to his Recreations, the longest Holy day in the Year.

1. The very first of these pretended Causes, is some Blame they lay upon the
Doctrine of the Church, and the main (if not the only) thing excepted against
in this kind is, That the Thirty Nine Articles are not so punctual in defining
the Five Points debated in the Synod of Dort as they could wish. Just as your
common Hackney Versifiers, or Water Poets, make one Verse for the Reason, and
the other for the Rhyme sake, so was this Objection mounted against the
Doctrine of the Church for the sake of his precious Answers, wherein he will
find or make as handsome an occasion, as impertinency will admit to vilify St.
Austin, and the Synod of Dort.

It will be extremely difficult to give our Enquirer a satisfactory Answer in
this Point. Shall we say, This is not the main thing in the Articles excepted
against by Dissenters? He will readily Reply, However then you t^itly grant,
that this is one of your little Cavils: Shall we say, This is not the Only
thing they scruple; he will return nimbly. Then it seems you consess this to be
one, though not the only thing you Boggle at: Really if I know how to content
him I would do it; and the best expedient that offers it self at present is
this Answer. 1. That the Church has other Doctrines, not contained in the 39
Articles, imposed on the Faith of Subscribers; and perhaps the scruple may lie
against them. 2. That the 39 Articles contain other Doctrines besides those
relating to the five Points debated (...) the Synod of Dort, as that of Art 20.
The Church has power to decree Rites, or Ceremonies. And that of Art. 34.
Every Particular, or National Church has Authority to Ordain, Change and
Abolish Ceremonies or Rites of the Church ordained only by Man's Authority, And
what now if the quarrel should lie against one of those. And I am the rather
induced to suspect they may hesitate in these particulars, because I have heard
some of them privately Speak, and seen others publicly Print, that though they
can practice such things, which being in their own Natures indifferent, remain
under all their concurrent Circumstances lawful; yet they cannot find where the
Church has any Commission to impose them: They can assert, and use their
Christian Liberty, and yet cannot subscribe to the Doctrine of the Churches
Power to take it away. 3. That the most rigid Calvinists do not scruple
Subscription to the Articles, so far as they relate to the Quinquarticular
Controversies; and for a clear experiment herein, for once let the Church make
those Articles only, the single Rail about the Communion Table, and we shall
soon see such Multitudes of Dissenters crowd into the Constitution, that she
will hardly find two Benefices a piece for them.

It Is my greater admiration, that they who deny Particular Election, Original
sin, the interest of Christ's death in Reconciling God to us; that they who
assert Justification by our own Works, Freewill, etc. can subscribe them; and
indeed it seems they swallowed them with some Reluctance, and are now reaching
and straining, with many a sour face, to Degorge, not the Bait of the Benefice,
which is infinitely sweet; but the Hook of the Article, which is unmereifully
sharp.

This pretended Pretense then might safely have been forborne, but that the
Lapwing thinks it advisable to raise a huge cry, where it is not, that we may
not search where really it is; to make a clampering about the Non causes, to
divert our Fnquirers from the true and proper causes of Non-consormity: Like
the ingenious policy of the Thief, that being arraigned for a Horse, freely
confessed the stealing of a Bridle, but prudently concealed it was upon the
Horses Head.

But (says our Enquirer) though this neither needs nor deserves an Answer, yet
I stall reply Two things to it: That is, he will give us Two needless Answers
to One needless Objection.

1. The sum of the former needless Answer is thus much. Common Arts, and
Sciences, which depend upon Humane Wit, and Invention, are capable of daily
improvements; but Christianity depending solely upon Divine Revelation, can
admit of no new discoveries. The busy Wit of Man way perplex, but it can never
bring to light any New Thing; for if we admit of any New Revelations, we lose
the Old, and our Religion together; we accuse our Savior, and his Aposiles, as
if they had not sufficiently revealed Gods Mind to the World, and we incur St.
Paul's Anathema which he denounces against him, (whosoever it shall be, nay if
an Angel from Heaven) that shall Preach any other Doctrine than what had been
received.

The Enquirer may call this a Needless Answer, (sor who shall hinder him from
calling his own what he pleases) but I assure him it contains a great deal of
Needful Truth, which had he like a good Husband improved, the rest of his Book
had been more needless than this Answer: Needless we consess it to be as to the
Objection, which was it self needless, but not so for his own Confutation; for
thus the Dissenters will come over him: If neither Time nor the Wit of Man can
make any New discoveries in Christianity; then the Pope, who like another
Columbus, or Americus, has made Great and New discoveries in the Terra
Incognita of Tradition and Ceremonies, must either be a God, or a Devil. That
the Liturgy was a principal part of Gods Worship, he has told us in the
Introduction, that it was discovered from the beginning, and not by later
Adventurers, he will be sore put to it to prove, for all the Musty Fragments of
St. James's Liturgy: That it was not part of the Wisdom of Christ, or his
Apostles, we are well enough satisfied: That there was Wit and Invention in it,
we confess, all the Question is, whose Wit should have the glory of the
Invention. Again! If to admit New Revelations be to lose the Old, and our
Religion together: Let us make a short Quaery upon it, whether to admit of New
Ordinances, and Constitutions, be not to lose the Old, and our Religion
together? That is, whether Gospel Institutions be not exclusive of new ones, as
well as Gospel Revelations? and why we may not expect a new Credimus, as well
as a new Mandamus? New Revelations as well as New Injunctions? A New Prophet of
the Church seems to me as necessary as a New King over the Church, and a New
High Priest as needful as either: And I proceed upon this Principle, that the
Law of Christ was as perfect as his Discoveries: He has told us as fully, and
clearly what we should do, as what we should believe: He that may invade the
Royal Office, upon pretense there are not Laws enough for the Government of the
Church, may with equal appearance of Reason invade the Prophetic Office too,
upon pretense there are not Revelations now for its instruction: And therefore
the vigilant universal Pastor has found it as necessery to supply the defect of
Revelations, by his own Traditions, as the nakedness of Worship by decent
Ceremonies.

As Jesus Christ vindicated the Moral Law from the false Glosses of the Scribes
and Pharisees, so he superadded a Ceremoni^l Law, depending merely upon his own
fullness of Power, and Authority; now what right any can pretend, to add new
Particulars to his Ceremonial Law, which they may not also pretend, to add to
his Meral Law, I cannot Divine: And therefore one of our Enquirers great
Friends, who had his Eyes in his Head, and saw farther into these matters than
his poor Neighbors, was constrained to assert a power that had lain dormant
somewhere of adding New Particulars to the Divine Law.

But further; If New Revelations do accuse our Savior, and his Apostles, as if
they had not sufficiently revealed Gods Mind to the World: Then new ways of
teaching Gods Mind, new invented Symbolical Ceremonies will accuse him, and
them of the same culpable failure in not discharging those Offices, committed
by God to a Mediator, and by him to his Apostles.

And in short; If we incur St. Paul's Anathema, which he denounces against him
that shall Preach any other Doctrine, than what he has received: Then they will
do well to get out of the way of that Curse who Preach this Doctrine, The
Church has power to decree Rites, and Ceremonies: Unless they be sure they have
received it from Christ, for its but ill venturing to stand in the way of an
Angel with a drawn Sword; more terrible than which is one of the Scriptures
Anathema's: Some will ask where, and when, and from whom the Church received
that Doctrine which some Preach, viz. A Power to impose Mystical, and
Symbolical Ceremonies, as the Terms of Communion with a Church^ but I shall
only say, that our compassionate Enquirer will need a most compassionate
Reader, upon these Two Accounts: First, that he makes an Objection for
Dissenters, which is their Answer: And Secondly, that he gives an Answer to
that Objection, which is their very Objection; but yet we have not heard the
Conclusion.

The Consequence (says he) of these Premises is; That the elder any Doctrine of
Christianity can be proved to be, it must needs be truer; and he that talks of
a more clear Light of the latter Times, and clearer discoveries in Religion,
talks as idly as he that should affirm he could discern things better at a
miles distance, than a Man that has as good an Eye as himself, and yet stood
close by the Object. This is that Needless Conclus on drawn out of his Needless
Premises, and having discovered the weakness of the former, I might leave him
at his leisure to deny his own Conclusion; but yet I shall give him some Items
about that also. And 1. It Is a crude unconcocted No. ion, that the elder any
Doctrine of Christianity is, the truer it is: For it was a Truth that Christ
was Born, before it was that he was Crucified: and yet the former Article, that
he was Born of the Virgin Mary, is no truer, than that he was Crucified, Dead,
and Buried: The Truth of the Doctrine depends not upon it. Antiquity or
Seniority, but upon the infallibility of the Revealer, quo ad ^os, and upon the
close connection of the Terms, in it self, whether a Truth was revealed by
Christ, or his Apostles immediately inspired, all are of equal Truth in
themselves, and equal Authority as to us; that is, the lateness of the
Revelation will breed no difference. 2. The Enquirer might have informed
himself; that there is a double Light, an Objective, and Subjective Light: The
former is the discovery of the Thing it self, the latter is the enlightening of
the Faculty: It Is true there is, there can be no New Objective Light rationally
expected: In this sense all New Lights are but Old Darknesses; but yet there
may be more Subjective Light, or a greater discovery made to us of what God has
discovered in his Word: The Papists locked up our Bibles in the Latin Tongue,
and kept the Key of Knowledge in their Pockets: God by his Gracious Providence
in the Resormation; has taken off the Embargo, and restraint that was upon
Knowledge, and great Light is sprung in amongst us, we say not God has put more
Books, or Chapters, or Verses into the Bibles, but that he has given us more
light in our Minds; he has not Revealed New Truths, but given us advantage to
discover the Old, Thus the Learned Stillingf. somewhere expresses himself. The
common way of the Spirits illuminating the Minds of Believers, is by
enlightening the Faculty, not by proposition of New Objects: A Man then may talk
of more Light in these latter Times, and yet not talk idly; if by more Light he
intends no more than a clearer understanding of Gods Mind, and Will revealed in
his Word; and a Man may talk of more Light in these latter Times, and talk very
idly; If thereby he means, more Revelations of Gods Mind and Will to supply the
defects of the Scripture; but yet none talk so idly, as the Rhetorical Men,
whose Premises speak against New Objective Light, and their conclusion against
New Subjective Light. If Subjective Light be not capable of growth, if it does
not recipere magis and minus: Let him give me a Reason why the Churches
Articles of 1571. do clear up the Doctrine more darkly, and imperfectly laid
down in the days of Edward VI. Refined Silver is more clear, than the same
Metal in the Oar, and yet there is no more Metal. But if it be capable of
growth, and increase; what an idle flourish is his Similitude of a Man's seeing
better at a distance, than he that stands close by the Object: For if we have
got no surther Light into the Scriptures by all the Advantages which Merciful
Providence has surnish'd us with above the darker Times of Popery, they were
very ill bestowed upon us; and he that would repay him in his own Coin might
tell him; That a Man may possibly stand too near the Object, as well as too far
off; and a Dwarf upon a Giants Shoulders may see further than the Giant himself.

What he has hitherto philosophiz'd upon, has been little to our Edification;
nor had we been troubled with this first Mess, but for the sake of that which
is now to be served up in the second Course; and that is, a piece of Revenge
that he will take upon St. Augustine, and the Synod of Dort.

1. And first, here is a heavy charge drawn up against one Augustine, of whom I
presume the Reader may have heard at one time or other some mention made. Now
this Augustine (or rather Austin; for his Name, as well as his Fame suffers a
Syncope) has been formerly a person in great danger of incurring that Curse
denounced against those of whom all Men speak well, till of late some
Charitable Divines, loath to let a Poor Man lie in Purgatory from Age to Age,
when a few bad words would release him, took some pity on him: And one of his
best Friends in this Nation is this Compassionate Enquirer, who informs us,
That no Father, or Writer Greek or Latin before this Austins time agreed in
Doctrine with the Synod of Dort, which is so notoriously plain that it cannot
be denied. And if he agrees therewith, yet it is certain, that in so doing he
disagrees as much with himself as with us of our Church: That he was indeed a
Devout Man, but his Piety was far more commendable than his Reason, and that
being hard put to it, by the Manichees, on the one hand, and the Pelagians on
the other, he was not able to extricate himself; and that he was rather forced
into his opinion, than made choice of it.

He that shall thus confidently dare to censure that worthy Father, must be
presumed to have read over his Voluminous Writings, with all those of the
Ancient Writers before him, both Greek and Latin, to a Man, to a Sentence,
which might sufficiently have proclaimed his Learning, and recommended him to a
Patron, (one would think) though he had never reproached that Father himself:
Many a poor Hungry Man have I known in my little time, that has scribled one
piece after another railing at the Pope, which yet never turned to such
Account, as half a score Lines smartly penned against this great Sinner Austin.
And yet sor all these Insinuations of Industry in Reading, and Acuteness of
piercing Wit, in hunting and tracing the Poor Man through all the windings, and
turnings of his self-perplexing Contradictions; it is our mere good Nature if we
will believe, that ever he saw any more than the back side of St. Austins
Works; for indeed all this may be no more than an ingenious Pataphrase of their
great Grotius, who thu^ spends his Judgment upon him: Discuss. p. 97.Ut dicam
quod sentio puto Augustinum adeo non cum prioribus, ne secum quidem per omnia
posse conciliari: Ita contranitendi studio, se in illas Ambages induxit ut non
invenerit, qua se extriearet; Paucis Scripturae Adductus Locis, quae facile
commodam interpretationem recipient, aliis locis, and pluribus, and
clarioribus, per quae Deus significatur omnium salutem velle, interpretationes
det violentas, and nunc has, nunc illas, incertus quo se vertat; ut dicam
aliquid amplius suit utilis Augustinus ad monita danda piae vitae, ad
interpretandas Sacras Scripturas satis in soelix.

When I first read this dismal charge against Austin, it minded me of our
common forms of Indictments against Breakers of the Peace; how they did Vi and
Armis, with Bills, and Staves, and Swords, and Guns, make an Assault, and
Battery, when it may be all the outcry is for no more than a Fillip, or a
sorry Box oth' Ear.

But what will the Reader say, if all this Bluster, and Clamor which our
Enquirer has borrowed upon Grotius his word, and the Public Faith, be no more
than what Grotius himself has borrowed from the Pelagians who were bound in
their own defense to reproach his Person, before whose Arguments they durst not
stand; and who being the great oppugners of the Grace of God, must needs hate
him who was its great Propugnator. I read indeed in Marius Mercator, p. 103.
That Theodorus, Bishop of Mopsu^stia, the Dad of the Pelagians, did at this
rate nibble at Austins Learning: Sed nihil illorum perspicere potuit, Mirabilis
peccati Originalis Assert or, quippe qui in Divinis Scripturis nequaquam suerit
exercitatus, nec ab Infantia, juxta B. Pauli vocem Sacras didicerit Literas;
sed sive de Scripturae sensibus, five de Dogmate saepius D^clamans, multa
frequenter inepta, proprie communiterve de ipsis Scripturis. Dogmatibusque
plurimis impudenter deprompsit. But this wonderful maintainer of Original Sin,
(Austin) could set none of all these Things; being a Person not at all
exercised in the H. Scriptures: Nor one that had (according to St. Paul's
saying) learned the Scripture from his Childhood; but frequently Declaiming
whether of the meaning of the Scriptures, or of some Opinion, he oftentimes
utters many fooleries, at all Adventures, Hab^nab, concerning the Scriptures,
and many Points of Doctrine. But yet let us hear the Indictment against Austin,
in its several Branches.

1. One Branch of the Charge is; That he was a Novelist in the weightiest
Points of Religion. No one Father, or Writer, Greek, or Latin, before his time
agreed with him. A deo non cum prioribus posse conciliari: And this is so
plain, that it needs no Proof; further than the bare say-so of Grotius) nor can
it be denied. There Is your Charge! There Is your Evidence! These are indeed Big
words, uttered with that confidence which Men commonly assume, that would be
believed in an unproved falsehood; for I will suppose Vincentius Lirinensis,
that Malleus Haeroticorum, to have understood the Sentiments of former Ages, as
well as this Enquirer, or Hugh Grotius. Now he tells us Cap. 34. adversus
haeretic. Quis unquam ante Prophanum illum Pelagium tantam virtutem Liberi
praesumpsit Arbitrii, ut hoc in bonis Rebus per Actus singulos adjuvandum,
necessariam Dei gratiam non putaret? Quis ante prodigiosum discipulum ejus
Caelestium, Reatu praevaricationis Adae, omne genus Humanum adstrictum negaret?
Who ever before that profane wretch Pelagius, ever presemed the power of
Free Will to be so Great, as not to judge the Grace of God necessary to help
it, in all good Things, even in every particular Act? And who before his
monstrous Scholar Coelestius, ever denied that all Mankind stood guilty of
Adams Apostasy from God? When Irenaus Bishop of Lions, had excellently
discoursed of Original sin: How that we were wounded Antiqua Serpentis Plaga,
with the Old Blow of the Devil, And how that Adstrictum est Humanum genus Morti
per Virginem, viz. Evam. That all Mankind was bound over to Death by the
Transgression of Eve: And Protoplasti peccato, vinculis alligati eramus. We
were all bound in Chains of guilt by the sin of Adam the Protoplast. St. Austin
made use of this Testimony, Lib. 1, Cap. 2. contra Iul. Videsne Antiquum Dei
Hominem, quid de Antiqua Serpentis Plaga sentiat? Quid de similitudine Carnis
peccati, per quam sanatur plaga Serpentis in Carnes peccati? Quid de
Protoplasti peccato, per quod alligati eramus. Do you not Observe (says Austin)
what that Ancient Man of God thinks of that old Blow given us by the Devil?
What his Judgment is, concerning the likeness of sinful Flesh, (Christ
Incarnate) by which the Wound of the Serpent in our sinful Flesh is healed? And
what his opinion is touching the sin of the Protoplast, by which we are all
guilty? And Origin against Celsus, Lib. 4. agrees exactly with him (...): The
curse of Adam is common to all Men, and there is no Woman of whom it may be said
what was said of the first Woman. So Nazianz Orat. 3. de Pace. (...); I have
need to be wholly saved, who am wholly lapsed, and condemned by the
disobedience of Adam, and the subtility of the Devil. And Austin quotes
Chrysostom to prove both the influence of the first Adams disobedience, upon
our Condemnation; and that of Christ's obedience upon our Acceptance with God.
(...); When a cavilling Jew shall object, How can the World be saved by the
Rectitude, or Obedience of one Christ? Answer him again, by asking him; How
came the World to be condemned by the disobedience of one Adam?

I shall give the Reader no further trouble in this matter; The Greek and Latin
Fathers were either of Austins, or Pelagius his mind, if they were of Pelagius
his opinion, then he has at once Canonized them for Orthodox Pelagians; but if
they were not of Pelagius his Mind. (for I know no Medium) they were of
Austins, and by consequence of the same Judgment with the Synod of Dort.

St. Hierome indeed says expressly, That before that Southern Devil (he means
Arius) appeared in the World, the Ancients spoke many things in the simplicity
of their Hearts, and not so advisedly, which might give some Advantage to the
Heretic; And Austin will confess. That Ante Mota Certamina Pelagiana, the
Fathers seemed to speak favorably of Free Will; but afterward multo
diligentiores, vigilantioresque facti sunt, they began to bestir themselves,
and watch over their words a little better: Now as it would be a severe Charge
upon all the Primo-primitive Fathers, that they were Arians, because a
suspicious word at sometimes dropped from their Mouths, or Pens, so would it be
a rash, and ignorant Censure of them, that they were all Pelagians, because
some odd expressions fell from them, which may seem to favor Pelagianisme: And
therefore I am in hope, since Pelagius is risen from the Dead, this sleepy Age
will awake, and give him no ground by unwary Expressions; at least we expect
thus much, that Non-conformists may not be ruined, because they are no wiser
than Austin.

2. A second Branch of the Charge is, That St. Austin Agrees not with himself.
A pitiful sorry self-inconsistent Scribler he was it seems, that could not make
his matters hang together: One that caper'd backwards, and forwards, that it
was the easiest thing in the world to trip up his heels, such a Novice was this
Austin; all which I could easily believe, when it shall be proved, that he
wrote the first and second Part of the serious Enquiry. Really, that Man must
have amassed a vast stock of confidence, that shall hope with one puff of
contemptuous Breath to blow away that fair heap of Repute that that Fathers
Name has gathered in so many Centuries; and he must have an overweening
conceit of his own Rhetoric, that can presume to persuade this Learned Age,
that he was so insignificant a Ceremony, so great a Trifler: The Papists with
incredible zeal have struggled for him; the Protestants have tooth and nail
wrestled to draw him into their Tents; all parties have ambitiously courted his
suffrage; at last comes one Hugh Gr^ot, and our Enquirer, and they cashier him
as an inconsiderable fellow not worth the whistling.

But Luther had this great Stone thrown at his Head by Bellarmine: And the
Learned Dr. Field thus puts by the Blow. On the Church Book. 3. Chapter 42. Luther
(says he) was as worthy a Divine as the World had any in those Times, or in
many Ages before, and that for clearing sundry Points of greatest moment in our
Christian Profession, much obscured, and entangled before with the intricate
disputes of the Schoolmen, all succeeding Ages shall be bound to Honor his
Happy Memory: That herein he proceeded by degrees, and in his latter Writings
disliked that which in his former he did approve, is not so strange a thing.
Did not Austin, the greatest of all the Fathers, and the worthiest Divine the
Church of God ever had since the Apostles time, write a whole Book of
Retractations? Did we not carefully observe what things he wrote whilst a
Presbyter, and what when made a Bishop? What before he entered into the
Conflict with Pelagius, and what afterward? Did he not formerly attribute the
Election of those that were chosen to Eternal Life, to the foresight of Faith,
which afterward he disclaimed as a mere Pelagian conceit? And would it not vex
a Man of our Enquirers Humor, that Austin the Presbyter should be more
Orthodox, than Austin the Bishop?

The Truth is, St. Austin disagrees no more with himself, than it became a Wise
Man, who by long studying the Scriptures, and the Primitive Fathers, had gained
a more concocted, and well digested Knowledge of Religion; his Retractations
were never laid in his Dish, but interwoven amongst those Excellencies which
Crowned his Learned Head, before Now. A piece of such selfdenial it was, that a
proud heart could not bear, unless more politic Considerations turned the
scale; This last Age has few Instances of such an Ingenuity as will confess it
self Truths Prisoner; though it abounds with too many that surrender themselves
Captives to base Lusts, and worldly Interest: Their own Grotius professes he
was progressive, and very prone to dislike what a little before he was well
pleased with, and the Reasons of his Change were evident to all the World.

3. A third Branch of this Charge is, That St. Austin disagrees with the Church
of England. There are indeed a knot of Gentlemen, that in spite of Right and
Truth, are resolved to be the Church of England, and with these St. Austin, and
the Ancient Fathers have no very good correspondence, nor are they ambitious of
it: But that the Ancient Church of England had very high thoughts of Austins
Judgment, is from hence evident, that she quotes his opinion in one at least of
the Articles of her Faith, and justifies her Authority from his Doctrine, Art.
29. But yet if the Church should be a weary of him, (as I am confident she
never will) and has no further service to command him, it is but transmitting
him with Letters of safe Conduct into Holland, where the Divines of the Synod
of Dort's persuasion will give him better Quarter, and a most Cordial welcome,
and there is no harm done.

4. Another Branch of this tedious Charge is, That he was a Devout Good Man,
but whose Piety was far more commendable than his Reason. Fuit utilis ad monita
danda piae vitae, ad Scripturas interpretandas satis infoelix: That is, The Man
was a well meaning Zealot! One that according to his dim light meant honestly,
but he never had wit enough to write Obscaene Annotations upon the Canticles;
he poor Man was little versed in Anacreons Ribaldry, nor had much studied Ovid
de Art Amaendi, he was a mere stranger to Catullus, and Martial; and therefore
must needs be Satis, nay Nimis ad interpretandas Scripturas inf^lix. The most
wretched unhappy Creature that ever bungled at a Text of Scripture. It was
never my unhappiness but once to hear the learned A. B. Usher reproached, and
it was by a Grave divine of the same Temper, and upon the same Account: That
the Primate was indeed an Honest Man, but one of no depth of Judgment.

We need not search far for a Reason, why these Men cry down Austins Reason: In
short, it is but to be revenged on him for crying down theirs; for there is a
certain Maleporrsaway thing, as blind as a Beetle, and as giddy as a Goose,
which they have Nicknamed Reason, and this Austin decries with some severity.
Thus the Learned Iuell against Harding, Art. 4. Diris. 17. observes, That
Austin speaking of the Scripture judging Mysteries, by Reason, faith thus. Haec
consuetudo periculosa est, per Scripturas Divinas enim multo tutius Ambulatur:
And again, Si Ratio contra Divinarum Scripturarum authoritatem redditur,
quamvis acuta sit, fallit verisimilitudine, vera enim esse non potest. If
Reason be brought against the Authority of the Scriptures, though it may seem
^xte, and witty, yet it is but fallacious under the shadow of Truth, for it is
impossible it should be True. And for this he quotes, Ad Marc^llinum Ep. 7. And
let the Reader have a special care of the Quotation, for the Ecclesiastical
Politicians sake.

But that our Austin was no such Shallow-brain'd-fellow, no such
half-witted-piece, as those Divines judge it their Interest to represent him. I
shall call in the Testimony of Jerome, one whose Learning, and Judgment may at
least counterballance those of the Enquirer. I have always (says he to Austin)
Reverenced thy Holiness! Increase in Virtue! Thou art Famous through the World:
Catholics Reverence thee as the Re-builder of the Ancient Faith; And I promise
you he must be no Blockhead, that shall be able to Redintegrate the Ruinous
Doctrine of the Christian Church: But I shall knock all dead with an
infallible, and therefore irrefragable Testimony; it is no less I assure you
than that of Coelestinus Bishop of Rome: We have always accounted Austin a Man
of Holy Memory, for his Life, and Merits of our Communion, whom we have long
since remembered to have been of so great Knowledge, that he was amongst the
best Masters. It would be impertinent to tell you, how Panlinus Bishop of Nela,
calls him the great Light set upon the Candlestick of the Church; or how
Prosper gives him the Character of a very sharp Wit, clear in his Disputations,
Catholic in his Expositions of the Faith: But to what purpose should we
control him with inferior Evidences after that of a Pope? or to what end
Subpoena our little Witnesses after these Grandees? For surely he that will
break Austins Pate, will not fear to dash out Prospers Brains.

5. Another Branch of this endless Indictment is; That being hard put to it by
the Manichees on the one hand, and the Pelagians on the other, he was not able
to extricate himself. Se in illas Ambages induxit, ut non invenerit qua se
extricaret. You see, I hope, that if ever we should want an able Head to
translate Grotius into English, our Enquirer is the Man: Never was poor Man so
bewildred, so sadly entangled in the Briars, as this Austin, between the
Manich^an fatal Necessity, and the Pelagian Contingency; one while he is just a
splitting upon the Seylla of Free Will, and whilst he goes a Point or two too
near the wind, he is ready to be swallowed up of the desperate Gulf of Stoical
Necessity. I shall say no more; let the Reader seriously peruse St. Austins
Works, and when he has done, study this Enquirers Volumes, and by that time he
may be satisfied, whether all his Rhetoric, and Confidence, will make him a
competent Judge of St. Austins Learning.

6. His Conclusion of his Charge is; That he was rather forced into his
Opinions, than made choice of them. H^ whose Tongue is his own, may employ it
how he pleases; but this slander carries its Consutation, as well as its
Confidence in its Forehead. It Is as if we should conclude; That Men become
Enemies, because they have shed one another Blood; whereas most think they
wound, and shed one another Blood, because they were first Enemies: It was the
Zeal of this Learned, and Holy Person, for the cause of God that put him upon
Study; that drew him out in the open Field against the open Enemies of the
Grace of God, who might otherwise have slept secure in a whole skin; Dispute
cleared up Truths to him, but he was not forced from any, or into any, I shall
conclude this Head, with that of Bradwardine, another famous Champion in the
same Cause with Austin. Ecce enim quod non nisi tactus dolor Cordis refero,
sicut^lim contra unum Dei Prophetam, octingenti, and quinquag inta Prophetae
Real, and simil^s reperti sunt, quibus and innumerabilis populus adhaerebat;
Ita and hodie in hac causa, Quot O Domine, hodie cum Pelagio, pro libero
Arbitrio contra gratuitam gratiam tuam pugnant, and contra Paulum Pugilem
gratiae specialem? Exurge ergo, Domine, sustine, protege, robora, consolare;
seis enim quod nusquam virtute mei, sed tua consisus, tantillus aggredior
tantam causam. Behold! (which I cannot mention without gri^f of Heart) as of
old against one Prophet of God, eight hundred and fifty of the Prophets of
Baal, and such like, were found, to whom a great multitude of People did
adhere; so in this Cause, How many O Lord at this day contend for Freewill,
with Pelagius against thy free Grace, and against St. Paul that Famous Champion
of Grace? Arise therefore O Lord! uphold, defend, strengthen, comfort me; for
thou know that not trusting to my own strength but thine, so weak a
Combatant has engaged in so great a Cause.

2. His second assault is against the Synod of Dort: A Task as needless as the
Answer itself, and such as will not quit for cost for having already routed
Austin, this poor Synod must fall in; course with him, and be buried under his
Ruins.

That it was a Dutch Synod I cannot deny: Dort is, and always was in the
Province of Holland; and therefore to pare off as much needless Controversy as
may be, let him Triumph in our Concession, and make his best on it; The Synod of
Dort was a Dutch Synod.

That England was not within the Jurisdiction of Dort, I shall easily admit,
Nay. I can be contend that it be exemp^ed from the Popes West^rn Patriarchate,
if Grotius, B. Bran^hal, and some others would agree to it. The Question then
is, How far the Church of England was, or is concerned in, at Agreement with,
or obliged by the Decrees thereof?

That King James sent thither several of his most Learned, and Eminent Divines,
premunited with an Instrument, and there by empowered to sit, hear debate,
conclude upon those Arduous Points, that should be brought before them, I think
is not denied; but by those who deny there ever was any such Synod. That they
did according to their Instructions, go thither, sit there, debate upon, and at
last subscribe to the determinations of that Convention, is also out of
dispute: If their subscription did not formerly oblige the Nation, yet it
evidently proves what was the Judgment of the Nation: Nor do I think it had
been for the Honor of this Church to have been of that Religion, because those
Delegates had subscribed; but they therefore subscribed, because they were in
their own Judgments conformable to that of the Church, of the Religion and
Judgment of the Council.

There had been formerly one Bar^ in the University of Cambridge, who delivered
himself some what broadly in favor of the Arminian Novelties; Hereupon the
Heads of that University, sent up Dr. Whitaker, and Dr. Tyndall to A. B.
Whitguift, that by the interposition of his Authority those errors might be
crushed in the Egg, which were but New-laid as yet, and not hatched in the
bosom of this Church. The Zealous Prelate presently convenes some of the most
Judicious Divines of his Province, and Nov. 10. 1595. by their Advice draws up
the Lambeth Articles coming up to, if not going beyond the Dordrectan Creed:
Forthwith he transmits these Articles to his Brother of the other Province, the
A. B. of York, who receives, and approves them: So that now we have the Primate
of England, and the Primate of All England owning more than virtually the
Decrees of that Synod; and surely two such persons, so learned, as having been
both of them Professors of Divinity in the University, and of so great Power in
the Church, must be presumed, if any, to understand the true meaning of the 39
Articles in the Five Controverted Points. After all this King James allows the
inserting them into the Articles of the Church of Ireland; and it were some
what difficult to believe, that a Prince so wise, and learned, would allow that
Doctrine for Orthodox in one of his Kingdoms, which was reputed Heretical in
the other; unless we will say, they were erroneous at home, but purged
themselves like French-Wines at Sea, by crossing St. Georges Channel; or that
the malignity, or latent poison of them, was sucked out by the sanative
Complexion of the Irish Air, and Soil: If then the substance of the Articles
was owned, it is no matter whether the Jurisdiction of the Synod was owne^: for
I rather think, that the Synod of Dort owned the Doctrine of the Church of
England, than that the Church of England owned that Synods Jurisdiction.

I must here remember him of his own discourse in the Introduction; and desire
to know whether he abide by that Doctrine he once Preached to us; That the
Presence of the British Bishops in the Council of Arles, was good proof of the
Nations Piety. Let him show how that Proof proceeds, and its very probable we
shall be in a fair way to show him how the Presence of the English Delegates at
the Synod of Dort, might imply, that the Church of England did compromise with
it in the Points now in Question.

I confess I do not well understand the Mystery of one company of Men's making a
Faith for another; but yet I may plead from an equality of Reason, that if the
Non-conformists are bound up by the Decrees of a Convocation at London, where
they have no representatives, the Church of England may be as well bound up by
the Decrees of Dort, where she had her representatives. If it be said that this
Church had no equal Number at Dort to make a full representation of her Body;
it may be answered; that in the Convocation 1571. there was no such equal
representation of the Clergy, nor any at all of the People, who have Souls to
save, and Consciences to Account for, and ought not to be concluded in matters
of Faith, by what a Couple of Clerks shall agree to, who are only chosen by the
Parochial Ministers: I never saw a good Argument to this day, to prove, that
the people ought to Believe all that their Ministers Believe, or that the
Ministers are bound to hold all that their Representatives shall subscribe,
seeing it cannot be supposed that they give them so large a Commission; and if
they should, it were actually void, because they give away their Consciences,
which are none of their own.

How things are now I know not well, but in former times a Convocation had been
judged no equal representation, either of the inferior Clergy, or the Body of
the People. In the lower house of Convocation, there have been in some
Diocesses, one Dean, one Clerk for the Cathedral, three or four Archdeacons;
and for the inferior Clergy of the whole Diocese, only Two Clerks to
Counterballance all the rest. So that all things must of necessity be concluded
according to the Temper and Interest of the Cathedrals, and that I think was no
equal representation; but these things are inconsiderable. He comes now to draw
up a Charge against, not the Jurisdiction, but the Doctrine of that Syn^.

1. They were such as knew not how God could be Just, unless he was cruel, nor
Great, unless he Decreed to Damn the far greater part of Mankind. A company of
silly Souls I perceive they were, and their Heads just of the same size with
St. Austins: But in my poor judgment they took the wrong end of the Staff; for
it had been much he harder task to make him Just, if he were first supposed
Cruel; but this is one of those Chymerical Consequences, which the persons of
this distemper, and prejudice, use when their Blood is up to fasten upon the
Principles of the Calvinists, It was an Ingenious Observation of the Author of
Orig. Sacr. p. 10. where he assigns this as one cause of error. To question
the soundness of Foundations for the Apparent Rottenness of the
Superstructures: For (says he) There is nothing more usual than for Men who
exceedingly detest some absurd Consequence, they see may be drawn from a
Principle supposed, to reject the Principle it self for the sake of that
Consequence, which it may be does not necessarily flow from it, but from the
shortness of their own Reason does only appear so to do. And if it were
possible to persuade these Censurers to so much humility as to suspect they may
possibly not be infallible, in drawing Conclusions from other Men's Principles;
all this heat might be over: What the Synod of Dort asserts in this matter is
thus much. Ar. 15. Deus Homines quosdam ex liberrimo, justissimo, and
immutabili beneplacito dectevit in Communi Miseria, in quam se sua Culpa
praecipitarunt, relinquere, nec salvifica side, and conversione donare, sed in
vijssuis, and sub justo judicio relictos, tandem, non tantum propter
infidelitatem, sed etiam Caetera peccata omnia, ad declarationem Justitiae,
damnare, and aeternum punire,In which, as there is nothing but what is Just, so
there is nothing at all that is Cruel. 1. That Act of God which our Enquirer,
for the greater Grace will call a Decree to damn the far greatest part of
Mankind, the Synod calls a Reliction of some Men, or a Decree to pass by some
Men. Quosdam Homines decrevit Relinquere. 2. They say not that God Decrees to
damn Men absolutely; but, Propter infidelitatem, and caetera omnia peccata
damnare, to damn Men for their Infidelity, and all their other sins; which is
neither injustice, nor cruelty. 3. They say indeed that God Decrees to leave
some Men in the common Misery, but withal it is such as whereunto they have
thrown themselves through their own fault. In communi miseria, in quam se sua
Culpa praecipitarunt. 4. They say this is an Act of Justice in God to leave
them to lie in that common misery, into which they had plunged temselves, it is
Iustissimo Beneplacito. So that all the difficulty will be to resolve, 1.
Whether it be an Act of Cruelty in God to leave Man as he found him in Massa
corrupta; and damnabili? And 2. Whether it be an Act of Injustice in God to
damn Men for their unbelief, and other sins. If neither of these; it will be no
difficult province to make it out, How God may be just in damning Men for their
sin, and yet not cru^ leaving them in their sin.

I am aware that this whole Controversy at last must empty it self into that
of Original sin. And a difficulty it is that may require strong Heads to prove,
that will not bring humble Faith to believe, how Men have plunged themselves
into the common Misery, wherein God leaves those some, by their own default,
Culpa sua: But the Church of England will be responsible for this difficulty,
who determines in her Ninth Article, That in every Person born into the World
it deserves Gods wrath and damnation.

The pretense for this odious Imputation, is nothing but a Fancy, which
forsooth these great Masters of Wit have agreed to call Reason, That that which
would be Cruelty, and Injustice in Man, must presently be so in God: As thus,
Because it would be Cruelty, and Inhumanity in me to see my Enemy (or if it
were but his Ox or his Ass) lie in a Ditch ready to perish, and not to put
forth a helping hand to pluck him out, that therefore it must be Cruelty in
God, to see a sinner lie under sin, and its present Consequents, and not to
deliver him from that state: Whereas we might consider that God has tied us by
the Laws of Charity and Interest to such Assistance; because we may possibly
call for the same Assistance from others in our Miseries; but God is not so
bound up, having once set his Creature on his legs, to raise him up as often as
he shall please to fall.

The vanity of this Reasoning will more easily appear, if we take the pains (a
little pains will do it) to put, and consider this Case. Scelus qui non
prohibet cum potest jubes; it is Seneca's Maxim, and owned by all; That every
Man is bound to prevent, and hinder all the wickedness he possibly, and
lawfully can; now if we will Measure God by this Rule, we must conclude, that
God is unjust and cruel, if he hinders not all the evil in the World, which he
can possibly, and lawfully prevent: Nay, put the Case as favorably as you can,
That God is bound to prevent all the wickedness of Mankind, as far as he can by
Moral means, not exerting any Physical Influence upon his Creature, to impede
its vicious propensities, yet this will not excuse him from Apparent injustice
and cruelty, if our Obligations must be made the Rule and Measure of his: For
he has not in many places of the World sent them so much as the Preaching of
the Gospel, nor helped them to the best Arguments against disobedience, nor
propounded to them the strongest Motives to obedience.

The Remonstrants I perceive would gladly fasten this upon the Contra
Remonstrants, that there is the same Reason, and Proportion between foreseen
Faith, and Election, and foreseen infidelity and disobedience, and Reprobation.
So Ames Coron. p. 27. Parilitatem quandam infer c^nantur inter electionem,
and reprobationem. To which he thus returns: Sed sine Ratione, privilegium enim
exemptionis, and liberationis a pana, merita, been potest aliquibus concedi,
sine ulla ratione Conditionis antecedentis, and impellentis; and pana tamen
caeteris inflig^ ratione sui meriti, i. e. The privilege of Exemption, and
Deliverance from deserved punishment may safely be granted to some without any
respect had to an Antecedent, and Moving Condition, and yet the punishment be
inflicted upon the rest, on the Account of their own demerits: So that he seems
to have cleared what he had said, p. 14. Interim advertere debent aliam esse
Rationem infidelitatis ad Rejectionem; aliam vero fide^ ad Electionem. To shut
up this discourse: If by Reprobation this Enquirer will needs understand a
peremptory Decree of God to damn any Man, without respect had to the violation
of his Law, the Synod is a perfect stranger to it: But if by Reprobation, they
may have liberty to understand no more than they have a mind to, viz. Gods
purpose not to give Grace to some to whom he ows it not: As it speaks no
injustice in him, because he was not their Debtor; so neither does it imply any
Cruelty, if as a Righteous, and Just Judge, he punish them for those sins,
which they commit for want of such special, and undeserved Grace.

2. A second Charge against the Doctrine of that Synod is; That they could not
tell how Men should be kept humble, unless they made him not a Man, but a
Stock, or a Stone. And yet the harder task had been to make him Humble, if they
had made him either a Stock, or a Stone; And yet the harder task had been to
make him Humble, if they had made him either a Stock, or a Stone; for it would
have puzzled them to Preach a Sermon of Humility with any considerable success
to such an Auditor, though the Legend would persuade us, that Venerable Bede
had once, and but once, that Happiness: But let the Reader hear what they say
for themselves, Art. 3, 4.. 13, 16. Sicuti post lapsum, Homo non definit esse
Homo, intellectu, and voluntate praeditus, nec peccatum quod universum genus
humanum pervasit, naturam generis humani sustulit, sed spiritualiter ^cidit;
Ita etiam haec Divina Regenerationis gratia, non agit in hominibus, tanquam
truncis, and stipitibus, nec voluntatem, ejusque proprietates tollit, aut in
vitam violenter cogit, sed spiritualiter vivificat, sanat, corrigit, suaviter
simulac potenter slectit. As after the Fall, Man ceased not to be a Man,
endowed with an Understanding, and Will, nor has sin, which overspread all
Mankind, taken away the Nature of Mankind, but only spiritually stain it. So
also that Divine Regenerating Grace, works not in Men, as if they were Stocks,
or Blocks, not takes away the Will, and its Essential Properties; or compels it
by force against its will, but spiritually quickens it, heals it, corrects it,
and gently, but yet powerfully inclines it. Hence it is clear, that this Synod
were satisfied that God in the work of Conversion deals not with Men, as if
they were Stocks, (and the same you may imagine of Stones) but the Question
then will be, whether upon this Hypothesis, they knew how to keep Man Humble:
Man indeed is a very proud Creature, and it may exercise the skill of the
wisest how to keep him Humble upon the best Principles; but of all that have
undertaken this hard task, I most admire at their want of skill, that know not
how to keep Man Humble unless they knock him ot^ Head. The knot of the
Controversy among the contending parties lies here.

The Contra-Remonstrants assert. Post Dei operationem, non manet in Hominis
potestate Regenerari, vel non Regenerari: So Ames Coron. p. 227. After the Work
of God (i. e. his utmost Work that he designs in Conversion) it remains not in
Man's power to be Regenerated, or not Regenerated; for they suppose that God
does not leave his Work in the halves, but that before that effectual Grace,
which proceeds from his purpose of Regenerating, does cease to operate, the
person is actually Regenerated; yet still that in all the process of this
Glorious Work, he offers no violence to, commits no Rape upon the Natural
Faculties of the Soul: The Remonstrants on the other hand assert, That Positis
omnibus operationibus, quibus ad Conversionem, in nobis efficiendam, Deus
utitur, manet tamen ipsa Conversio, (...) (...) nostra potestate, ut possimus
non Converti. Supposing the whole Work of God, (...) (...) uses to work
Conversion in us, to be finished; yet still Conversion it self remains so (...)
in our power, that we may not be Converted. Which Principle seems clearly to
ascribe Conversion not to Gods Grace, but to Man's Will, and Strength; it is the
Man that makes himself differ from another: It Is Man that Regenerates himself,
when all is done that God does; and perhaps our Enquirer may have something to
do to keep Man humble upon this Hypothesis: But whether of these Two Principles
makes the nearer Approach to the Church of England, I mean that Doctrine which
is expressed in the thirty nine Articles, let the 10. Art. judge. The Condition
of Man is such after the Fall, that he cannot turn, nor prepare himself by his
own Natural Strength to Faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we have no power
to do good Works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we have
that good will. Our Enquirer, will tell us by and by, p. 9. That there has been
little or no alteration made in the Doctrine of this Church, since the
beginning of the Reformation: And therefore I conclude, that there has been no
alteration made from an Anti-Arminian to an Arminian sense* for that cannot be
called little or no alteration: Now that this 10 Art. in the beginning of the
Reformation, in Edw. VI. Reign, had an Anti-Arminian sense, will be out of
Question to him that remembers what Addition there was then made to it. The
Grace of Christ, or the H. Ghost by him given, does take away the Stony Heart,
and gives an Heart of Flesh; and although those that have no will to good
things, he makes them to will; and those that would evil things, he makes
them not to will, yet nevertheless he forces not the will. Articles Printed by
I. Day Anno 1553. Cum Privilegio: If this then be the sense of the Article, let
him go practice at home, and turn his Brains, how to keep Man Humble, and yet
neither make him Stock nor Stone; and when he has found out the Mystery, send
word to the Synod, who I am assured never asserted higher than this amounts to:
But if this be not the sense of the Article at present, though it was once so,
then it must follow that the Church has more than a little altered her Doctrine
since the Reformation: And then a worse thing than all this will follow; for p
8. He allows, That if this Church did approach too near Popery, it would serve
to justify a Secession from it. But says another, if it approaches too near
Arminianism, it approaches too near Popery; and therefore our Enquirer will
warrant any Man's Secession from the Church, without the least imputation of
Schism: What a close connection there is between those two errors we shall
hear e're long, and thither we refer the Reader, when we have told him, that
the Church of England is certainly free from any Tincture of Arminianism, and
so far free from any spot of Popery; only it concerned the Enquirer to
understand the consequences of his own scandalous Reflections. I have done with
his first Answer.

2. I come now to his second: The Arti^ (...) (...) (...) (...) this Church do
with such ad^ prudence and wariness handle these (...) (...) (...) paerticular
respect was had to these Men, and care taken that they might Abundare sensu suo.

I cannot imagine what greater Reproach he could throw upon these famous
Articles, and their worthy Compilers, then to suggest that they were calculated
for all Meridians and Latitudes: As if the Church did imitate (...), the
Delphian Apollo, whose Oracles wore Two Faces under one Heed, and were penned
like those Amphilogies that cheated Croesus and Pyrr^ into their destruction:
Or as if like Ianus, they looked (...) backwards and forwards: and like the
untouched Needle, stood indifferently to be interpreted through the two and
thirty Points of the Compass: The Papists do never more maliciously reproach
the Scriptures, than when they call it a Lesbian Rule, a Nose of Wax, a Leaden
Dagger, a Pair of Scamans Trowzes; a Movable Dyal, you may make it what a Clock
you please: And yet they never arrived at that height of Blasphemy, as to say
it was Industriously so penned by the Amannenses of the Holy Ghost.

I dare not entertain so little Charity for an Assembly of Holy and Learned Men
convened upon so solemn an occasion, that they would play Legerde main, and
contrive us a Systeme of Divinity, which should be (...) pacis non veritatis:
The Conventicle of Trent indeed acted like themselves, (that is, a pack of
Juglers) who when they were gravelled and knew not how to hush the noise, and
imp^rtunate Clamor of the bickering Factions, the Crafti^r L^ng M^n found out
a Temper (as they called it) to skin over that Wou^d which they could not heal,
and durst not search; And what was the success of these Carnal Policies? only
this! Both parties retained their differing opinions, believed just as they did
before; and when they f^und how they had been cajouled, the Con^ versi^s which
for a while had been smothered under the Ashes of a Blind Subscription, broke
out into a more violent flame.

The craft of this Politic Juncto, that impartial H^storian Pietro Pola^ has
opened to the World: Hist. Conne. of Trent. p. 216. In the ^ear 1546. (says
she) In the end of the Session Dominicus a Soto, principal of the Dominicans,
wrote Three Books of Nature and Grace, wherein all his old Opinions were found;
Then comes Andreas Vega, a great Man amongst the Franciscans, and he ^ites no
less than Fifteen Books, upon the 16 Points of the Decree that passed that
Session, and expounded all according to his own Opinions: And yet their
opinions were directly contrary to one another, though both supposed to agree
with the Decree of the Council. So Righteous it is with God, that they who
design not their Confessions for an Instrument of Truth, which is Gods End,
should not find them an Instrement of Peace, which is all their End: They that
will separate Truth from Peace, shall certainly miss both of P^ace and Truth.

The Title prefixed to the Book of Articles does abundantly secure us of their
Honesty. The Catholic Doctrine believed and professed in the Church of
England. Now how shall we at all believe, if we know not what to bel^eve? And
if the Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound, it is all one as if it were not
Sounded: That which is every thing, and every where, is nothing, and no where.
That which has no determinate Sense, has no Sense, and that is very near akin to
Nonsense. The Jews indeed have a Tradition, that the Manna was what every Man's
appetite could relish; and such a Religion would these Men invent as should be
most flexible, where it ought not to bend, and where it should yield, there to
be in^exible. Strange it is, that Religion of all things in the World should be
unfix'd, and like Delos, or O-Brazile, float up and d^n in various and
uncertain Conjectures: What Aristotle ^'d to say of o^ of his Books. That is
was Editus, and non Editus, and what was the just reproach of the Rhemists
Testament, that it c^e forth (as some repor^ of a great Princes Sword) with a
Padlock upon it, so stuffed with Pen and Ink-horn Terms, that it was almost as
intelligible in Latin; the same contumely does our Enquirer pour out upon the
Articles of the Church, which were the most famous Testimony that then for many
Years, nay Ages, had been given to the Truth of the Gospel. I conclude then,
that he must be very immodest, that can entertain a thought so unworthy the
Learning, Religion, and sincetity of our first Reformers, which were their
greatest Ornaments, as they were of their Times, and the Articles the greatest
glory of them both.

I know it is an easy matter to draw up a Proposition so dubiously, that the
greatest Dissenters may subscribe it; but what is the advantage of such dawbing
Policy? Peace or Unity of Judgment? Some Men indeed have got a Worm in their
Pates, and they fancy this an expedient for these ends, but there is no such
matter; for the Subscribers in this Case do not bow their jugdments to the
Articles, but gently bend the Articles to their judgment. It Is not the Bank
that moves to the Boat, but the Boat that moves to the Bank, and each Party
thinks it self the stronger, because it can draw in the obsequious Articles to
abet their opinioons

When therefore he insinuates, that they of the Cal^inistical persuasion, in
subscribing the Articles, are forced to use Scholastic Subtleties to reconcile
their opinions to them; we entreat them to use Scholastic Sub^leties, who are
of the other judgment, to reconcile the Articles to their opinions, and they
will find all too little, unless they borrow a Point or two of Conscience,
first to resolve to subscribe, and then defend it afterward as well as they
can.

And when he intimates that they were only some few Divines of this Church that
used this expedient, we know well, that till the appearance of the late A. B.
Laud, the generality of this Church were of the Dort persuasion; Arminianism
has been openly declared Schism; Arminius himself an Enemy to the Grace of God,
by our greatest and most Learned Princes; and the greatest of our Churchmen
have declared against it, as a stranger and enemy to our Church. But all this,
as I observed, was brought in to vilify the Synod of Dort; and that eminently
Learned and Holy Person St. Austin, whose Credit whilst the Enquirer would
wound, he shall but like the Viper in the Fable, Break his own Teeth, and never
hurt the impregnable Steel.

2. A second pretended Objection against the Church is, That it is not
sufficiently purged from the Dross of Romish Superstitions.

It Is a marvelous advantage to him that challenges another to fight; if he may
prescribe and impose the Weapon; this Authority has our Enquirer, and some of
his Camerades arrogated as peculiar to themselves, that they may put what
objections they please into the Mouths of Dissenters.

For though they cannot in the largest Charity acquit a Party, (neither
considerable for Number or solid Learning) which yet by noise and
Pragmaticalness, and some other Artifices, have vested themselves with the Name
of the Church; yet they are ready to clear the Articles of the Church from
Popery, and Arminianism.

I intend those alone, who would obtrude a meaning upon the Doctrine, as if it
impugned particular Election, Original Sin, and asserted Free Will,
Justification by our own Works, and the rest of those Points whereof some
mention has been made.

In the first of Car. I. The House of Commons exhibited Articles against one
Mr. Richard Mountague; the 5th. of which was thus. And whereas in the 17th. of
the said Articles, it is Resolved, [That God has certainly decreed by his
Counsel secret to us, to deliver from Curse, and Damnation, those whom he has
chosen out of Mankind in Christ, and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting
salvation, wherefore they which be endued with so excellent a Benefit, be
called according to Gods purpose working in due time, they through Grace obey
that calling, they be justified freely, walk Religiously in good works, and at
last by Gods mercy attain to Everlasting Felicity;] He the said Richard
Mountague, (...) the said Book called The Appeal, does affirm and maintain,
that men justified may fall away from that state which once they had. Thereby
la^ing a most malicious scandal upon the Church of England, as if he did differ
herein from the Reformed Churches in England, and the Reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, and did Consent unto those pernicious Errors commonly called
Arminianism, which the late famous Q. Eliz. and K. James of happy memory, did
so piously, and Religiously labor to suppress. And farther they charge him,
That the scope and end of his Book, was to give ^ncouragement to Popery, and to
withdraw his Majesty's Subjects frrom the True Religion established; From whence
we have gained this Point, that that Doctrine which denies Perseverance in them
that were once Justified, does abet Arminianism, and therein draw near Popery:
But if these men might expound the Articles, they would deny the one, and abet
the other; and therefore do draw too near Popery: Hereupon Dissenters have a
warrant under his own Hand to withdraw from the Church, for (says he) p. 8. If
the charge (of drawing too near the Church of Rome) were true, or if it were
probable, it would justify their separation from it.

In 5 Caroli I. The House of Commons made this protestation, Whosoever shall
bring in Innovation of Religion, or by Favor or Countenance se^k to extend
Popery or Arminianism, or other Opinion disagreeing from the truth, or Orthodox
Church, shall be Reputed a Capital Enemy to this Kingdom and Commonwealth.

And so close has the connection between Popery, and Arminianism ever been
adjudged, that the Jusuites, who thoroughly understand their Interest, and the
most proper and suitable means to promote it, h^ve p^ht upon This as the best
expedient to introduce That, for (...) ^s in that Triumphant Letter of theirs
to their Rector at (...), they express themselves, Now we have planted that
Sovereign Drug of Arminianism, which will purge the Protestants of their
Heresy, and it flourishes, and brings forth fruit in due season. Whence we are
taught both our Disease, and our Remedy: The Disease under which poor England
labored was Protestancy, the Remedy was the Jesuits powder, or a round Dose
of Arminianism, which is it seems a specific purger of that Humor.

That the Divines of this Church did formerly maintain a just suspicion, that
the Opinions of Conditional Election, and falling away totally from Grace, were
an Inlet to Popery, we need no other evidence then that Letter written by the
University of Cambridge, to their Chancellor, upon the occasion of Barrets, and
Baro's preaching up such like novelties: It was dated March 8. 1595. If (say
they) passage be admitted to these Errors, the whole Body of Popery will break
in upon us by little and little, to the overthrow of all Religion. And
therefore they humbly beseech his Lordships good Aid and Assistance, for the
suppressing those Errors in time; and not only of those Errors, but of Gross
Popery, like by such means in time to Creep in amongst them, as they found by
late experience it dangerously begun.

I say, not that the Articles of the Church incline to Popery, nay they detest
it, but this I say, that if they did incline to Arminianism, they must to
Popery; If they do not, why are they with allowance, so misconstrued? if they
do; then the secession of the Non-conformists is thereby justified.

Having therefore made this Objection for the Dissenters, he will give them
their Answer, and prove the unreasonableness of this suggestion, That the
Church of England approaches too near the Superstitions of Rome.

1. Its certain (says he) there has been little or no Alteration made, either
in the Doctrine, Discipline, or Liturgy, since the first Reformation. Little or
none? Does he mean for the better, or the worse? To say, there has li^le or
none been made for the better, is a Commendation so cold, that silence had been
more an Honor than such praise. The Reformation was begun as the times would
bear; A fair Copy was set for posterity to imitate, never dreaming that their
Rudiments should have been our utmost perfection. That their first step should
have been our Hercules Pillars, and a Ne plus ultra, to all future endeavors.
To say, there has been little or no Alter^ made for the worse, is a more modest
way of Defamation; but ^enters have many things to say to this.

1 That there have been cons^ble Alterations made in the Articles themselves,
if not as they remain in Scriptis, yet as they are publicly interpreted, for
we subscribe not to a heap of Letters and Syllables, but to the sense and
meaning of certain propositions, as they are owned by the Church, What the
Church owns (say they) we can no otherwise understand, then by those Writings
which appear every day Licensed, and approved by those of greatest Authority in
the Church: Now if we may judge of the meaning of the Articles by those
Writings, They are as much Altered, as if Negatives had been changed into
Affirmatives, or Affirmatives into Negatives. In former times they were
generally subscribed, because the most scrupulous were generally informed by
those of most eminent place in the Church, that the meaning was found, but now
(say they) we are informed otherwise, we see our mistake, the words have a
different and contrary meaning; and therefore we must be excused in
subscription. 2. They will say, That what the Enquirer calls little or nothing,
is a very great something: for it concerns us not so much what is put into the
Liturgy or Rituals, as what is made a Condition of Communion which the Church:
Now in the beginning of the Reformation, though many things were in use, yet
few imposed as the necessary Terms of enjoying a station in that Society;
Things supposed indifferent were used as in different. In the 13th. of Q. Eliz.
subscription is only required to Doctrinals, and such Subscribers, though not
ordained by Prelates, were admitted to officiate as Ministers of the Church of
England. But now subscription is peremptorily required to all and every thing
contained in the Book of Commonprayer, The Book of ordering Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, wherein are considerable Doctrinal Additions, and Alterations;
such as the different Orders of Bishops* Priests, and Deacons, supposed to be
distinct jure divino; A Doctrine which A. B. Cranmer understood not, as is
evident from his M. S. exemplified in Dr. St. his Irenicum.

In the beginning of the Reformation, Ceremonies were retained to win upon the
people who were then generally Papists, and doted upon old usages, and not as
the necessary conditions of Communion; They were retained, not to shut out of
Doors the Protestants, which is their present use, but to invite in the
Romanists, which was their Original end, but there is nothing more common, then
for Institutions to degenerate; and be perverted from the first Reasons of
their usage, and yet still to plead the Credit of their Originals: Thus
Indulgences, and Remission of sins were first granted to all that would engage
in the Holy War, to recover the Sepulcher of Christ out of the hands of the
Saracens, but in process of time they were dispensed to them who would massacre
the Waldenses, and Albigenses, and such as could not obey the Tyranny of the
Romish saction: Thus was the Inquisition first set up to discover the
Hypocritical Moors in Spain, but the edge of it since turned against the
Protestants. And thus were the Ceremonies perverted, at first made a Key to let
in the Papists, and now made a Lock to shut out Protestants. What a glorious
work must it then be to abolish those Engines, that seeing they are become weak
to do Good, they may be rendered as impotent to do mischief: Imitating herein
the Apostle; who once circumcised Timothy to gain the weak Jews, yet stoutly
refused to Circumcise Titus, least he should stumble the weak Gentiles. 3. The
Ceremonies its true crept into the Church pretty early, yet they laid no
weight, no stress upon them; It was decreed by the Council of Sardica, that
none should be made a Bishop, (...) ^e that had passed the Inferior Orders,
and continued in them for some time; and yet we see they insisted not upon such
a Canon, when it might prejudice the Church, and exclude useful persons from
the Ministry: and therefore Nectarius was chosen Patriarch of Constantinople,
not only being a Layman, but unbaptized: As our Enquirer commends and admires
the Churches Wisdom in forming her Doctrinal Articles, that men of various
persuasions might subscribe them; so her tenderness and wisdom had been no less
admirable, had she recommended Ceremonies with such an Indifferency, that they
who were passionately sond of them, might be humoured, and they that protest
they scruple them in Conscience toward God, might fairly let them alone: for
it can be no dishonor to a Church to be as Lax in Ceremonies of humane
constitution, as in Doctrines of Divine Revelation. 4. Dissenters say from good
grounds, that that which makes all an insupportable burden, viz. That we must
subscribe according to the clause of the 20th. Article, that The Church has
power to decree Rites, and Ceremonies, is added since the Beginning of the
Reformation. And this they think heavier than all the Ceremoni^s put together;
many could practice a thing supposing it indifferent in it self, and having a
real tendency to a greater good, who can by no means subscribe that the Church
has such a power to take away my liberty: I have taken notice, that in the
Ancient Bibles of this Church, the Contents of Psalm 149. ran thus; The Prophet
exhorts to praise God for his Love to his Church, and for his benefits. But
in the latter days we had got high ranting Language, The Prophet exhorts to
praise God for his Love to his Church, and for that power that he has given to
his Church over the Consciences of Men: This is no little Addition. 5. They
will tell him, that the number of Non-conformists was considerable from the
very Infancy of the Reformation, though it could not be expected that their
names should be inserted in the Church Calender amongst the Confessors; and
that Nonconformity has run a line parallel with the National Reformation to
this day.

But (says our Enquirer) The main quarrel is, that we are not Always Reforming.
No that is not the main, nor any Quarrel that Dissenters have with them: Let but
Reformation be made in what is necessary, and as often as is necessary, and I
know none disposed to Quarrel: It were better never to be sick, than to have a
Remedy; yet upon supposition of a Disease, in my mind there is nothing like an
approved Medicine. It Is more desirable not to make Shipwreck, than to escape by
a ^lank; yet when a wrack is made, he deserves to sink that despises a
subsidiary Plank: If it were possible for Churches not to contract corruption,
I know no need, because no use of Reformation.

Some Men hate Reformation as the Bear hates the Stake. They pretend, that the
Reformation of the Church will discompose the State: But the best way to
preserve the Iron, is to scowr away the Rust: A dirty Face may be Washed, and
yet the skin never rubbed off; and the House swept, and never thrown out of the
Windows: They plead again, That no Reformation can be made, but what will
notably diminish the Revenues, Grandeur, and Credit of the Church. And this
Objection has more real weight in it than all the rest. This is the Capital
grievance, Hinc illae Lachrymae! But does it not argue ae Saleable and
Mercenary Soul, that would Barter away Purity for Pluralities? The most severe
Reformation would leave too much, if any thing, for such an Objector; what ever
have been the specious Pretenses, this has been the real obstruction of an
effectual Reformation; Kings and Parliaments have always been inclinable
toward a Redress of Exorbitances; but the Covetousness and Pride of Churchmen
have ever impeded their Pious endeavors. A Parliament in Queen Eliz. Reign, as
we read in Dr. ^llers Chapter History was bringing in a Bill against Pluralities;
and A. B. Whitguift sends a Letter to her Majesty, signifying they were all
undone Horse and Foot (...) it passed: Observe how he deplores the miserable
state of the Church. The woeful and distressed estate, whereinto we are like to
fall, forces us, with grief of heart, in most Humble manner to ^ave your
Majesty's most Sovereign Protection. -- Why what ^s the ^ter? were they making
a Law against Preaching? No! or against Common Prayer? By no means! what ailes
then the distressed Man? -- why, We therefore not as Directors, but as Humble
Remembrancers, beseech your Highnesses favorable beholding of our present
state, and what it will be in time, if the Bill against Pluralities should take
place. No question it must be utter extirpation of the Christian Religion: Thus
in another Letter to the same Queen he complains with Lamentations that would
soften a heart of Marble. That they have brought in a Bill giving liberty to
marry at all times of the year, without restraint: well, but if men be
obnoxious to the evil all times of the year, why should they not use the Remedy
that God has appointed all times of the year? The Apostle who tells us, Its
better to marry then burn, did not except any time of the year. But why may not
a Parliament make a Law, as well as the Ecclesiastical Court give a License,
that it shall be Lawful to marry at any time of the year? Ay but the Parliament
will make the Law for nothing, whereas those other will have Money for their
Lice^ses. But he proceeds, -- Its Contrary to the old Canons, continually
observed by us. Why but is it not Contrary to the old Canons to take Money for
a License? Yes! but -- It tends to the slander of the Church, as having
hitherto maintained an Error. And now you have the bottom of the Bag: All
Reformation must touch the Clergy either in their Credits or Profits; and it
were better never to put a hand to that work, then to touch either of those
with a little finger.

2. His second Answer is, All is not to be esteemed Popery that is held by the
Church of Rome, we are not to depart further from her, then she has departed
from the Truth, and those things wherein they Agree, are such (and no other) as
were generally received by All Christiaen Churches, and by the Roman before it
lay under any i^ character. Many things might be returned, but I shall say
little, only 1. As all is not to be accounted Popery which is held by the
Church of Rome, so neither is all to be accounted Schism which hot men in their
passions and prejudices will call so. Let that be now accounted Popery, which
in the beginning of the Reformation, by the most eminent Divines of this
Nation, was so accounted, and he will hear no more I presume of that Argument.
2. I would be satisfied whether Rome departed from the Truth, Simplicity, and
Complexion of the Evangelical Worship, when she loaded the Church with such
multitudes of unnecessary Ceremonies, and Superstitions; If not, why did the
Church of England depart from her in Any? if so; why did she not depart in All?
3. Why should we be so tender of departing from an Abominable Strumpet? were it
not more Christian to say, we will depart from the Reformed Churches abroad, no
further then they have departed from the Truth, and then the Argument will be
ingenuously strong, rather to part with Ceremonies that we may Syncretize with
Protestants, then retain them that we may hold fair Quarter with Papists. 4. It
cannot be made appear, that those things wherein the Agreement yet abides, were
generally received by all Christian Churches: Kneeling at the Sacrament was not
received in the Church, till Rome came under an ill, and most odious Character,
Many Centuries after the Apostles knew it not, and when it was first
entertained, it was accommodated to the grand Idol of Transubstantiation.

But our Enquirer has a mind to be Resolved in a few Questions for his own
private satisfaction.

1. Qu. If there be such a dangerous affinity between the Church of England,
and the Romish, how came it to pass that the blessed Instruments of our
Reformation, A. B. Cranmer, and others, laid down their lives in Testimony to
this against that. I meddle nor with his dangerous Affinities, nor
C^nsanguinities, nor whether they come within the Prohibited Degrees or no;
what I am concerned in, is his argument, which may receive this short Answer.
They laid down their lives in testimony against those Errors wherein they
differed, and not against those wherein they might be agreed: They might
possibly agree in many, and yet differ in so many as might cost them their
Lives: There was difference enough to justify their opposition; and yet there
might be Agreement enough to justify a modest complaint.

I once heard a person upon his Arraignment for Burglary plead strongly, that
he had served his Majesty faithfully in his Wars; the judge I remember took him
up somewhat too short: Friend! you are not Indicted for your Loyalty, but for
breaking a House: The Nonconformist agree with the Church of England in more,
and more material points, then England can be supposed to Agree with Rome, and
yet all his smooth and oily Oratory, will not persuade the Dissenters that
they suffer not from their Brethren.

The difference between the Church of England, and Rome, is very considerable,
it is Essential, it constitutes them two distinct Societies, and such as cannot
Coalesce without fundamental alterations in the one, and yet there might
possibly remain some things, which might speak too near an Approach.

I should be loath to be misunderstood; and do question more my own infelicity
to cloth my Conceptions with apposite expressions, then the Acuteness of the
Reader, and therefore I shall give him this general Advertisement to prevent
mistakes. I am not concerned to Assert, that this Church Approaches too near
that of Rome, but modestly examining whether the Enquirer has ^roved his
Negative, that she does not; and therefore does not, because Cranmer, Ridley,
etc. laid down their lives in Testimony against Romish Corruptions. I deny not
the Consequent, but the Consequence; Not that this Church maintains a due
distance from Rome; but that it appears true upon this Reason, because the
bloody Papists put many of her Ancient Fathers, and Zealous Children to death,
of whose weakness I am the more confident, being assured by good History, That
they have most barbarously persecuted and murdered those who differed from them
in some single Point, whilst they held communion with them in all the rest.

The Church of England (I say it again) is departed from Rome, but yet it may
be true, 1. That some amongst us have laid such foundations, as being
regularly, and proportionably advanced in their superstructures, will either
re-introduce that Abomination, or condemn Cranmers separation. In the grand
Debate, p 92, 93. The Reverend and Learned Divines lay down these Rules. 1.
That God has given not only a Power, but a Command ^lso of Imposing whatsoever
shall be truly Decent, and becoming his Worship. 2. That not Inferiors, but
Superiors must judge what i^ truly Convenient, and Decent: Now allow but the
Pope, and ^is Consistory these favorable Concessions, (and it cannot
reasonably be denied them by those who claim them) and all their Injunctions
will be justified; and Cranmer with his Brethren found Will-sufferers, who
charged their persecutors to be Will-worshippers: The Pope commands us to
worship an Image, nor terminating our Adoration therein, but letting it slide
nimbly through that Medium to the Adorable Object which it represents; and all
this as August, and Decent, and a great exciter of Devotion, a mighty mover of
Pious Affections: I suppose my self to be one of those Inferiors, who scruple
the lawfulness of this practice: He who is my supposed Superior, asks me,
whether I do not own it my Duty to Worship God? I plainly own the Affirmative,
but I am not satisfied in the Mode of Adoration. He answers readily, The Modes
of Worship are but indifferent Circumstances, in their use very Decent, and
commanded too by those who have power to Impose and Judge what is truly Decent:
I Rejoyn again, This is very strange Do^trine, I have drunk in other
apprehensions from my Mothers Milk: But he stops my Mouth, and turns me to the
very Page, where some of our most eminent Divines of late years do plead on
their behalf, what he pleads on his.

But further, he Commands Holy Oil, Holy Water, Consecrated Salt, Cr^m,
Spittle, Insuff^ations, Exorcisms, with abundance of ^ine D^es to be used in or
with, or in order to Baptism; The inferior scruples these as me^t fooleries,
too childish and light to be used in Gods Worship. But the Superior takes you
up: You are not Competent Judges; it belongs to him to Impose, and Judge what
is De^, and such he has judged these, and as such imposed them, and your work
is not Disputation, but Obedience.

When B. Bo^ner heard, the in ^r Reforma^ion we had reserved some of the old
Ceremonies, he answered with a smile, They have begun to Taste of our Br^, and
in time they will eat of our Beef: The old Crafty Fox knew well, that where there
was a Nest, Egg left, the Priest; and Friars would Lay to it the whole
Racemation of their Superstitions.

They that take away a practice, and do not renounce the Principle upon which
it is built, do but lop off some of the more Luxuriant Branches, whilst the Tree
is alive, or turn his Holiness out of doors, and yet give him the Key in's
Pocket to return at his leisure, or pleasure: And he might be too hasty that
said, The English forced the Pope out of d^rs so hastily, that he had not time
to take his Garmen^ with him.

I confess, I have been puzzled what Answer to give to a Cavilling Popish
Priest; when he asks so pertly, why the Priest may not put his Fingers in the
Child's Ears, in Token that it shall hearken diligently to the Word of God; why
not put Salt upon the Child's Tongue, (methinks I see how the poor wretch screws
and twist; up its Mouth) in Token that its Speech shall be seasoned with Salt,
as well as make an Airy Cross over its Forehead, in Token that it shall
confess a Crucified Christ: If we will give scope to our wanton extravagant
fancies, and set our pregnant inventions on work, we might easily excogitate a
thousand such pretty ingenious knacks, as might bear some Imaginary Allusion to
some Spiritual Grace or Duty; but amongst them all I wonder no lucky Fancy
never stumbled upon it, to put a Decent Banner, with St. Georges ^ss upon it into
the Child's Hand, in Token that it should manfull, (and not like a Child) fight
under Christ's Banner.

2. Quest. How comes it to pass, that all those of the Roman Communion withdraw
themselves from ours, and all true Protestants think it their Duty to absent
themselves from their Worship.

Physicians do carefully observe the Indications of Nature; and therefore
observing that our Enquirers mind stands strongly inclined to a little
pleasantness. why should we check the Humor? How comes it to pass? Truly I
neither know that it does come to pass, nor why it comes to pass. I am certain
I have read or heard, that for the first 12. years of Queen Eliz. the Papists
came to Church; and if they have knocked off since, and why they have knocked
off, I wait for an Answer from this Enquirer. King Edw. VI in his Proclamation
to the Devenshire Rebels; tells them; That if the Mass were good in Latin, it
could not be bad by being Translated into English. It could not be objected,
as't was against the Commedian, Ex Graecis Bonis. fecit Latinas non Bonas; This
could not be the Reason to be sure. No, no, (says he) They are commanded so to
do by the Head of their Church: There Is the Reason; then what needed all this
stir; The command of a Superior will hallow, or at least excuse an erroneous
Action. As a Transcendent in our Church speaks; and if this Doctrine would but
pass, we should have a sweet time on it: Our Superiors must impose, and judge
what is Indifferent and Decent; and we have the easiest life in the world,
nothing but to wink hard, and lift up our Legs high enough, and there is no
danger.

And yet the Papists learned not possibly all this Lesson of withdrawing from
the Church of England, from their own Superiors, they might be taught the
Doctrine neater home: A. B. Laud being asked by a Lady, Whether she might be
Saved in the Romish Communion? Answered readily, Madam! You may; and the good
Lady took his word, and ventured it. It Is possible it might be the same Lady,
that Dr. ^uller, Chapter Hist. B. 11. p. 217. tells us of. She being asked by the
same Prelate, Why she had changed her Religion? Answered, Because I ever hated
a Crowd. And being desired to explain her meaning herein; she replied. I
perceived your Lordship, (it should have been Grace by her Ladyships favor)
and many others are hastening thither as fast as you can, and therefore to
prevent a press I went before you.

What design of Reconciliation with Rome, and upon what terms Grotius carried
on, is pretty well known by this time of day: That he had a Party here in
England, or expectations of one, his own words testify. Aequis multis non
displicuisse Grotil Propace Labores, N^unt Lutetiae, and in omni Gallia multi,
multi in Polonia, and Germania, in Anglia non pauci, pla^idi, pacis Amantes,
Discus. p. 16. There were I see by this, a Company of Loving, Sweet-natur'd,
Tractable Souls here in England, that would have stepped half way over the Ditch
to meet his Holiness: Especially since Mr. Mountagues time, who informs us,
That the Controverted Points (between England and Rome) are of a lower and
inferior Nature, which a Man may be ignorant of, without peril of his Soul,
and may resolve to oppose this or that without peril of perishing for ever.
That Images may be used for instruction of the Ignorant, and excitation of
Devotion: And that the Church of Rome has ever continued form upon the same
foundations of Sacraments, and Doctrine instituted by God.

They are not single Instances of those who have not abhorred the Communion of
Rome, which I could give, but I will spare the Living and cover the Dead.

Nor will I say, that these or such as these were Papists, yet methinks they
did incline, and warp desperately toward it; there is an odd Distinction we
often meet with, of a Sensus Compositus, and a Sensus Divisus, which may a
little illuminate us: Now because my Readers are not like to be any of the more
deadly learned sort, I will a little explain the Distinction to their
Capacities, by a very familiar, though I confess a very homely Comparison: It Is
impossible (say I) that a Maggot should ever be a Fly: That is, in your Sensus
Compositus; or so long as it continues to be a Maggot, because these have Two
distinct forms, and the one keeps the other out of possession, whilst it has a
Nail or Tooth to scratch or bite: But now its not only possible, but easy for
this Fly to become a Maggot, in Sensu Diviso; that is, for the Maggot to strip
her self of her old shape, and appear in another likeness; I shall be modest in
the Application, and hope the Reader will not be immodest: Such persons as I
have mentioned could never be Papists, whilst they adhered to the Doctrine of
the Church of England; but yet such were their disposednesses that way, that
the transition was easy, to slide from such loose Principles into Popery, and
yet the Church the mean time might be Innocont.

3. Quest. Whence comes it to pass, that the Romish Church have more spite
against our Church, than against any Sect or Party whatsoever? When it is once
well proved that they have so, it will be time enough to enquire why they have
so; but we must suppose one half of his discourse to be true, that we may have
leave to answer the other.

The spite of the Roman Faction against Protestancy as such, has so eminently
discovered it self, under whatever denominations they have been differenced;
that none of them have cause to boast of it, or be ambitious to taste further of
it: It were well improved, if they who are Objects of their implacable spite,
could learn to love more, and agree better amongst themselves: The Papists
think themselves excusable in persecuting all, when (...) Protestant so
suriously persecutes another, they know no Reason why they should love us
better than we love our selves: And truly against whom their spite is hottest
is hard to judge. If we compare the Cruelties of the Parisian Massacre ^ith the
Butcheries of the Irish Rebellion; we shall find the true Reason why they flew
more in Ireland than Paris, was, because there was more to be slain: The Fire
may go out for want of matter, but I dare say, never for want of a good Stomach
to its Food: In short, their spite is there the greatest where they can show
it most; as to one that is very hungry the biggest Dish is ever the best: The
Papists judge of the Object of their hatred, as one did of Tullies Orations;
The longest is to be sure the most Excellent: And yet I conceive the Enquirer
to be quite out in this matter. The Papists may spite the Church of England
upon the account of its fair and vast Revenues, great Dignities, mavelous
Honors, Wealth, Splendor, and whatever is desirable to the Eye, because
hereby the Church is able to vye with her; and yet their malice upon the pure
account of Religion may be greater against other lesser, weaker parties, whose
Principles stand more directily in opposition to those of Rome: I do not doubt
but our Enquirer could bring better Arguments than these, to prove the distance
of Religion between the Two Societies, for this I am sure is too weak, unless
it may appear, that their spite is levelled against the Church, merely on
account of those Principles wherein she differs from Dissenters.

4. Quest. How comes it to pass, that they of all Men most Zealously ^and in
the Gap to oppose the return of Popery? That Gap at which Popery must enter, if
ever it enters into England, is the Division between Protestants, and if that
Gap were well stopped. Popery might look ^ver, but would never leap over, or
break through the ^dge: This Gap of Divisions, is made by the imposition of
such things, which in the Judgment of the Imposers are indifferent in their own
Nature; but in the Judgment of the Dissenters sinful in their use and exercise.
The Dissenters say, they cannot stop the Breach, unless they make a wider in
their own Consciences: If now they who seem so Zealously to stand in the Gap to
keep out Popery, would come out of the Gap, and make it up, which else will let
in Popery; we shall thank them more for making up one, than standing in, and
keeping open a thousand.

I know very well, that many Men do oppose the Introduction of Popery, and
there is cause for it: There Is a Popery that would take away their Wives, and
some fear it, and others hope it upon that account: There is a Popery that
would subject them to a foreign Metropolitan, and make them trot to Rome upon
every ^leevless errand; that would let strangers like Locusts and Caterpillars
into the Land to eat up every green Herb; that would drain the Thames into
Tyber, and derive all the Blood and Spirits of the Nation into another Channel.
Caesar had rather be Primus in Villa, quam Secundus in Roman. Every one may
sooner hope to learn A B C, than to arrive so far as P: A distance then there
is, and yet the opposition against Popery may not prove the distance so great,
but there may be too great an Agreement: The State of Venice did once expel the
Jesuits, and yet they expelled not Popery; the French were long before they
entertained the Decrees of Trent, yet still they were Popish: I quote them for
no more than this; that its evident there may be fierce opposition upon some
particular accounts, when yet there may be a great Harmony upon other accounts:
Many oppose a Popery coming Top and Top Gallant, that yet would compound for a
Popery upon handsome Terms.

This last Question has strangely transported him into a most passionate
Panegyric in commendation of some Churchmen, for some rare exploit or other,
which by all the circumstances, must be the procuring The late Proclamation
against Dissenters: An Act so glorious, that no Age shall ever wear out its
memory; This is it, which challenges from posterity, Statues of Corinthian
Brass, and will embalm their memories to all succeeding Generations: He had
lately exposed the Ignorance of those simple Men of Dort, that they kn^w not
how to make God just, unless they made him cruel too; And what was their
reproach, must now be these Men's Glory, That they know not how to make the
Magistrate Great, unless they make him Cruel, nor Glorious, unless they destroy
a considerable part of Mankind: Methinks Churchmen should not be so ambitious
to survive their own Funerals by such Epitaphs. Here lie they who first taught
Religion to be unmerciful.

This high Encomium is attended in the rear with a severe charge against the
Dissenters, That they were instrumental in procuring a toleration and
suspension of the Laws for Popery: It is true. Conscientious Dissenters desire
not the execution of sanguinary Laws upon Papists, merely for their Religion,
there are proper ways enough to obviate the cursed tendencies of their
principles, without dishonouring our own. Nor ought the modest desire of a
sober liberty for the exercise of their own Consciences, to be interpreted an
endeavor for a Toleration of Popery; They ever hoped that Governors know the
difference between Dissenting Protestants; who agree with the Church of England
in the Essentials of Christianity, and Recusants who substantially differ; and
the wisdom of his gracious Majesty in his Declaration for Indulgence, made a
clear distinction between them, though some wise Churchmen could not see it.

Protestants however differing in some things from the present establishment,
yet have no foreign Interest, no transmarine dependences; They own no Exotic
Head, that may Alienate their affections from their natural Prince and liege
Lord, their private peace and happiness is wrapped up in the general Happiness of
the King and Kingdom; Any eye but that of Envy might have discovered a sensible
difference between these parties.

That Protestant Dissenters were instrumental to procure such a Toleration for
Popery, is therefore a slander so unworthy, that none would have forged, but
they who never baulk an Officious untruth, when it may subserve their main
design, to render the Non-conformists Odious; that so the instruments of their
destruction may not be fettered with the reluctance of their restif Consciences.

But we envy not them the Glory since they aspire after it, of reducing their
Brethren to primitive poverty, because they endeavor primitive purity, let
them enjoy the Glory, that no humble under-woods can grow under the shadow of
their spreading Branches; let them take the glory of the Gardiners shears,
which snips off every aspiring Twig that would mount toward Gospel simplicity
above its fellows; such is the glory of an old A king Tooth, that is in
insupportable pain till it may either chew the flesh of the Conscientious, or
come under the Discipline of De la Roc^'s instrument. For when His Majesty's
Grace had for a while (...) them to the Rack-staves, they were ready to break
the Bridle till they could come at the Manger. Let it be a Quaere then, whether
it be more probable to Cure, or increase the old suspicions of some men's
inclinations to Popery, That they could never be at ^ase, whilst their
Protestant Brethren had any in their native Country.

I shall not need to add to all this (says he) That there are as understanding
men in Religion, persons of as holy Lives, and of as comfortable Consciences of
this Churches Education, as are any where to be found in the world besides.

They who are Masters, or however owners of such comfortable Consciences, do
surely know what it costs to get, what care it requires to keep, and what
torment it is to lose a comfortable Conscience. He that shall swear a thousand
times by the Great Osyris, that he has a comfortable Conscience, and yet shall
thrust other men upon the turn-pikes of sin, and force them to act against
their light, that shall rail at, or persecute them for worshipping God
according to their convictions of Duty from the Word of God, must give me leave
to be Incredulous, and earnestly desire him to find out some Solifidian. That
can believe the Moon to be made of a green Cheese. Let him farther consider.

1. That its not the main considerable in Conscience, that it be Comfortable,
but that it be so upon solid grounds. The Apostle Peter, 1 Ep. 3. 15. commands
us to be ready to render a reason of the hope tha is in us. If the reason of
our hope, comfort, and confidence, be not as strong, as the building is high,
the Towering Edifice will tumble down upon our own heads: It behooves us to be as
solicitous about the spring of our Comforts, as the sweetness of the streams:
And I am the more earnest with this Enquirer to look after the comfortableness
of his own Conscience, for as for the Religious and Orthodox Divines of this
Church, I doubt not both of the purity and peace of their Consciences) because
1. He allows no other Election, then Gods determining absolutely of temporal
Blessings, p. 74. But the Church of England Art. 17 having described a
particular Election to Everlasting Life, from Gods Everlasting purpose; tells
us. That the godly consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ,
is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to Godly persons, and such
as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ. He then that disowns
this Doctrine, must needs want one main ground of a pure and comfortable
Conscience. 2. They who own Justification by works, want another bottom of a
comfortable Conscience. So the Church of England, Art. 11. Wherefore that we
are Justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and full of comfort:
All peace then is founded in Grace: In Gods Grace as the Fountain whence it
springs, and in the Operations of Grace upon the Soul, as the Evidences of that
Grace in God; and though men may bless themselves in Evil, and flatter
themselves when they find prosperous Iniquity, yet if any one be a liar, a
persecuter, a hater of Godliness, and Godly Men, a slanderer, etc. God speaks
no peace to him; and therefore its more advisable to boast less of a
comfortable Conscience, and mind the things that belong to a comfortable
Importance.

3. The last pretended cause of the Dissenters withdrawing from the Church of
England, is, A Charge against the sufficiency, but especially the sanctity of
the Clergy.

The Dissenters do gladly acknowledge, that the Learning and Piety of very many
of the Ministers of the Church of England, is such as deserves an honorable
place in their hearts; that they have not such a valuation for some of our
Enquirers copartners, they beg his excuse, till they may see more cogent
Reasons to alter their Judgments; when they are in the Humor to take a few
sorry Sophismes candied over with Rhetoric, to be Learning, or uncharitable
censoriousness, crusted over with smooth Hypocrisy, to be Piety, they see
nothing to the contrary but they may enlarge their Charities. That there are
many of the present Establishment, eminent for sound Learning, and exemplary
Holiness, who exercise Christian tenderness toward those, who dissenting in
Conscience, do suffer for Conscience, is the rejoicing of their Souls under
their great pressures; And they know that the more Learned and Godly any person
is, the more humble he must needs be; A little knowledge ferments a^ impotent
heart, and makes it intolerably arrog^nt; but he that knows much, amongst other
things must needs know, that he that stands in need of mercy from God, and
therefore will more readily show pity to Man: He that knows what a tender
Conscience is at home, will pity and indulge it, wherever he meets with it
abroad. He that knows much, cannot presume all the world enjoys his measures of
Light.

The Enquirer might therefore well have spared this odious and invidious
discourse, had he not found it necessary, first to make a Man of Clouts, and
then execute it: And yet his Victory cannot be great, in trampling on those
that lie on the ground, and can be laid no lower, but in their Graves, for to
Hell he cannot send them. Two needless things he will say to this Objection,
for he is full, Et si non aliqua no^uisset (...) esset.

1. Supposing this Objection had been true, yet it could not be made by any
Protestant, without contradicting his principles. No, why not? Oh, for the
Papists are taught, that the efficacy of all Divine offices, depends upon the
intention, and condition of him that administers; but Protestants are taught it
seems otherwise, that the efficacy of all Divine Ordinances, depend^ upon the
Divine Institution, and the concurrence of Gods Grace wi^h my use of them.

The Reader must give me leave to repeat my former caution, which is always
understood, though not expressed, that I deny not the sanctity of the English
Clergy, my only task is, to examine the strength of his Arguments, which are
sometimes so weak, as would tempt the less considerate to conclude, that cannot
be true, which so bold (...) undertaker cannot make out. His answer to the
Objection, is ^nly more weak then the Objection it self: For.

. 1, When he (...) (...) the Church of Rome, sure the Protestant Dissenters
must expect no Quarter: The Papists do indeed hold, That the efficacy of
Sacraments depends upon the Intention of the Priest; but that it depends on the
Condition of the Priest as to Holiness, they assert not. I shall produce one
evidence of many. Tolet de instructione sacerdotis, lib. 1. cap. 92. propounds
this Question. Quando licet a ministris malis accipere Sacramenta? When, or in
what case is it lawful to receive the Sacraments from wicked Ministers? And the
very moving of the Question implies, that at least at sometimes, and in some
cases, its lawful; but this will more fully appear from his Answers, which he
gives. 1. Negatively, A non-toleratis ab Ecclesia^ non licet ullum Sacramentum
accipere etiam necessitatis tempore, Its not lawful to receive any Sacrament
from those who are not tolerated by the Church, no not in case of necessity.
Here is Doctrine to his own hearts content, and wherein the Jesuit may assure
himself of our Enquirers suffrage. A Nonconformist amongst them may not
Baptize, or Administer the Supper, though the Salvation or Damnation of never
so many depended on it. And yet when the Casuist thinks better on it, he will
except Baptism, and perhaps the other Sacraments in the Article and point of
death^. A ffirmatively. A m^lis ministris, dum non sequatur aliquod grave
scandatum possumus sacra recipere, Nam Ecclesia ipsos tolerat. and ipsi ta^a
administr^ntes sibi solis nocent. We may receive Sacraments from wicked
Ministers (such as he there describes) provided no grievous scandal follow upon
it; for the Church tolerates such as these, and when they administer the
Ordinances, they hurt none but themselves. Nay he quotes Pope Nick. to back
him. Isti sunt sicut fax a^censa quae alios illuminat, and se consumi^; and
unde aliis commodum exhibent, sibi dispendium praebent mortis: These evil
Ministers are like a burning Torch, which enlightens others, though it wast it
self; and destroy themselves by that very means whereby they advantage others:
but at last he comes to this. Ab his quibus ex officio incumbit, sive sint
parati, sive non, licet petere, and accipere Sacramenta, five ex necessitate
five non quia ille ex officio tenetur quandocunque petiero ministrare, nec ego
jus meum a mitto ex illius malitia. We may demand, and receive Sacraments from
those, whose duty it is to Administer, whether they be prepared or not; whether
it be in a case of necessity or not; Because such a one is bound by virtue of
his Office to minister when I demand it, and I cannot loose my right through
his malice. Navar indeed cells us, That Mortale est peccatu^ Audire Missam, aut
Recipere Sacramenta, a notorio Concubinario. That its a mortal sin to hear Mass
from a notorious Whore ma^erly Priest; but honest Suarez corrects that
preciseness, and clears it up, that That Prohibition is repeated by the Council
of Constance. So that in this one point, the Papists are as Orthodox as our
Enquirer can reaso^bly desire, and have laid no Stone of offense at which any
on^ might stumbl^ into separation. They do indeed hold, That Holiness is
necessary in a Priest necessitate praecepti, and I hope even ^e will not deny
that, but that they held i^ not absolut^ly necessary, necessitate medii, so as
that the absence thereof will make a nullity in all Ministerial Acts, or render
them utterly veid, and of none effect; and that is as much as he can prove. The
Papists then are taught no such matter.

2. Protestants may without contradiction to their principles, separate from a
person who by Law is vested with all the Tithes, Profits, Perquisites,
Emoluments of a Parish whatsoever, whether he be called Parson, Vicar, Curate,
if withal he be ignorant, and not apt to teach, Erroneous, and does worse then
not teach, and scandalously profane, and so does unteach all he taught before:
He must have a good Stomach that can receive the Sacramental bread from him,
out of whose nasty hands I could not take my Co^poral Bread, without a Vomit.

If a Preacher shall constantly Preach Heresies, and damnable Doctrines, such
as the ent^rtainment of them would destroy my Soul, must I venture the ruin of
it out of civility and run the risque of being damned for fear of one of those
Theological Sc^rcrows, which men have set up to fright us into Compliance. Can
I in Faith expect that God will deliver me from Evil, ^hen I lead my selfinto
Temptation? Can I hope that he will preserve my Judgment untainted, when I
expose my self to be practiced upon, by the cunning insinuations of a sly
deceiver, and set my self as a mark for Satan to shoot at? Mr Harding I
remember presses the Reverend Iuel with this. Be the Bishop of Rome's life
never so wicked, yet we may not sever our selves from the Church of Rome. The
Learned Man Answers from Cyprian, Plebs obsequens praeceptis Dominicis, and
Deum metuens, a peccatore praeposito separare se debet. A People that obey Gods
commands, and fears him (not only may, but) ought to separate from a wicked
Minister, Art. 4. And yet he understood the Principles of Protestants as well
as our Enquirer. But let Cyprianus Africanus go which way he pleases, we have a
greater than he, Cyprianus Anglicus, who in his discourse with Fisher, from
that Text, Romans 16. 20. Mark them which cause divisions amongst you: Observ^ to
(...). That (...) (...) (...) (...) the causer of the Division is the
Schismatic.

The prudence which we use in flying the Contagion of a scandalous Mi^ister,
does not imply, that all his Minis^erial Acts are mere Nu^lities, nor that God
may not possibly concur wi^h his Ministry to advance my Spiritual welfare, but
that a Soul is a Being so precious, bought with a Price so precious, the loss
of it so irrecoverable, and my whole concerns embarked in the bottom, that I
ought not to expose it to apparent danger, upon presumption of what God can, or
may do; for ordinarily we know that ^od delights to serve himself of the
labors of those Instruments, who having dedicated themselves inwardly to the
Service of God in the Gospel, do Sincerely design, and Zealously pursue the
glorifying of his Name, in the turning Sinners from their evil ways to God;
which we may reasonably suspect of them, whose Lives witness that they have no
concern for others Salvation, who have so little for their own.

The Apostle Paul commands his Son Timothy, 1 Ep. 4. 16. To take heed to
himself, and so the Doctrine; for in so doing he should both save himself, and
those that heard him. More then implying that the Soul of another will never be
dear to him, to whom his own Soul is cheap: As my running from a Pesthouse
does not suppose that all must necessari^y die that come within its Walls, but
that it becomes a prudent Man to dwell, not where he may possibly escape death,
but where he may most probably secure his life: So my withdrawing from an
heretical and scandalous Minister, does not imply a necessity of damnation by
attending upon his Ministry, but that a Soul is too precious a concern to be
put to that adventure.

In all matters of lesser moment we exercise our wisdom freely, without the
least scruple in our selves, or rebuke from others. If an Act of Parliament
were made, by advise of the Convocation it self, that no sick person should
consult any other Physician, but only him that dwells in the Parish; nor any
one to take advise of other Councellor, than him that dwells in the Vi^age; he
that knows how difficult it is to keep, and preserve health and estate, how
much more difficult to recover them when lost, would without any Prefaces of
Modesty, take leave to seek out the most experienced in their faculties, and to
become a civil Nonconformist to those Injunctions: There Is no Man but will
tell Money after his own Father; and thinks it no incivility that he will see
with his own Eyes, and not another; and why my Soul must be hazarded in a
Complement, as if it were the most inconsiderable trifle in the world, I cannot
once Imagine.

And the rather, because, if by my imprudent choice I should destroy my Soul,
the sin and guilt will lie upon my self alone; but if I should ruin it by the
neglect of timely escape, none can give me security that he will answer for my
folly before the Judge of all the Earth.

Nor can it be imagined, that I should be such an Enemy to my own Soul, as to
destroy it wilfully; or that any other should have a greater kindness for it
than my self; and when I find them not over tender of my Body, Estate, Liberty,
Good Name, Life or Livelihood, which they have seen, they have cautioned me
into a jealousy that they can have no such miraculous good will to my better
part which they have not seen.

I have heard of a Gentleman, who having a Son fitted by Academick Learning for
foam serviceableness and employment, was much perplexed within himself, upon
what particular Calling to fix for a future livelihood: He consults his
Fri^nds, and with them thus Debates the Case. If I design him a Physician, he
must study long, and gain good experience, before any judicious person will put
his Life into his Hand, which he values so dear: If I should educate him
toward the Law, he must wear out many a year before the wary World will
entrust an Estate under his management: The only way therefore will be to make
him a Minister, for such are the low thoughts Men have of their Souls, that
they will entrust them with the most raw, and unexperienced Novice,

Hitherto his discourse has proceeded upon a supposition, that the Charge had
been true, yet the Inference he thinks would have been false, but now he comes
roundly to the denial of the Charge, and a laborious confutation of it to no
purpose.

2. Combined wit and malice (says our Enquirer) shall not be able to fix any
scandal upon the Body of the English Clergy. I hope they never shall! Nor have
I met with any so absurd and disingenuous, as for the sake of some, though many
individuals to cast an aspersion upon a whole Society, excepting those who have
least Reason If the Body of the Clergy be Innocent, all the Combinations of wit
and malice shall not be able to Eclipse their unspotted Innocence; that it
shall break more gloriously through those envious Clouds which had obscured its
brightness; and if they be Peccant, all the combined Wit and Rhetoric in the
World will not wipe away the guilt and filth; it must be Repentance and
Reformation that can only be their Compurgators.

1. First then concerning their Learning: a thing that has been hitherto
indisputable, and may continue so still, if the weakness of this Gentleman's
proofs do not render the truth of the proposition suspected. But hear his
Arguments.

1. If the Preaching of the present Age be not better than that of the former,
I would fain know the Reason why the Homilies are in no greater Reputation. And
so would I too! In those Ancient Sermons there are Two things especially
remarkable; the Phrase or Clothing, and the matter or substance of them. It Is
true, Time, and the growing refinings of the English Language have
superannuated the former; but why the latter should also become obsolete, I
would as fain know a Reason as himself; and that from himself, who is best able
to account for his own Actions: I assure him I would not exchange the Old Truth
for New Phrases, and Modern Elegancy: I had rather see Plain Truth, in her
sober homely garb, than gaudy error spruced up with all the fineries of the
Scene and Stage.

The weakness of the former Clergy, was the great Reason that introduced both
Liturgies and Homilies. And if the present Clergy are grown so strong that they
can despise one of their Crutches, perhaps in time they may go alone without
both. Those Cogent Reasons pretended for the necessity of the one, will hold as
strongly for the other; it is full as easy to disseminate Heresies, to vent
crude, raw, undigested Nonsense in the Pulpit, as the Desk.

When I hear any of our Enquirers Sermons, I shall summon up my best Reason to
make a judgment, whether he has so infinitely ^ut-dene the Ancient Homilies, as
he pretends: In the mean time I fear the Language is not so much polished, and
tricked up, as the Doctrine is defiled; nor have they shamed the Homilies so
much in briskness of Fancy, quaintness of Words, and smoothness of Cadencies,
as the Homilies have shamed them in plainness and soundness of Truth: I would
mind our Author of the last words of the second part of the Homily of
Salvation, and though he may mend the Phrase, I doubt he will hardly mend the
Doctrine, So that our Faith in Christ (as it were) says thus unto us: It is
not I that tako away your sins, but it is Christ only, and to him I send you
for that purpose; forsaking therein all your good Virtues, Words, Thoughts and
Works, and only putting your trust in Christ. In the Homily of the Place, and
time of Prayer, the Church praises God, for purging our Churches from Piping,
Chanting, as wherewith God is so sore displeased, and the House of Prayer
defiled. Hence perhaps some would conclude, that the true Reason why we have
forsaken the use, is, because we have forsaken the Doctrine of the Homilies.

2. Arg. All Protestants abroad admire the English way of Preaching, insomuch
as some foreign Congregations, (...) I am credibly informed, (that was wisely
inserted) d^ray the charges of the Travels of their Pastors into England, that
they may return to them instructed, in the Method of the English Preaching. For
the Logic of this Paragraph I shall not so much as examine it, All Protestants
admire English ^reaching, for some Congregations send to be instructed ^n't.
There Is the all and some of this Argument. Again, Protestants admire English
Preaching; ergo they admire the Conformists Preaching; for All Dissenters
preach in an unknown tongue. Again, they send them hither to be instructed in
the method of English Preaching; all the excellency then lies in the method,
which is to Preach without Doctrine, Reason, and Use: And now methinks I hear a
Pastor of a Congregation in Holland, returning home with a flea in his Ear, and
gi^ing an account of the expense of his time and charges; Beloved! we have been
sadly mistaken all this while, for our Synod of Dort was a pack of silly
ignorant fellows, that knew not how to make God Just, unless they made him
Cruel; or Man humble, unless they made him a Stock or a Stone: As for us, we
are informed, that we are not true Ministers of Jesus Christ, as wanting a
thing, I think they call it Episcopal Ordination, and if any of us should
become Ministers there, we must be re-ordained, though a Priest from Rome shall
not need it: and therefore by consequence your Baptism is a nullity, all our
Ministerial acts void, and of none effect, your Churches are not true Churches,
your Reformation was began in Rebellion, continued in Schism, and thus I have
got my labor for my pains, and naught for my labor.

3. Arg. The Preaching of the Church of England is beyond that of Rome. Yes so
it may be, and yet none of the best neither; what sleighty Topics are these
from whence to evince the excellency of English Preaching: Commend me to read
one Sermon in the works of the Learned B. Reynolds, and it storms the
incredulous sooner then a hundred of these Ridicules put together: But how does
it appear that the English transcends the Romish Preaching? pray mark the
proof: why Erasmus wrote a Book of the Art of Preaching, and full of the
follies and rediculous passages in Popish Sermons. Most Meridian Conviction!
Has not I. E. written a Book also full of the follies and ridiculous passages
in English Sermons? Pray then set the Hares head against the Goose Giblets. Ah!
but Erasmus his Book is as full as his: very good, and so is his as full as
Erasmus's: Really when the Act comes out against Metaphors, I hope there will
be a clause in it, that no Rhetorician shall ever again use an Argument.

As he would be injurious to the Truth that should take the sollies gathered up
in this modern Author for the measure of present Preaching, so shall he be
equally vain, that shall make those impertinencies gleaned up by Erasmus, to be
the true measure of the Preaching of those times: And why may we not charitably
suppose, that the Romanists have furbisht up their rusty Preaching since the
days of Erasmus, as well as we have scowred up ours since the days of the
Homilies?

3. Arg. His fourth Argument is none of the strongest, and yet worth all the
rest put together: which were but the vauntcourriers to usher in this main one
with more solemnity. Compare (says he) but the Preachings generally in our
Churches, with those ordinarily in Conventicles, you will find them unequally
matched.

Though we could be content they were modestly compared, yet we can by no means
allow this Enquirer to use his own false weights of comparing, and generally
such comparisons are odious. Non-conformists do not affect strong lines, nor
are ambitious of the Gigantick Vein and Style, they study not measured
sentences, nor use the Compasses to every dece^t period, they had rather with
their Austin, have A wooden Key that will open the Lock, then one of Gold,
which makes a fidling din, in the Wards, and yet confounds them.

None of them but do praise God for the Learning, sound Judgment, solid
Preaching, holy Lives, which are to be found among the Conformable Clergy, but
can he rear his Triumphant Arches to their praises upon no other foundations,
then the ruins of other men's credits.

For my part, I am always apt to suspect that persons credibility, who thinks
more to confirm it by two or three rattling Oaths: And I never received it as an
argument of her honesty, that carries her tongue so loosely hung, that she
deals about most liberally S^rumpet and Whore; but I see he is impatient till
he compares them.

On the one side you have sound Theology, strength of Argument, gravity of
Expression, distinctness of Method; on the other side nothing more frequent,
then puerile, and flat, oftentimes rude, and sometimes blasphemous expressions,
similitudes instead of arguments, and either Apish gestures, or Tragical
v^ciferations instead of Eloquence. Reader, this Language is pure Cicero, I
assure thee, Ex hac enim part Pudor pugnat, illinc petulantia, hinc pietas,
illinc stupram; hinc fides, illinc frraudatio.

I am sorry our Enquirer dwells by so very bad Neighbors, that his own mouth
must be the very Trumpeter of his praises; If the common Crier could have been
engaged for love or money to proclaim them, no modest man would have done the
drudgery. But nemo patriam suam amavit quia magna est sed quia sua. It Is
propriety that renders all things sweet and beautiful; All this had been
pardonable, but I see some that love to be Ingeniosi in aliena fama; huge
facetious upon other men's fames, and perhaps never witty in a Twelvemonth, but
when they write Satyr.

As all impartial Readers know one half of his Oratory to be false, so its to
be feared they may suspect the other moiety not to be very true: That's all an
honest man shall get by being in a Knaves company: Truth has sometimes been set
in the Stocks, because it has been found under the same Roof with Falsehood. He
that wishes well to his own due praises, let him never desire, they should be
yoaked with another unjust reproach; least the hearer knowing the one
unrighteously slandered, conclude that the other is as unjustly flattered. For
its an unquestionable maxim, He that will be a Sycophant against one, will be
a Parasite to another.

Let our Enquirer then sweetly enjoy the ravishments of his pleasing Dreams, I
shall not awaken him with loud recriminations, only softly whisper that of the
Poet. Bella es; novimus! and Puella; verum est!
Et Dives; Quis enim potest negare?
Sed dum te nimium. Fabulla, laudas
Nec Dives, nec Bella, nec Puella es.
Mart. Ep. l. 1. 165.

Yet there is one Salvo for their credits, which all the Fraternity of
Gentlemen-Raylers do use to bring themselves off, and heal all again, when at
any time they have most unconscionably overlasht: and that is, when they have
poured out all the contempt and scorn, have heaped up all the slanders and
reproaches that they can make or rake together, then to make an Honorable
Retreat, and tell you, they do confess there may be one or two that may be
innocent.

God forbid (says our Gentleman) that I should charge all the Non-conformists
with such Indecencies. Nay I can tell him more then that: God forbids him to
charge any one with such Indecencies, unless he had better proof of them: And
had he known any individual guilty of these crimes, he should have personally
charged that one, that he might be brought to Repentance for his profanation
of Gods holy Name, and not involve a whole party under the scandalous
suspicion; All the charity that these words necessarily contain is, that they
are All such save one.

Suppose another as charitable as himself, should write after his Copy, and
when he had with much pleasant Scurrility and Drollery made the Devil sport
with the Indecencies of Churchmen, should come off at last with this
Epanorthosis. God forbid I should charge all the Conformists with these
extravagancies; what would it argue but a more crafty and safe way of
Hypocritical Calumny? Thus I remember a Gentleman once in a frolic, told his
Companions, They were all Fools but one; and when a young Gallant of the knot,
more tender of his Reputation then it deserved, and willing to venture more for
it then 'twas worth, began to draw. The other takes him aside, and whispers him
in the Ear, How do you know but that I intended your self, by that single
exception; And this little dust parted the fray.

Well, I see he is sick till he comes to particulars; Asahe^ would not take
Abners civil warning; some men seek mischief to themselves, and all the Friends
they have cannot stave them off from the Duel; the more you hold a Coward, the
more eager he is to engage; let the man alone, pray let him alone, and in the
mean time, I will fortify my self with patience, that no provocation of his,
may tempt me to a back blow under the fifth rib; for how then should I lift up
my face to my dear Brethren?

1. Their Sermons are generally about Predestination. About it? (...); what a
word was that for a wise man? The Church of England in her 17th. Article
propounds the Doctrine of Predestination to be believed by us, according to the
Scriptures; that which is the matter of Faith, ought to be the subject of our
Preachings, 1 Cor. 4. 13. we believe, and therefore we speak. And yet I am
confident that our Enquirer, and his like, preach more, write more, and make
more noise about that serious point, then the Non-conformists, I presume I may
have heard my share of their Sermons, and yet I can assure the Reader. I never
heard that Doctrine professedly handled in my life; I speak not this in their
excuse, or commendation, no, it is their just Reproof, and were I meet to give
them their due, I would speedily come out of their debt: what shall the great
Truths of the Gospel, the Articles of the Church of England, the famous St.
Austin be trampled in the Dirt by the Foot of Insolence, and shall a pretense
of I know not what modesty, unwillingness to offend them that are resolved to
be offended, stop your mouths? Reverend Sirs! Its high time to awake, and plead
the cause of God, least he give you up to reproach and contumely, because you
have left his truth so.

If the Reader be so curious as to enquire wherein lies the great evil of
Preaching about Predestination, he may know, that there is a Preaching about,
id est, Pro: and there is a Preaching about, id est, Con: To Preach about it,
when it signify's for it, that indeed is scandalous and dangerous: but to
Preach about it, when it signifies against it, that indeed is laudable, for its
well known, that when the Arminian faction got a little Heart in the rising
days of A. B. Laud, the Abe^ters of those novelties procured a Proclamation,
that none should meddle about those controversies, pretending they were nice
School-points, unfit for vulgar Ears, but presently the Arminians fell
pell-mell upon fiery Declamations against them.

2. They Preach about Union with God and Christ. About it still! I doubt not
but this Gentleman could be willing the Dissenters had free liberty to Preach
again, provided they Preached about just nothing. If the Church-doors were
unlockt, the Pulpitdoors set wide open, and their Mouths sealed up, and a
Padlock hung upon their Bibles, the case would be much the same; But to speak
freely, if they did Preach about it, at the rates that many write about it,
reducing all to a Politic Union, e'ne Nail up their Pulpits, and set the
Arrow-head upon the doors of their Meetings: It Is then no such heinous crime to
Preach about it, you may Preach about, and about, and about the Bush again,
provided you never come near it, or doff it off with an Airy nothing.

Ay, but the N. C. confess this Union to be unintelligible, and they help to
make it so. There are many great Truths in the Gospel, which in their heigths
and depths, in their utmost improvements, we cannot comprehend; yet such a
knowledge of them is attainable, as may whet the edge of our Appetite after
more, and in the mean time direct us in our Duties toward God and Man, the
perfect opening of which mysteries is reserved for Heaven, when we shall see
face to face, and know as we are also known. He that will throw away every
Object of Knowledge which he cannot (...), must throw away the two great
Volumes of Scripture and Nature; The Doctrine of the Trinity is certainly owned
in the 39 Articles, and yet what ever Key the great engrossers of reason have
got to that Tremendous Mystery, in my Judgment there is an unintelligible depth
in it, for which Faith must lie at the stake, and the veracity of God be
responsible.

Our Union with God and Christ have been cleared up from the Scriptures, to
stay the Stomachs, and give some present satisfaction to the Holy Ardency of
True Believers; and yet though the thing in its own Nature be Cognoscible, yet
so glorious are the Privileges that flow from it, such the Mercies which issue
out in Eternal Life, that we freely confess our Ignorance; Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man, (such poor Men as we
are) to conceive all those Comforts which lie in the bosom of that Relation,
and which God has laid up in store for those that are in Covenant with him.
Whatever is Received, must be so according to the capacity of the Recipient; we
do not thinck that the Ocean can be put into narrow mouthed Vessels; when God
shall raise our Faculties, and enlarge our Capacities, that we can hold more,
he will give more; and therefore leaving the sublime speculative Gnostics to
their own fancies, we shall bless God for what we know, and humbly aspire after
greater Measures of Divine Light

3. They preach of the sweetness, beauty, and loveliness of Christ's Person.
They do so! and are willing to be Criminal; if this be a Crime, our Enquirer
bewails the want of love amongst Christians; and if he were as sollicitous to
enquire into the Reasons of that defect, he would find this to be a main one,
that the loveliness of Christ is so much depreciated: He that cannot love
Christ, cannot possibly love a Christian; since that for which every Christian
as such is Amiable, must be that he partakes of those Graces for which Christ
is Amiable: It Is an Humane Love that only eyes our own Image, but a Divine Grace
that loves the Image of a Savior: But these things were not reproach in those
days, when Ignatius upon every mention of Christ styled him his Love, (...). My
Love is Crucified! But that the Preaching of Christ^ Loveliness stirs up
sensual Passions, is a note of blasphemy abo^ Ela, not to be paralleled but by
the Friendly Debate, whose Dunghill our Enquirer has first Raked, and then
Epitomized.

And thus much shall suffice at present to have descanted upon the Ignorance of
the Non-conformists Preaching: Now wipe your Eyes, and you shall read a
Specimen of his own.

I have seen a Picture of such artificial contrivance, that as we entered the
Room, it presented to us the ridiculous prospect of the Cat and the Fiddle: we
had not traversed a few paces to the other side, but it was by a strange
Metamorphosis become a very Beautiful Lady: Curiosity drew me nearer to view
the Mystery of this dubious Piece, and it soon discovered it self a trivial
Essay of Mechanisme: Thus when we entered upon this Subject, the Enquirer gave
us, the Nonconformist, and his Preaching in Ridicule; now turn you twice
about, and in a trice the Scene is changed, and you shall have the lively
Pourtraiture of a Rational Divine in all his Pontificalibus.

And here first we meet with Discourses of God, his Nature, and Attributes:
Which if some of them found not so, they have left unintelligible. Such a
Nature as they have contrived, such Attributes as they are graciously pleased
to assign to him; so that Tertullians complaint is not more frequently than
justly repeated. God shall not be God, but upon such Terms as Man shall
prescribe. And then of the Reasons of Religion. Yes no doubt you are the Men,
and all Wisdom shall die with you. What a sad Case had Religion been in, if
these Eminent Men had not been raised up to set Religion upon its proper Basis,
and unsettle it from the feeble foundations upon which former Ages had erected
it? But then they give us Arguments for contentment, under persecution perhaps,
such as would make a Man weary of his life, and almost Petition to be Hanged.
And of Reverence too; consisting in uncommanded postures of bowing at the
Naming of Jesus, worshipping toward the East, and Altar; and of Submission,
viz. Of Private Reason and Conscience to the Public, But of all, and of all
they excel when they Treat of the Eternal Reasons of Good and Evil; A Point
admirably fitted to the Capacities of the vulgar, which nothing but
unskilfulness could make a Man bold enough to undertake the unfolding of. An
dantur Aeternae Rations Boni and Mali, in mente Divina indispensabiles? Oh how
the Ladies sit and admire this profound Theology! Notions which cannot be
Uncharacterized better than in Gondib^rts Phrase, -- To charm the Weak, and pose
the Wise. But then they Treat of the Nature of Faith And how there is nothing a
justifying and saving Faith as such, but what the Devils can show for it: And
to conclude of Charity too, to all of their own Cue, to a hairs breadth, with
Denunciation of Fire and Faggot, to all that come not up to their Apices Iuris,
and jump not in, with every Iota, and Tittle of Conformity: I had almost forgot
their discourses of Obedience to Magistrates; I suppose this Enquirer has not
very long Treated of that Subject; the meaning of it is, so long as they are
well paid for their pains: O Emperor (said one) Defend me with thy Sword, and
I Will Defend thee with my Quill! Could you blame him? It will cost more to
maintain an Army, than a Penny worth of Quills: Notwithstanding all these
Bravadoes, the World must see, if their Eyes be not out, that Dissenters give
more real obedience to Magistrates, for bare life, and uncertain liberty, than
some do for all these Revenues, which public Indulgence has loaded them
withal; for when the Finger of the Magistrate is put forth to touch them, not
in skin or bone, but some sorty Accident, they are ready to make good the
Devils charge, and curse him to his face.

2. He has done with the Learning, and will now come to the Lives of (...)
Clergy: Whatever good he shall speak of the Clergy, I can heartily agree with
him in it, provided he could forbear the disparagement of others: Let it be
accorded that the Lives of the generality of Churchmen are unblamable: yet
that they need no foyl to set them off* is such a childish way of wheedling our
belief of it, as if a Jeweller should show you a Stene with its foyl, and then
protest it needs none.

Here then needed no Quarrel; we can rejoice in, and Bless God for the Graces,
as well as Gifts; the Piety, as well as the Learning of our Brethren who differ
from us. Nay we can pray to God to double his Spirit upon them in both
respects, and for those who deride the Grace and Spirit of God, we can pray
that God would give them a sounder mind: We pray that there may be such burning
and shining lights found amongst all them that profess the Reformed Religion,
however in small matters varying, as may confound Atheism and Popery, with
whatsoever is contrary to found Doctrine and Godliness; but yet this
Compassionate Enquirer, that he may not be uncivil, nor pass by the door of a
Nonconformist without a Salute, will call in, and say a word or two to them,
when he has first given us a Reason why he will Treat them like Christians.

1. R. Because he will not render Evil for Evil, nor Retaliate the Reproaches
cast upon the Sons of the Church; for he has not so learned Christ, And
doubtless he that has learned Christ to any purpose, either in his Example or
Doctrine, must learn quite another Lesson than foul Language, and blackmouth'd
Barking, or he has gone to School to no purpose, and must come back to his
Horn-book, and begin at Christs-Cross.

2. R. Such uncharitable Recriminations have not only made an Apology for
Atheism, and the profaneness of the Age, but they afford a pleasant spectacle to
all wicked Men.

3. R. It taken from the Example of Constantine the Great, who when the Bishops
and Clergy at the Nicene Council had exhibited a bundle of Libels one against
another, burn^ them all before their faces, protesting that if he should see
one of them in the most scandalous Commission, he would cover his shame with
his own Purple.

Being therefore convinced, that all Recriminations are unbecoming the Gospel,
and that from the nervousness of our Enquirers Arguments, I will make a
reasonable motion, That all the Friendly Debates, the Ecclesiastical Policies,
with the foul-mouthed Co^ler of Gloucesters Canto's, be condemned to the next
solemn Bonefire. Unless you will make the Compassionate Enquiry the
Protomartyr: And add the Porter, who when he should have covered the scandalous
Commission with his Frock, openly exposed it upon his Back.

These Massive Reasons (one would think) might have sunk any ordinary Man's
railing inclinations into a modest silence, and suspended his pr^clivity to
reviling, ab officio for three years; and yet (like a compassionate,
self-consistent, or self-condemned Enquirer) he will say these two things
further in this Case. Nay, I did look for it every moment, and that all those
Re^s against slander were but a foyl to set off Hypocrisy, profaning of
Scripture, and the deba^ching of his Conscience, with a greater Grace, when he
shall come to blazon the scandalous Impieties of the Nonconformist Ministers.

And here I first got a satisfactory in-sight into one truth more, That there
is the same proportion, between the Title, and the Book, that there is between
his Rhetoric, and his Reason. The Title calls the Boock, A serious and
compassionate Enquirer: but the Book ingenuously calls it self, The ridiculous
and passionate Enquiry And if they thus revile and scold at one another, we
must not admire if both join in reviling the Dissenters.

1. Two things then he has to say; And the first of them is Three things alone.

1. If a man be malcontent with the Government, and sorsaking the Church,
resort to private Assemblies, such a man may debauch his life too; and yet have
a very charitable constrnction among the generality of Dissenters. That is, if
a man will be a Rascal in one paricular, he may be a Villain in all the rest,
provided he become a Nonconformist: Ay! Sit Sacrilegus, sitfur, sit vi^iorum
omnium flagitiorumque princeps -- At est Bonus Fanaticus! Come but over to
their way, and you may Lie, and Steal, and Whore, and Drink, and be Drunk! this
was spoken without all peradventure out of tenderness of Conscience, to fulfill
that Royal command, of not rendering evil for evil? That it might appear how
well he had learned Christ. But let him know, that they allow no
Non-comformity, to compound for severe Piety; nor Dissent from Ceremonies, to
substitute Assent to the substantials of Christianity. He that is not brought
over to the Obedience of the Gospel, is with them no Christian, by what Name or
Title soever he be dignified or distinguished; and I seriously desire, that
this overcharged slander may not recoil, and hurt the Enquirer.

But though he be very uncharitable, I shall endeavor to give the most
charitable construction of his words that they will bear; And therefore
observe, That though he be engaged not to render evil for evil, yet he never
promised not to render evil for good.

2. If being a Clergyman (says he) and continuing in the Church, he shall
debauch his Office, and undermine the Church which he should uphold, such an
man (also) may then debauch his life too, and yet have a very charitable
construction among the generality of Dissenters.

What must Enemies expect from this Man, who has no mercy an his Friends? There
are many Holy and Learned persons, now within the Bosom of the Church, who
having considered the terms of enjoying the more public exercise of their
Ministry, have overcome the difficulties of Subscription; and do yet retain
their former Orthodoxy, and sobriety of Conversation; These persons knowing
what Conscience is, do exercise great tenderness toward it in their Brethren,
who cannot get over their rubs, and obstacles; and these, if I mistake not, are
the Glory of the Church of England, for purity of Doctrine, and piety of
Conversation, for all true Learning, and useful knowledge; Against these
persons, The Enquirer has a desperate stitch, as those that undermine the
Church which they should uphold: that is, if they condescend never so little to
a tender Conscience, in one of those little institutions, which themselves call
indifferent, the whole Church must presently fall about their Ears: but if the
Church were built upon Christ the Rock, and not upon the Woolpacks of
Ceremonies, such condescension would never undermine it: These are taxed also
with debauching their Office. And indeed if the Office of Ministers be to
become Informers; If Preaching the Gospel be nothing but to make a P^ther about
Ceremonies, I hope they will debauch it still; but that any of these do debauc^
their Lives, and are thereupon more acceptable to Dissenters, is a lo^d
falsehood, only to let us understand, how well he has learned Christ.

3. If a man (says he) be of the most Holy Conversation, but Zealous for the
Interest of the Church, this man shall have wors^ Quarter from the fiery
Zealots of other parties, then one of a more loose life, and meaner abilities.
Let no man reply, If a man be of a loose Conv^rsation, and but Zealous of the
Grandeur, and for the Ceremonies of the Church, this man shall have fairer
quarter, and more encouraging preferments, from the fiery Bigots of Conformity,
then one of a severe life, and greater ministerial Abilitits. To interpret this
myst^ry, we must inform our selves, what is the Church^s true Interest as it is
a Church: Its very easy to mistake in stating the True interest of any
Society, and if we mistake there, its impossible we should be regular in the
means of pursuing it. An error in the first concoction is never rectified in
the second: The true Interest of every true Church of Christ, is to promote
Holiness, and Conformity to his Commands, engaging thereby his presence and
protection; and a Spirit of Love and Peace amongst its members; though under
some variety of apprehension in Adiaphorous matters: The mistake is to advance
a Churches secular Grandeur, external splendor, and worldly pomp, which every
true Christian in his Baptism has renounced, to^ether with all the works of the
Devil, and the lusts of the flesh: If ever a Church shall be so far mistaken as
to judge worldly Glory, its true interest, I know not why it may not also
mistake the works of the Devil, and the lusts of the flesh to be its true
Intere^t also: A Conforming Minister, who despising that false, understands and
pursues this true Interest, is truly dear to all the Non-conformists; but for
those who are so deluded as to think, it lies in destroying and ruining all
that are not satisfied with their Canons and Constitutions, however aliene and
foreign to the temper of the Gospel, they confess they are no great admirers
of them, whatever appearance of Holiness they may make: If the Interest of a
Faction, shall lie in sending po^ Christians to the Almshouse of Newgate, and
the Hospital of Bedlam, and will give no Quarter to the most Holy, and
Religious, if they fail in two or three Niceties, I must needs say I see no
reason why such should adorn themselves with the plumes of Gravity and
Devotion, to render their Inhumanity more plausible.

2. But he has somewhat further to say then all this: If impertinent, and
fantastical talking of Religion, endless scrupulosities, censorious, and rash
judging our Superiors, Melancholy sighing, going from Sermon to Sermon,
without allowing our selves time to meditate on what we hear, or to instruct
our Families, be the main Points of Religion, then the Non-conformists are Holy
Men. And now I hope the Reader is abundantly satisfied, that the Enquirer has
otherwise Learned Christ, than to render Evil for Evil, that he dares not
furnish Atheism and Profaneness with an Apology: That he makes a Conscience of
affording a spectacle to evil Men: That he dares not (for a World) dress
Religion in a Fantastical Habit. that Boys may laugh at it: This is his
Constantines Robe which he casts over scandalous Commissions.

Serious Discourses about the concerns of the World to come, about our own
death, and the day of Judgment, is Fantastical talking: Tenderness of
Conscience, Holy fear of sinning against God, is endless scrupulosity; Modest
refusal to practice every thing commanded, though Reason, Judgment, Scripture
Reclaim, is Censuring and Rash Judgment of Superiors. Godly sorrw must be
melancholy sighing; attending upon Gods Word Preached, shall be running from
Sermon to Sermon: And a downright falsehood added to close up the whole: That
they neither allow themselves time to meditate of what they have heard, nor to
instruct their Families: And yet if they shall dare to practice this last, with
a few of their weaker Neighbors that drop in to hear a Sermon repeated, they
shall be liable to the Law, and punished as Seditious Conventiclers, and railed
at as Schismati^ks.

When all is said and done, Machiavils old Rule is a Sacred Maxim with these
sort of Men; Fortiter calumniare, aliquid adharebit: Throw Dirt enough, and
some ont' will stick. Wildfire flies further, than the Water that should
Quench it: A Reproach will run, where a just Vindication will not creep: Had
the Providence of God allotted the Non-conformists their abode any where but
amongst those whose Interest it is to render them Odious, they might have
passed for good Christians: It would be difficult to hire Men to be Instruments
of Cruelty, if they were not first persuaded, that they are Ministers of
Justice; and the only way to persuade that, is to represent Dissenters as the
off-scowring of all things not fit to live a day: The best way to take away the
life, is to render it abominable. None can handsomely be destroyed, till they be
dressed up in a Malefactors Clothes. And it seems as much for their Enemies
Advantage to make them seem wicked, as it is for theirs to be really Holy.

It had been a more Important Enquiry, than any he has yet made, whence such an
exulcerated Spirit should proceed? The Gospel is a Message of Peace from the
God of Peace, by the Prince of Peace, to the Sons of Peace; which Gospel
breaths nothing but healing Counsels, drops down the Balmy Dews of Gentleness,
Meckness, Patience, Long-suffering, Charity; and if I might borrow an ^ld
Maxim at second hand from him: Aut hoc non est Evangelium aut nos non sumus
Evangelici:Either Charity is not Gospel, or our Enquirer is an Infidel.

It Is a grave Axiom in the Law; That his Cause ought more to be favored, who
only seeks to avoid wrong, than his that seeks to get Gain. The Dissenters
humbly plead the Benefit of it: They grudge them not their Preferments, and
Accumulated Dignities; they neither envy nor seek their Great things: They only
deprecate Ruin till they shall deserve it: It Is only from a Prison, not for a
Palace that they Petition: When others have got the Two Swords, the Secular and
the Spiritual, they only crave the protection of the Defensive Shield: And
think they may with some Reason demand of them who Deifie the freedom of Humane
Will. that they may be indulged in the freedom of their Consciences regulated
by the Word of God.

CHAP. II.
Of the more Remote Causes of the infelicities of this Church: The Persecution
under Q. Mary: The bad provisions for Ministers in Corporations: Frequent Wars:
The mischiefs of Trade and Travel: The Designs of Atheists and Papists enquired
into; with what influence they may have had upon the present separation from
the Church of England.

WHen Adrian VI. was pressed by the clamorous Importunity of the German Princes
to Reform the Clergy, he answered very gravely, That a Reformation was
necessary, yet the danger of Reforming all at once was so dreadful, that he
resolved to proceed step by step. Some Wise Men smiled at the cautious
Advisement of his Holiness, and said, They hoped he would not break his shins
for have, but deliberately make a hundred years at least between every step

The same prudence which this politic Pope used in his advance toward a
Reformation, our wary Enquirer uses in his approaches toward the Causes of
Separation. Hitherto we have been entertained with certain Romantic Imaginary
Causes, and now he will give us a gentile Treat with the Real ones.

But of th^se, some are more remote, others near hand; these come by the
running Post, those by Tom Long the Carriet. Thus your Poching Fellows, when
they have found the Hare sitting, go round about, and about the Bush, till they
have screwed themselves into a convenient Distance, and then give poor Pus^
Club Law, and knock her dead upon the Form.

1. Now the first of these Remote Causes is; That it was the misfortune, and is
the great disadvantage of this Church, that it was not well confirmed, and
swadled in its Infancy, it conflicted with Serpents in its Cradle, and
underwent a severe persecution.

What he understands by that old Blind Heathenish Beldame Fortune, I cannot
tell. The Scriptures have taught us to believe, That the Hairs of our Head are
all numbered; and therefore much more the Heads of the Martyrs: That a Sparrow
falls not to the ground without the Providence of our Heavenly Father. Much
less the Blood of the Saints, which is more precious in his sight than many
Sparrows, But this is only a Shibboleth, which serves for a Certificate that he
is no friend to the immutable Counsels of God.

However this early persecution must needs have a considerable influence upon
the Churches present weakness; for thus Mephibosheths Nurse, making more have
than good speed, in her fright and flight threw down her Nursery, and he became
lame to his dying day.

It was therefore politickly done of Licurgus (thinks the Enquirer, when he had
framed the Body of the Spartan Laws, to pretend an occasion to Travel; and
having first taken an Oath of the People, that they should make no alteration
in that Government (either in Church or State) till his return, he resolvedly
never returns again.

If the old Masters of Ceremonies could have persuaded the people to some such
subscription, that they would never alter their Inventions till their return,
and then had sentenced themselves to a voluntary perpetual Exile, it had been a
successful piece of self denial to cheat a Nation into Uniformity, no less
honorable to themselves than grateful to thousands.

But thus the Case stood with the Church in its Infancy. King Edward VI. dying
Immaturely, (too soon says the Enquirer, too late says Dr. Heylin) Q. Mary
succeeded him in the Throne, and so the Church was put upon difficulties and
trials, before its Limbs and Ioints were settled and confirmed.

Persecution has hitherto been esteemed one of the Churches best friends,
whereof it has been often afraid, but never hurt: Such was the constant
experience of the Primitive Christians: Exquifi^ior quaque, crudelitas
illecebra magis est secta, plures efficimur quoties metimur, sanguis Martyrum
est semen Ecclesia. The cruelties of Enemies does but more increase the Number;
the oftener the Church is mowed down, the thicker it comes up, and there is no
Seed thrives so well as that which is steeped in the Blood of Martyrs, That
which Christians lose by the wind of persecution, is only their Chaff; that
which the fire of Tribulation preys upon, is only their Dross. The Marian Fires
did the Church this one good turn, that it melted down much of that imposing
Spirit and Lordly Temper, which reigned in some Churchmen over their
dissenting Brethren, which Bishop Ridley confessed at the Stake: That Tree
which is of Gods Planting, takes deeper Root by shaking, and if it loses any
Ceremonious Leaves, let them go, the Tree will bear better and sweeter Fruit
with out them.

Could Persecutors have seen how much good the Wise God would extract out of
their evil, they would never have aggravated their own damnation, to be the
instruments of the Christians Salvation: But malice is so quicksighted to do
mischief, that it is Blind in the reasons of doing it; and makes such have to
her end, that she stumbles in the means; Thus Nero's fingers itcht to be
burning of Rome; but that he knew it would arise a more glorious Phoenix out of
its own Ashes; which could the Devil himself consider, he would never be
content Tribulos metere, dum nobis spinas serit, to sow us Thorns, and reap
himself a crop of Thistles.

All this while we are waiting to see how he will make it out, that This early
Persecution did any real hurt to our Infant Church; And after some Preambles
and Introductions, he will doubtless come home to the point: And first, By
reason of this Persecution (you must understand) a great number of the
Ministers, and other Members of this Church, were driven into other Countries
for refuge, and shelter from the Storm, I hope their finding refuge, and
shelter was no part of their misery: but is was seasonably remembered; for if
the Ministers, and other Confessors of this Church, found such Cordial
Entertainment amongst the Reformed Churches beyond the Sea, if ever the like
sad providence should send them hither, they may expect to meet with
proportionable welcome, and not be remitted with their Beards half shaved, and
their Coats dock't, with a Paper pinned at their Backs, intimating that they
are Fugitives, Schismatics, and Rebels.

But still, Quid hoc ad Iphicli Boves? what is all this to the matter? oh now
it comes! There they were tempted with Novelty, and distracted with variety of
Customs and Ri^es, before they were well instructed in the reasons, or
habituated in the practice of their own. And hereupon they brought home with
them foreign fashions: The meaning is this, Reader! Religion travailed too
young and raw, and drunk in the Ceremonies of the Reformed Churches, and she
cannot be dis-infected to this day: A little matter will blow this dust out of
the Readers Eyes, and let him see the egregious trifling of this Harangue.

1. He supposes that those exiled Confessors, did but chop, or Barter one
Ceremony for another; as suppose they carried out with them The Cross, they
exchanged it for Cream, or if they went out in the Surplice, they returned home
in the Friars Coule: As if the Competition had been between two Ceremonies,
which as Candidates vyed, which should be most for Edification, and the
Adorning Religion: whereas, they who improved their afflicted state to the best
advantage, left their Ceremonies behind them, and brought no other home in
their rooms: Alas! to what end should they bring more to England? this had been
to carry Coals to New Castle; or to what end steal from the Reformed Churches?
which had been merely to rob the Spittle.

2. Those Holy Men made not the foreign Churches the Rule or Reason of their
Reformation in Worship; but their help, to lead them to the Common Rule of
Reformation; They that were reduced to Primitive poverty, might be allowed to
emulate Primitive purity. It was no wanton humor, but a sense of Duty,
begotten by awakened Conscience, roused up by their affliction, which brought
them to a self-denying compliance with the Institutions of Christ: It would
break the proud heart of them that live in Ease and Triumph, to imitate their
patience and resolution, whose return to Gospel-simplicity, they can so
pleasantly deride.

3. Its a scandalous reproach which he throws upon the English Reformation, as
if it lay in Rites and Ceremonies, and such kind of inventions. Before (says
he) they were well in^red to the English Reformation, they became enamoured of
the Rites of other Churches: The Reformation lay not in preserving Rites and
Ceremonies, but in purging them away: so far purged. so far reformed; you may
call the Scar upon the Face, it is Healing, if you please: but I will rather
choose to call it, a foot-step, or relic of the old former wound: nor will I
call the dust behind the door part of the Houses cleanliness, and yet I dare
not impose, let others call them as they please: this is evident, That those
things wherein the Reformation consisted, were opposed by the Papists, but the
Ceremonies were not opposed by the Papists, therefore our Reformation consisted
not in Ceremonies.

4. No less is the reproach cast upon those famous Exiles* that they were
enamoured of the Rites of other Churches; we read indeed 2 Kings 16. 10. 11.
That King Ahaz in his Journey to Damascus, saw an Altar there, which pleased
his Humor, and he sent to Urijah the Priest, the fashion of the Altar, and the
pattern of it, according to all the workmanship of it, and he like a tractable
good-natured man, that would not offend the King for a small matter, built an
Alter according to all that King Ahaz had sent from Damascus: but our banished
worthies imitated not the Example, it was not the opposing one Ceremony to
another, but the opposition of all Ceremonies which was their Glory.

But our Enquirer is resolved they shall be in an Error, and which looks
something like Charity, he will convince them of it too.

1. Their first weakness was, That they considered not whether those other
Rites were better, so long as they were newer and fresher. A groundless charge!
new or old, fresh or stale, was nothing to them, it was Ceremonies as such
which they rejected; And if he can evince, that the present Dissenters have
derived from the Transmarine Churches any Rite or Ceremony, which is not of
Divine Institution, they are not so enamoured of it, but they will presently
deliver it up into his hands, to be dealt with at discretion.

2 Another failing was, that they observed not, That there are oftentimes
reasons to make one form necessary in one place or people, and not in another,
when its possible they may be both indifferent.

They observed without his information, that the circumstances of time and
place in general, were indifferent; but they observed not, that new invented
Rites were necessary in any time or place, to present the grace and duty of the
Gospel; They knew well, that all Christ's Ordinances were Decently to be
Administered; and they knew as well that there was no need to institute New
Rites or Ceremonies to create a decency, to conciliate a respect or reverence
to any of Christ's Ordinances: If we must have New Rites, to render Christ's
Ceremonies decent and comely, then we must have New Rites also invented to
render those Humane Ceremonies decent and comely; and so infinitely forwards,
others to make those latter decent and comely, because we cannot imagine the
wisest man on Earth able to contrive a more perfect Ceremony then Christ has
done: And thus we must have a Lace to make the Garment decent, and then an
Edging to make the Lace decent; and then we shall make Religion a Suit, as
fantastic as that Princes, who fitted it with Loop-holes, like Argu^ his Eyes,
and then hung a Needle at every Loop-hole to make all decent.

I have heard of a Taylour (from France no doubt) that was sent for to take
measure of, and make a Cord robe for the Moon; she was then very slender, as
being in Conjunction with the Sun, and when at the Fortnights end he brought
her home her Gown, she was grown so Corpulent, that it would not meet by a
Third part of her Circumference; The poor man was sadly ashamed, blamed his
Spectacles, and with more Circumspection, takes measure of her Ladyship, and
when he came to try her Stays, she was grown so slender, that she looked like
a shrimp in a Lobsters Symarr: Now the Moon is the Church, which according to
the measures which our modish Fashion-mongers take of her, must at every Change
and Full, appear in new Accoutrements: And as Nations have differing Attires
each from other, and the Winters-freeze differs from the Summers-stuff; so the
same Church must have a Mourning Worship, and a Wedding Worship, accommodated
to her outward accessions or declensions in Wealth and Riches.

The external Condition of the Church does vary, but her God is the same; her
joy may be turned into sorrow, her sorrow into joy; she has her fasting, as
well as her feasting days; solemn Humiliations, and solemn Thanksgivings, but
her Worship continues still the same; Though the Worshippers may alter their
garb, yet the Worship which respects the immutable God, is immutable like
himself: If new things pleased our God, it were our duty to study new things.
If he shall declare for Summer Ceremonies, and Winter Ceremonies, we must
provide accordingly; but if with him there be no variableness nor shadow of
turning, that Worship and Service which we offer to him, ought to observe the
same fixedness and stability.

3. Another of their follies was, that they could not hit upon the right rule
of Reformation. It was their unhappiness, that this Enquirer was not then born
to direct them to it; which advantage the present Age may enjoy, if we be not
wanting to our selves; And it is this: That those differing forms be fitted to
the Humor and Custom of the People, and made consonant to the civil
Constitutions: A Rule had need be straight, or else whatever is framed by it
will be crooked: Now 1. For the Humor of the People: This has sometimes the
sad fate to be decryed as the cause of Deformation, and now the happiness again
to be as much cried up for the rule of Reformation; which if it be varied
according to the ebbing and flowing of this Euripus, must needs be changed half
a score times in four and twenty hours. 2. Custom has I confess a fairer plea,
some persons of no small Learning, pretending it to be the only rule of decency
in things indifferent, In p. 31. our Enquirer intimates, That the Constitutions
(of a Church) by Time are digested into Customs, and made natural. Now if
Custom be the only rule of decency, then the Churches Constitutions ought to be
of no things but what are naturalized to a People by Custom, and thereby made
decent, unless he has a power also to command All things te be done undecently,
and then leave to be made comely by long usage, and continued Custom; but if
the Churches Constitutions, her power to impose and judge what is decent, be
the Rule of Decency, and the Reason of our Obedience, then Custom is not the
only Rule of Decency.

How much better were it, that the peoples fluctuating Humors, odd Customs,
and the Churches Constitutions, were all regulated by the Word of God; which is
equal, insallible, and impartial: Equal, and therefore we shall not be to seek
for our Worship upon every accident; infallible, and therefore we may safely
confide in its direction; and impartial, and so abets no party, favors no
faction or worldly interest, but faithfully and fully delivers out to us the
mind and will of God: Whereas our Enquirers rule, must prove the Author of all
mis-rule and confusion amongst the Churches of Christ, when Humors shall cross
Customs, Customs thwart Humors, and perhaps Civil Constituiions shall retrench
both Customs and Humors.

One instance will a little enlighten us in his design and meaning. Where (says
he) the Reformation had not at the first the Countenance of the Civil
Government, there the Reformers were constrained to enter into particular
confederations with one another, from whence Presbyterian Government seems to
have taken its rise. Say you so? then I know who will assume; But for the first
three hundred years after Christ all along through the purest Primitive times,
the Christian Reformation had not the Countenance of the Civil Government, and
therefore they entered into particular Confederations; from whence the
Presbyterian Government had its rise. I cannot certainly tell, and therefore
dare not conjecture, whether these particular confederations, be not a kind of
New Latin, for the solemn League and Covenant; but this I will say, That t^
^anks of the Classis are ordered to be returned to this Gentleman for his
Learned Argument to prove, the Presbyterian to have been the Primitive
Church Government.

All this while it remains a great mystery, how these poor Exiles prejudiced
the English Reformation; And therefore in the first place he will give us some
light into it by a plain and familiar illustration. As the Children of Israel,
even when they had Bread from Heaven, Angels Food, longed for the Onions and
Garlic of Egypt, remembering how sweet they were to them, under their bitter
Bondage; so these Men retained as long as they lived a lingering after those
entertainments which they found then very pleasant, when the other was denied
them. The foundation of this ingenious illustration lies in these Two Things.
First, That the Rites and Ceremonies of England were Manna, Bread from Heaven,
Angels Food: And Secondly, That the Worship of the Reformed Churches without
these Ceremonies were Onions and Garlic, he must have an Ostrich-Stomack that
could concoct them, unless they were first m^erated, and dissolved in a
Menstruum of Ceremonies: Now the parallel is so self-evident, that we shall
only need to gather what drops of it self, and not to shake the Tree: For 1. As
the Manna was of Gods own appointment, so we must not question but the
Ceremonies also were. 2. The Manna was Angels Food, and as whenever Angels will
cloth themselves with a Garment, they cannot assume one of more Congruity than
Light; so whenever they shall please to condescend to a Treat from Men, they
cannot be served up with a more agreeable Dish than Ceremonies; And then 3. As
the Manna was despised, and accounted dry Meat, so are these Ceremonies too;
and therefore as wise Fathers take away their Childrens Meat, if they will not
eat their Bread; so the Fathers of the Church think it wisdom to deny their
Children Spiritual Food, if they will not down with the Ceremonies, or let them
fast till they have a better Stomach: But the parallel comes off very lamely at
last: For the Manna lasted only whilst the Church was in the Wilderness, and
ceased as soon as they entered the Land of Canaan; whereas the poor afflicted
and persecuted Churches knew none of those Rites, but surfeited of them in the
day of her Rest and Prosperity: And therefore to have carried on the Humor, he
might have feigned one thing more as well as all the rest; That those Exiled
Worthies lived all the forty years of their Banishment upon nothing but Rites
and Ceremonies, but when they came to the Land of Promise, the Manna ceased.

We have heard a long narrative of the cause of Nonconformity from the Exiles
in Queen Mary's days; which had it been delivered without color or fraud, had
amounted to no more than this naked little, when the Righteous God saw it
necessary to unchain the Devil, and let him loose upon the Englis^ Protestants
to exercise their Graces, and correct their Follies; he gave some of them
Christian Courage to abide by the trials; to others of them Christian Wisdom to
secure themselves by fligh^: Had all fled, the Truth had wanted Witnesses at
home for the present; had all stayed, the Truth had wanted Successors for the
future; they that fled, found the Care of God attending them, and the Mercy of
God as a Harbinger going before them, to provide them first a Room in the
Hearts, and then in the Houses of their Brethren: Where being eman^ipated from
the prejudices of In^eterate Custom* got from under the D^resse of Imposing
Power; humbled by afflictions, and made more willing to bear the Yoke of
Christ, and finding the Reforming Churches a tolerable Counterpane of the New
Testament Worship, many of them not consulting with Flesh and Blood, came off
from Ceremonies, content to Worship God with the same Measure of Decency
prescribed* and practiced by Christ and his Apostles.

When therefore he tells us, that those Fxiles received a Tincture of those
other Rites before they had well imbibed, or sufficiently understood the
Reasons of the Church of England. He says no more tha^ that the Rationale of
the Liturgy, and the Compassionate Enquiry, were not then written; for where
else to find the Reasons of the Church, for imposing Ceremonies, I am yet to
seek.

2. A second Cause of this evil effect is: The bad and incompetent provision
made for a learned and able Ministry in the Corporations, and generality of the
great Parishes in England.

But before this Incompetency can possibly be remedied, it must be known what
is a Competency for a Learned Minister, for some that are Learned enough, are
also Able to spend five times more than the people are worth, or can spare.

Two things are here considerable, which have exercised our Enquirers politic
Headpiece.

The Grievance, and the Redress of the Grievance.

1. For the Grievance. The multitude of Opinions that deform and trouble the
Church, are generally hatched and nursed in the Corporations and Market Towns.
Nay not only the dissatisfaction with the Rites and Ceremonies, but the
con^ulsions and confusions of the State took their Origin from the bad Humors
of th^se greater Societies. But how easily might all this mischief have been
remedied, had he pursued his own Primitive Rule of Reformation. viz. Modelled
the Rites and Government of the Church to the Humors and Customs of the
People. But his meaning was; That Reformation should be accommodated to the
Humors of the Villages, where the people mind nothing of Religion, (as he
thinks) but not of the Market Towns, where they are intent upon New Fashions:
But the Reader must look on these as the lesser sports of his Wit, and the
dilations of a pregnant Fancy; for the true Reason of all the dissatisfaction
about those Rites, has been the want of good ground for them in the Word of
God, and the main cause of the troubles that have ensued thereupon, has been
the unreasonable and unseasonable imposition of them upon the Consciences of
Men.

But our Enquirer is otherwise minded, and he imputes these Con^ns and
Confusions.

1. To the Fullness and Luxury of these great Towns. Well! have a little
patience till he can procure his Proclamation against Trade, and to shut up the
Shops, and that will most effectually take down their Grease, and humble their
haughty Stomachs, and they will grow tame and manageable: But then another
difficulty will arise, how they should maintain a Learned and able Ministry,
and allow him such a Revenue as he shall confess to be a Competency; but is not
this inconvenience to be found in the Country Towns and Villages? No! They are
for the most part quiet, and peaceably comply with established Orders; for they
are tired with hard labor, and never trouble themselves no^ others* but apply
themselves to Till the ground, and earn their Breat with the sweat of their
Brows. Let them have liberty to be poor, and pay their Tithes, and they concern
themselves little in Religion, or the saving of their Souls; they go by the old
Rule, Si Mundus vult vadere sicut vult, Mundus debet vadere sicut vult: These
Creatures indeed will make fit materials for Uniformity to work upon; you may
put the Bridle in their Mouths, and clap the Saddle on their Backs, and ride
them till they are broken winded and foundred, and they will neither wince nor
complain; and yet there are some sour Lads and knotty pieces amongst these too,
that will not budge a foot, nor yield an Ace further than Conscience informed
from the Word of God shall command them.

2. In these great Towns they have leisure to excogitate Novelties, and Spirit,
and confidence to abet them; and here there is great concourse of people, where
Notions are more easily started, and Parties sooner formed for the defense of
them: Where the dividing Notions have been most started. I cannot infallibly
tell; but I am sure the richest Corporations find themselves something else to
do than to excogitate Ceremonies, or other Novelties; and whether Convocations
have always sat in the great Towns or little Villages, is easily determined.

3. The misery of all is; That in these great Towns where was most need of the
most liberal maintenance: so pitiful a Pittance is left to the Curate or
Minister, that he can scarce afford himself Books to study, nor perhaps Bread
to eat, without too servile a dependence upon the benevolence of his Richer
Neighbors, by which means either his Spirit is broken with Adversity, or the
dignity of his Office obscured, or he tempted to a sordid ^nnivance at, or
compliance with their follies, and so like Esau sells his Birthright for (...)
Mess of Pottage.

The bottom of the Grievance in plain terms is this: If the Clergy could but
once procure a Revenue settled hard and fa^t upon them to their minds, (which
what it is, neither we, nor perhaps themselves ever knew) had they but more
Wealth to support their Grandeur, out of the hard labor of the poor drudging
Moyls, that tug hard night and day to get Bread, had they but Midas his Option,
or Fortunatus his wishing (...)* that every thing they touched might be Gold;
they would then make the Ble^-aprons Lacquey it, and trot to the Courts by
their Horse sides, and it does them good but to imagine how they would firk
their lazy Hides, and curry the s^abbed Humor of Nonconformity out of them:
Thus much of the Malady; the Remedy follows.

2. The Remedy of this insupportable Grievance in short is this. That a Law be
made, that all Corporations, Market Towns, and great Parishes, provide a
Maintenance for the Vicars* in proportion to London; for till some such course
be taken, it will be in vain to expect, that the Church of England, or the best
Laws of Religion, should either obtain just Ven^ration, or due Effect.

So far am I from envying them their Honors, Revenues, and desired Affluences,
that I could be content they had the Nine parts, and the poor Tenth only left
to the Landlord, as a small quit-rent in memory that the whole was once his
own: But what security can we have, that that also will not be demanded in time
to make up a Compotency; for Trade is too great, Corporations too rich, every
one has too much, only the Clergy have just nothing till they have got their
Competency, which is nothing less than the whole.

This was the glorious design managed by the Council of Trent, when the Church
was so unmeasurably rich, that it maintained abundance of Cardinals, every one
carrying the Port and State of a King; so many Archbishops, Bishops, Priests,
besides the infinite numbers and swarms of Religious Persons, all endowed with
ample Revenues, and yet they made a Begging Decree; much would have more; Cujus
avariti^ totus non sufficit Orbi^. That all the Faithful should be exhorted to
give largely to the Bishops and Priests to maintain their Dignities. But the
Parliament of Paris, a wise and foreseeing Assembly, abhorring this Mendicant
Trade, and knowing well, that your counterfeit Beggars hide Luxury under the
Covert of Rags, and remembering possibly that of Solomon. Prove. 13. 7. There is
that makes himself poor, and yet there is no end of his Substance; gave this
censure of it.

That this had been good indeed, if they did serve the people as they ^ght, and
were really in need; for so St. Paul exhorts, That he that is instructed,
should give some part of his goods to him that instructs him; but when he that
bears the Name of a Pastor does intend any thing rather then to instruct the
people, the Exhortation is not proper; and the rather because Ecclesiastical
goods formerly were for maintaining the Poor, and Redeeming Slaves; for which
Causes, not only the Immovables, but even the Ornaments of Churches, and Holy
Vessels were Sold. In the Mosaical Law, God gave the Tenth to the Levites, who
were but the 13th part of the people; but the Clergy now, who are not a
Fiftieth part, have gotten already the Fourth part, and does still proceed to
gain, using many Artifices therein; Moses having invited the People to offer
for the service of the Tabernacle, when as much was offered as did suffice,
forbad them in the Name of God to offer any more; but here will be no end found
till they have all, if Men will continue still in the Lethargy: If some
Priests and Clergymen be poor, it is because others are excessively rich, and
an equal distribution would make them all rich abundantly. Hist. Trent. Counc.
p. 821. Again ^b. p. 540. For a Synod to put their hands into Men's Purses to
^intain Curates, seemed strange, both for the matter and the manner; for the
matter, because the Clergy was superfluously rich, and rather indebted to the
Laity: For the manner, because neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever compel
Men to make Contributions, but only gave power to receive them that were
voluntary; And he that reads St. Paul to the Corinthians and Galathians, shall
see the Masters treatment of the Ox that treads ^ut the Corn; and the duty
of the Catechized, toward him that Catechiseth, yet so that those Laborers
have no Action by rigor of Law, nor any Chancery to relieve them.

It was a notable Constitution of the wise and potent Prince Catolus M.
constitut. fol. 73. Ut decimae Populi dividantur in quatuor parts, id est, una
pars Episcopo, Alia Clericis, tertia pauperibus, quarta Ecclesiae in fabricis
applicetur, ut in Decretis Gelas^i P. continetur: That the Peoples Tithes
should be divided into four parts, one whereof should maintain the Bishops; a
second the Clergymen, a third should maintain the Poor, and a fourth should go
to the repair of Churches: Now if the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor,
should have all their Levies raised out of their Tithes, which was the first
and best use of them, what a peal of sacrilege should we have ringing about
our Ears continually: Let me soberly propound a few Quaeries.

1. Qu. Whether they who are for a moderation in Reformation, a mediocrity in
coming up to the Primitive purity, ought not to be as real for a moderation and
mediocrity in maintenance? It seems to be very disproportionable to cry out for
a Mean in Trading, a moderation in Preaching, moderation in Reforming, and yet
to be immoderate for Revenues. A little I see will serve of any thing but
riches. Let men have but enough of wages, and they can be content with little
enough of work.

2. Whether it be rational to proceed in this matter ascendend^, to bring up
the lean Vicarages to the Corpulency of fat Parsonages, or descendendo, to
reduce the gouty Benefices to the modicum of the m^agre Vicarages, and not
rather to make an Equality, that they may both meet in the half way?

3. When a Market Town or Corporation is low, and not able to maintain its
poor, the Law enables the Justices of the Peace to bring the Neighboring
Village under Contribution; and they who understand what Charity is in a mean
estate, are glad since there is so sad occasion to demonstrate their Charity,
to lay hold on it: Let it therefore be enquired, why the poor Corporation
Vicars ought not to be augmented out of the richer Parsonages of the
Neighborhood? But many will cut a large Thong out of another Hide, who will
be sure to spare his own Skin; and they whose Tails sweep the ground, will not
lend an Inch ^o him that is docked close by his Buttocks.

4. Whether the poor Vicar ought not rather to be relieved out of the rich
Clergy-mans Excrements, then out of the lifeblood of the Laity? If the
Revenues of Pluralists and Prebends, with other such useless Creatures, were
annexed to the ill provided places, all would be well; but the Daughters of the
Horseleach cry still, give, give, and yet they are ready to burst with blood.

5. Whether it be not more agreeable to the Prim^ive times* and the nature
(...) (...) Christian Religion, that the (...) ^uld have some dependence on the
People as to Temporal* (...) depend so much on their Clergy in Spirituals? we
consider the Inconveniences of a depending Clergy, but not the greater ones of
having them absolute and independent: who having got a settled Maintenance,
defy their Benefactors, contemn those that drudge to maintain their splendid
Equipage, and torment their Consciences, who keep the Woolf from their Doors:
The middle way is therefore best. That so much be settled as is absolutely
necessary, and leave them to stand upon their good behavior for superfluities:
since he that is rich, and able to contribute liberally this year, may become
poor, and need Contribution the next; and its not equal to be compelled to
Charity when he cannot discharge his Debts.

6. Whether it be not a most scandalous reflection upon the English Clergy,
which he intimates p. 39. That the motives and invitations of the most
judicious Clergy, to undertake the work (viz. the charge os the flock) is from
the most liberal maintenance?

7. Whether the healing of the Clergies Poverty, will not cure them of their
Laboriousness in Preaching? and whether doubling the Revenues will not single
the Sermons? I have read of a poor Vicar, that being taken notice of by the
Bishop for an industrious Preacher, to encourage him in his work, he gave him a
good bulkie Parsonage; but observing that he began presently to slacken his
pace, and come to once a day, he sends for him, expostulates the Case with him,
why he should work less now he had more Wages, to whom he answered ingenuously,
Parv^ l^quuntur Curae, ingentes s^upent.

8. Whether it was advisedly spoken by our Enquirer, to compare a Ministers
Condescension to his scrupulous people in the matter of Ceremonies to Esau's
selling his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage? for if the Minister should
happen to cut short his Common Service to gratify his Patron in hopes of a
Dinn^r, the worst he can make of it is, that he fells a Mess of Pottage for a
Sunday-Pudding, And if a Ministers Birthright consist in Rites and Ceremonies,
he that gives a Mess of Pottage for it, will certainly buy it too dear.

3. The third cause is the late Wars: And for proof hereof he will desire the
Reader to look no further back, then the late Wars between this Kingdom, and
the States of the Low Countries. But why no further back? we used to be lead
back as far as the late Civil Wars; but our Enquirer was better advised then
his Reader perhaps is aware of: It had not been safe to follow truth too near
the Heels, least it should have dashed out his Teeth.

But into what a perplexed Dilemma has he brought the Church of England? If we
have Peace with Holland; and therewith Trade and Commerce, then comes in all
the new fangled Commodities* Ceremonies and Rites of foreign growth, exotic
Customs, jack-in-a-boxes; If we have War with them, then the Reins of
Government are remiss, and Nonconformity grows apace: for that (says he) the
Contempt of Religion is greater, and the state of the Church worse at the end,
then the beginning of th^se Wars: Could we but onderstand the mystery that
lurks under that word Religion, and that I^rgon and Cipher [the state of the
Church] we might easily return an Answer. By Religion then understand Ceremony,
by the state of the Church, understand, its power to crush, and ruin all that
comply not with those Ceremonies, and then it is very true, that Wars are a
great Enemy to Religion: Every thing is so far to be reputed evil as it
crosses, and so far good as it advances the Trade of Ceremonies and
Impositions: If Navigation and Merchandise be Essential to the flourishing
state of the Nation, yet if they stand in the way of Ceremonies, damn them as
Schismatical; and Wars and Bloodshed, and the beggering of the Nation* if they
would but promote Ceremonies, were amongst the choicest desirables: However the
remedy is cheap and easy:, It Is but parting with the Flag, the Sovereignty of
the Sea, (which our Enemies would have persuaded us were but a Cer^mony) the
fishery, the East India Trade, and perhaps two or three more such
inconsiderable necessaries, and we might have secured our Innocent Ceremonies,
and the Churchmen swagger'd over the Consciences of Dissenters.

He that has a mind to interpose in a discourse of Wars, may possibly get a
broken Pate for his pains; otherwise the Valor of the English Nation, has so
justified it self in our Naval Engagements, that it needs not be ashamed to
look back upon its behavior; but I shall only observe as I pass on these few
things.

1. That the Ecclesiastical Histories observe to our hand, that the Wars
between the Emperor and the Persians, proved a means to check those
persecutions which the Arians raised against the Orthodox: And if the great
Governor of the World will overruled public Calamities, to render the
condition of persecuted Christians tolerable, we have the more reason to admire
his powerful wisdom, who out of so great an Evil could extract so great a Good.

2. I must call to mind one of our Enquirers grave sentences; ubi solitudinem
feccrunt, pacem vocant: That which some men count Peace, is nothing but havoc
and desolation. Like some great Enclosers, who having depopulated all about
them, and left nothing but the bare Ribs, and naked Skeleton, of sometimes
flourishing Farms, bless themselves that they are (...) from the noise of the
obstreperous Carters. Thus when our Ecclesiastical projectors, shall have
ruined Trade, routed the Conscientious, and forced peaceable Dissenters into
deserts; beggared Corporations, those Nests of Schism, they may applaud
themselves for profound Statesmen, that they have wrought out their own Ease,
with the miseries of the People.

3. Wars may reasonably contribute something to a just and well bounded Liberty
of Conscience, for how could a Prince expect his Subjects should hazard their
lives in his righteous cause and quarrel* and open their Purses wide to
maintain the War, when either they must lose them in his Service, or if they
return having survived apparent dangers, be trampled upon at home, by those who
have all the while sat still at ease, wrapped up in warm Furr, and security.
There Is no great difference whether a man be slain by chain-shot, or a single
Bullet; And yet a generous Spirit would accept is as moreEligible to meet a
noble death in the Field, fighting for his Prince and Country, then to
languish and pine away an inglorious Life in servitude, under Ecclesiastical
Impositions.

4. If the effects of War were lamented, as letting in Debauchery and
Profaneness, tolerating immoralities, antiquating the practice of Religion* we
should mourn with him that thus mourns: But when we shall have an Oration of
the Evils of the War, and at last, the great one is, that it makes people not
so fond of Ceremonies, whereas Peace and Prosperity multiplies them, it is
enough to make a people entertain thoughts less evil of the one, and less
honorable of the other: for thus the Spartans made the lives of the People so
intolerable in Peace. that they might more readily engage in Wars abroad. And
indeed such mis-representations of the reasons of things, have made the World
desire like the Salamander, ^ar for its Element, that they might not dwell in
the hotter fire ^f Persecution in a more moderate Climate called Peace; for a
Person of Honor that in defense of his Country has come up to the mouth of a
Canon, and come off with renown, to be slain by an Ecclesiastical Canon, would
make him resent his fall with regret, and dying, bite the ground.

4. The fourth, and indeed the greatest cause of all these mischiefs, is a
pestilent evil, known by the name of Trade: This Kingdom of Great Britain is an
Island, which as by its situation it has the greatest need of, so the greatest
advantage by Commerce. That which Nature made a Necessity; Art and Industry
have turned into a Virtue: That as we cannot live comfortably without it, so we
are capacitated to live Gloriously by it: To speak of its usefulness to English
men, were to be as impertinently absurd, as that Soldier who would needs De re
Militari c^ram Hanibale diss^rere, read a Lecture of Tactics, to one of the
bravest Captains of his time for Courage and Conduct; and he may seem almost as
vain that should commend it, as he would be impious that should disparage it.

B^ Trade be irreversibly doomed for an intolerable evil, may we ask with
Pilate, pray what evil has it done, has it introduced the sins of the torrid
Zone? or made those wickednesses Denizons, that were peculiar to hotter
climates? has it impoverisht the Subject, or lessened the Revenues of the
Crown? no! nothing of al these; but it has feloniously, and of its malice
forethought, brought down the price of Ceremonies, which are the staple
commodities of the Kingdom: But did not the dear Ceremonies come over by
Shipping too? they are not drugs of our own growth, and therefore in Civility,
we are obliged to car^y a (...) ^spect ^owards (...), that brought us home so
ri^ (...); bu^ consider, shipping was useful ^ill it has landed this sraught,
and then like Julius Caesar, burn them all, that they may never export so
precious a Commodity.

In drawing up a charge against this Trade, our Enquirer looks like the very
Picture of Modesty: He seems to say, O utina^ nescirem Literas! He could almost
wish (had it not been too great an injury to the world) that he had not been so
Eloquent: If he might do it without offense he would take the boldness to say;
that is, I^ the Merchants would not be angry to have an Embargo laid upon their
Ships, and their Goods seized. He would say something -- Nay, pray Sir speak
out; the Merchants will exercise so much self-denial sure for once as to be
beggered. Why then this is the something he would say. That the vast increase
of Trade does usually reflect some inconveniences upon Ecclesiastical Affairs:
The most favorable Indictment surely that ever was drawn up against an evil of
so pernicious consequence in all the world. 1. They are but inconveniences; and
what Commodity is there but is attended by some small inconveniences? 2. They
are but some inconveniences neither, as perhaps, that one of the wealthy un
governable Fanatics cannot be called to account in the Ecclesiastical Courts,
because he is extra quatuor Maria, or so. 3. It Is not always neither, though
usually that these fatal effects follow it; for sometimes an Eclipse, or
Quartile A spect may be disappointed of its malignant influence, by the
interposition of a more bening Planet. 4. Nor has Trade a direct spleen against
the Church, it does but reflect its malevolent Beams; now you know that Radius
reflexus langu^t. 5. Nor is Trade, qua Trade, in it self considered, but the
increase, and the vast increase of Trade that has all the guilt upon it; so
that if we could persuade Merchants and Tradesmen, either not to Trade, or not
to thrive of their Trades, it would prevent all this mischief, and I durst
undertake to persuade one half of them at least to this latter, if that would
reconcile them to him. 6. And these Inconveniences are but to Ecclesiastical
Affairs. Religion will not be prejudiced, nor Holiness suffer I hope; but there
are some Affairs, whatever they are, that some Ecclesiastics are a brewing,
will not work so well: In one word it is all but Ceremonies.

The most Christian King is all this while endeavoring to settle Factories and
Plantations for Trade abroad, and to gi^e ^t all possible encouragement at
home. And indeed they say, he has a very wise Council about him; who verify
the old Proverb, That the French are wiser than they seem; and they tell him,
that whatever Quarter he carries with these Churchmen, who have ever private
desings of their own distinct from the general interest of that Monarchy; yet
Navigation and Trade must be encouraged, and let the Priests fume and fret, or
whine, and put the finger in the Eye, all is one, he will settle commerce for
all the idle chat of Kirk-statesmen: But to speak truth, I do not hear, that
the Clergy there, whether Regular or Secular, have these dreadful
apprehensions, That the Rise of Trade will be the Fall of the Church* and
perhaps the Reasons of things they differ. They have Legions of Ceremonies, and
may well spare some (...) tered Companies; their Commons are stocked sans
Number, and if they were a little stinted, the rest would thrive the better;
but should we lose a Brace, or a Leash, we were half undone; and yet I am
confident, that Wise and Valiant Prince, would sell us a dozen of the best
Ceremonies he has in his Empire, for one half of our Trade, and thank us into
the bargain.

We should smile at the tenderness of the Gentleman that would throw himself,
and hopes away, to satisfy the impotent longing of a Green Sickness Girl; and
others would as much smile at us, should we sacrifice the Wealth and Strength
of a Nation to the Humor of those, who for a few Ceremonies which apprized by
indifferent persons, are not worth one of our Plantations, would loose both:
But if the Trade of a Nation be os no more concernment then to be cast away for
such trifles, all we shall gain by the hand, is an Additional Reason why they
are c^lled Beggarly Rudiments.

You are therefore satisfied that it was mannerly done to scrape a L^g to the
Merchants before he would propound so harsh, and displeasing a business: He
would do it without offense, if he might be so bold! He envies no man's wealth;
Its far from his thoughts to wish the Tide of Trade dammed up; offended! I
wonder who could find in his heart to be offended at such civility? such potent
charms of Rhetoric are able to persuade them to Moor up their Ships for ever,
rather then import any of those Holland prohibited Commodities.

Readers, you are now to give your Attendance to a most eloquent Oration, which
is the Embalming of Trade, before it be converted to Mummy: for thus the Orator!

Trade is hugely advantageous to the public as well as private persons, in
many respects, It much raises the parts, and sharp^s the Wits of a Nation by
foreign Conversatious; It opens a passage to the discovery of other Countries,
and of the works of God and Man, of Art and Nature; Its the great Incentive,
and Instrument of Humane Society. It makes all mankind of one Bedy, and by
mutual intercourse to serve the occasions, supply the needs, and minister to
the delight and entertainment one of another, It enlarges the minds of Me^,
(...) well as their fortunes, insomuch that any Nation is unpolite, unbred, and
half barbarous without it; It inures men to hardship and danger, and instructs
them in subtlety, and all the Arts of living and self-security, It adds much to
the Beauty, Power, and Strength of a Nation, and to the Riches and Revenues of
the Prince. -- Dixi! -- And yet all this notwithstanding -- Ay! there is one
evil in it which we little dream of, which out-weighs all those Conveniences,
Enlargement of Trade has usually been attended (he must crave leave to say it)
with as much latitude of Conscience: then some men's Consciences have above 70
degrees of South and North Latitude. And the heat of that, with as much
coldness and indifferency in R^gion. It Is commonly observed to introduce great
diversity of Opinions, and consequently to abate of Men's Zeal for, and
Reverence of an uniformity in what was before established. And therefore better
the public were undone, Men's Parts and Wits made as dull as a Beetle, foreign
Discoveries left to the pragmatical Dutch, all Commerce with other Worlds
interrupted, and the Britains once again excommunicated from the rest of
Mankind: Better a thousand times Men's Fortunes and Hearts were broken, the
Glory of the Nation stained, its s^rength shattered, the Exch^quer exhausted;
than Uniformity in some little things endangered, one Ceremony disparaged, the
Wills of some Clergymen crossed, which might shorten their days, or one pair
of Organs put out of Tune, which would make them grumble like a pair of Scotch
Bag-pipes.

And to speak the truth, all the great ends of Trade might be secured by
Ceremonies, and an exact uniformity in them; for it will wonderfully sharpen
Men's wits, and make them both as keen and blew as a Razer, to find out every
day some happy new conceit: Pope Vitalian was the Man that Glories first to
have taught Mankind the Art of Worshipping God with a Box of Whistles. Society
will be maintained by being all of a piece at home, and instead of foreign
discoveries, an Inquisition will better search out the Terra Iucognita of
Conscience, and let this Enquirer be one of the Lords Inquisitors of that Holy
House; and the strength of the Nation would be better secured, if the Trained
Bands were untaught all their old Postures, to the right and the left, and knew
nothing but face about to the East. The Beauty of the Nation will be so
enhanced, that we shall shine with a painted face of Religion: And the old
Controversy between Marc Liberum, and Mar^ Cla^um, will be for ever
determined, and that on the right side; which out of Zeal to the Honor of the
incomparable Grotius, every devout person is bound to pray for; nor shall the
Seas any more be proved of their Blood, which have fought to assert their Right
to that Rolling Empire.

It was then seasonably, and well thought on, to propound to us the Wisdom of
the Lacedaemonians, who that the Laws and Government might not be disturbed with
Novelty; absolutely forbad Trade or Traffic, or so much as Traveling into
other Countries, lest the Citizens should barter away their own Laws and
Customs, for those of other Cities. But then I doubt (...) Laws were about the
great things that concerned the Nations being. They did not make Laws, That
every Man's Hair should be of a length, and then swear the people to observe
them, and forbi^ Trade, lest they should bring in the Geneva Cut, and destroy
Periwigs: And besides all this, they prohibited Travel as well as Trade; as
good leave all the doors of a house open, as one, and stop never a leak, as not
all, for one will sink the Vessel. Now how to restrain Travel deserves more
consideration; and therefore let it be remembered, that Trade and Travel are no
otherwise evil, than in their mischievous consequence; and could we separate
the grand inconveniences from them, they would not be Mortal; seeing then we
Trade more into Holland. and Travel more into Italy, simple Travel cannot be so
destructive as compounded Trade.

These Arguments Cooked up in good Language, may persuade all Men to step out
of the way, and throw themselves over the Bridge in convenient season; for what
can be impossible to these Arts? But he had told us p. 35. That there are
oftentimes Reasons that make one form necessary in one place and people, and
not in another. And therefore his Reasonings from Sparta will hardly go current
in England: Some say Sparta was a free State, and therefore it may not hold in
a Monarchy; and others say, these were the fundimental Laws of their Magna
Charta, which they would secu^e by abridging Trade and Travel; and not some odd
Artic^i Cl^ri, what Garments their Priests should wear upon Holy Days.

But never was Man in such a distraction between his remaining pity to the
distressed Merchants, and his yearning Bowels to the precious Ceremonies; so
has the Merchant himself been distracted in an Aphoretick Debate between his
Lading, and his Life, till at last dear Life overcame the stickle of combating
Objections, and over board went all his Merchandise: Thus this Compassionate
Person would not have Trade die, but yet he must have Impositions live; and
where are those grave Headpieces that can reconcile these differing Interests?
Why yet he hopes that the English Reformation is such, that it may rather gain
than lose Proselytes, by being confronted with any other Institutions: And
there is no question but under its present Advantages it would do so, did not
the severity of Impositions, and rigorous exacting of things which at best are
but indifferent, at most doubtful, and to many sinful, against which standing
Caveats have been entered from the beginning of the Reformation, a little mar
the sweet air of her truly beauteous face, and thereby render her not
altogether so surprising.

But as the Case stands, from whence should we hope for this numerous Offspring
of Proselytes? From amongst the Papists? Alas, they have conceived greater
hopes of us: That their Tyber shall swallow up our Thames, before our London
shall Proselyte their Babylon: And they are encouraged in their hopes, because
(...) say our Ceremonies are a Bridge over the Narrow Seas, not to let all the
Women of Europe into England as we fancy, but to admit Rome amongst us with all
its Retinue of Pompous Nothings, From the Reformed Churches then? Alas, they
are satisfied in their Primitive simplicity, they content themselves that their
Churches are True Churches, their Ministers Gospel Ministers; and though they
may perhaps make a Journey now and then to learn English Preaching, they think
it not worth the while to fetch Fire: The Expedients propounded to reconcile
Trade and Uniformity, are as follow.

1. That there may be such Laws provided, and such care taken, that the one (I
suppose he means Trade) be not discouraged, nor the other (Discipline no doubt)
corrupted. I have been studying what further Acts of Uniformity this Gentleman
would have enacted; whether with the Grave Recorder he would introduce the
Spanish Inquisition, or revive the Act ^r Banishment, or extend the Statute of
Praemunire to every one that shall keck at a Ceremony; I hope God will pour out
the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, of Counsel, and the fear of the Lord
upon our Legislators: we may make Rods to whip our selves upon ^r Childrens
backs; and the Teeth of Posterity may be set on edge with those sour Grapes,
which though the Fathers did not eat, yet they planted the Vines that bore
them. But what would he have? Why he would have a more simple way of
Agriculture attended to, as it was amongst the Spartans, and this Nation
formerly: Really if it had not been for these Spartans, I cannot tell what we
should have done: But it is always thus when Divines will be Statesmen, and
dictating to their Superiors* Scholars sit up late at their Studies, till the
Cocks and their Brains begin to crow, and what uncouth whimseys breed in their
Heads? There was once amongst us an odd Generation o^ Folk, we called 'em
Adamites. and they would level all things, reduce all things to the mode of
Paradise; such another Capri^io is our Enquirer, who though he will not reduce
Religious Affairs as high as the Apostle, yet Trade must be carried higher, and
new modeled Secundum usum Spartae. I am a thinking what we should do with our
Wool, which was once the staple commodity of the Nati^n till the Ceremonies
carried it; when we have spun it, wove^ it, and worn as much as we need, what
must we do with the rest? I should never have guessed, but that there' s an Old
Stuff set off with a New Name, they call it Episcopacy revived, and that must
employ the remainder.

I have heard of a supercilious Spanish Dom, who being asked by his Friend, How
the English men lived? Answered, Oh they live by selling Ale to one another.
The Answer was unpardonably scandalous, yet agreeable to the Morose Humor of
that people: But to this very pass must we come, when the design against Trade
takes, to Barter Food for Raiment; and both for Ceremonies.

2. His next expedient is; That every one have so much Charity toward the
Governors of his own Country, and the Church, as to think them both as wise
and honest as in other places. And let me add: A great deal honester and wiser
too. We hope our Governors are so wise, and tender of their Subjects, as to
allow them their Consciences, the only thing God has reserved to himself, and
that they are ambitious to preserve entire for him; which will sweeten all that
cost and pains they are at in the Service of him, whom Divine Grace has set
over them: But the highest opinion we can possibly entertain of the Wisdom and
Sincere Piety of our Governors, may well consist with a Humble Petition, to be
excused in that one thing the Immediate Worship of God.

As it does not imply that I am wiser or better then every man whose Religion I
cannot own in every particular, so neither do it suppose that I entertain low
thoughts of the Legislators Wisdom, because I cannot subscribe to his Tendries,
whilst I patiently submit to his penalties, for it must needs be supposed that
I judge him vested wi^ Authority from God to govern me, and wise in annexing a
Sanction to his Law so equal, that I may submit to it, whose preceptive part I
cannot discern so to be.

I have heard some plead in justification of the Severities inflicted on the
Jesuits in Q. Elizabeth and K. James his Reign, that they suffered not for
Religion, but disturbing the Government, we humbly beg the same savor; Let not
our Worship be accounted a Breach of the Peace, ipse fact^, but if the matter
be disloyal, or the Consequences turbulent and tumultuous, we have no farther
to plead in our own behalf.

3. A third expedient is, That we impute not all the distractions of m^ns
minds, and the quarrels against the Church, to the badness of its Constitution,
since this point of Trade has such an influence, as we see both in the nature
of the thing, and in the effects of it. I have no power to compound for the
Trading part, and presume he has as little to treat on the behalf of the other
part. The blame of our Distractions, Divisions and Quarrels, will lie when they
^ught, let him or I lay them where we please; If Trade brings in multitudes of
Opinions, yet that those Opinions make quarrels, is because perhaps one
needless Opinion is made Cock of the Dunghill, and Crows over all the rest its
equals, and may be its betters. I think impartially there is blame on all hands,
and if we could wave that sorry way of excusing our selves, by accusing others,
we were certainly in a fair way of Healing: yet one ^uint he has left unproved
to the Charity of his well-disposed Reader, viz The Trade in its own Nature has
such an influence upon our Distractions.

4. His last remote Cause is from the Papists and Atheists, who both, though
upon several grounds combine their malice against the Church

1. And first for the Papists: concerning whom he will treat of two things:
first, why they are such Enemies to our Church; and then wherein the Fnmity
discovers it self.

1. What is the reason that these Papists should be such implacable En^mies to
this Church? did we ever go about to Blow up the Pope and his Consistory with
Cun-powder? or ever Massacre a Hundred Thousand of his Catholics in Ireland?
Oh no! It was a higher, or a deeper cause, no matter which, whilst our
Enquirers penetrating Head can reach it.

1. The decent order of our Church shames their Pageantry: Rome has a
Brazen-face of her own; and I assure this Gentleman for all his C^nfidence, it'
s not a little matter will search the blood into her ^heeks. She has cause
enough to blush, but she wants a bore-head; though the blood of Thousands of
Protestants lies upon her Conscience, yet it appears not in her Looks: But
before our Enquirer upbraid them with their Pageantry, it will be necessary
that he gives us the Nice critical difference between Ceremonies Decency and
Pageantry; for if the definitions of both be not fixed to a hairs breadth,
either the Papists will prove their Theatrical pomp to be Decency, or our
Ceremonies to be Pageantry; If all mystical Rites be Decent, they will show us
Twenty for One; and will hardly be made to bl^sh for their penury; or to envy
our greater p^y. But if they should be found a piece of Pageantry, they have
infinitely outdone us, but withal, its no great commendation to have but
little Pageantry in Gods Service.

2. The Dignity of the Church shames theirs: Dignity is a Term of Art, and
capable of several meanings: If by Dignity we should (as we ought) to
understand, A real essential worthiness, arising from something excellent in
the account of God; then this Church has so out-stript her, that she ought not
to be named in the same day and year. But if we speak with the Vulgar, and take
this Dignity for some external glory shining out in secular Lusire, which is
that current signification, which Custom, the Master of the Mint, has stamped
upon It, I doubt she will hold up her Head, and not be dashed out of
Countenance; she can prod^ her purpuratos patres, her Cardinals, (Princes
fellows) her Dignitaries, she can produce you her Acolytes, dancing attendance
upon her Decans; her Deacons footing it after her Priests, her inferior Clergy
bo^ing before her mitred Prelates; and al^ these orderly Reverencing their
Metropolitan, but then she boasts unmeasurably, that she has an Ecclesiastical
Head to be the Center of Union to all those; so that whether you run up the
scale from the poor Ostiary to the Exorcist, and so upwards, or down the Scale
from the supreme infallible Noddle, moving, all the inferior Wyers, she will
brazen it out, and never hang down her Head.

3. The An ient Gravity of our Church reproves theirs: I am sorry for the
Honor of our Church, which I truly Reverence, that this Gentleman in vying
with Rome, should pitch upon those particulars, wherein if we do excel, and
carry the day, it will be no such Victory as to challenge a Triumph; and yet
such is the dubiousness of the case, that perhaps we may lose the day: I do not
yet hear that Rome has disclaimed Antiquity to be one of the marks of the true
Church: and know something of her presumption in applying into her self: Let
any Antiquity short of Scripture Epoch, be fixed upon, and she will make a
sorry shift to scramble through many a tiresome Century, and scuffle to come as
near the Apostolical days as some others: Both sides I think have played at the
game of Drop-father, so long till they are weary, and forced to confess, that
some things now in usage, were unknown to the Fathers, and many things
practiced by the Fathers, which we have silently suffered to grow obsolete by
desuetude.

I look upon these things as matters of course and form, to look big, and set
the best foot before: for if ever we confute Rome with an Army of hard words,
Decency, Order, Antiquity, Gravity, they must be such as the Word of God has
made so. It must be a Decency warranted by God himself, either from the Light
of Nature, or Scripture; an Order of Christ's Establishment; a Gravity
exemplified from the Apostles; and an Antiquity which was from the Beginning;
and when Scripture is once made sole Umpire in the Quarrel. As the Church of
England will certainly run the Papist out of all distance, so the
Nonconformist will begin to put in his stake, and perhaps win the Plate.

2. If you ask how the Church of Rome undermines our Church, he answers.

1. She furnishes other parties with Arguments against it. It were much easier
to evince, that the Euquirer has rather borrowed his Arguments from Rome, then
Rome lent one to the Non-conformists: I think there is not one Arrow he can
shoot against them, but I can show him where't was borrowed, or shotten from a
Jesuits Quiver: where was that Argument taken from Axes, Halters, Pillories,
Galleys, Prisons, Consiscations, as some express it, or as he more concisely,
Executing the Laws, borrowed, but from Rome? The Scripture knows it not, the
better sort of Heathens abhorred it, Protestants disown it, Papists only glory
in it. Uterejure tuo Caesar, sectamque Lutheri,
Ense, Rota, Ponto, Funibus, igne Neca.


And whence was that argument for Active unlimited Obedience to all things
commanded by the Church, borrowed; for though it becomes no mouth so well as
his that can boast of Infallibility, yet still we are pressed with the same
Argument, and in the last resort Public Conscience must carry it. I am sorry
this imprudent person should give any one occasion to say further, that some of
us at home, have furnished Rome with Arguments against the Reformation,
Arguments from the Scripture, Rome has none; from the nature of the thing, not
one; but some have put into their Hands a left handed Dagger, which does
mischief enough, it is called Argumentum ad Hominem. Thus when we are earnest
with them to throw away their Oil and Cream; they bid us, throw away our Cross;
If we desire her to reform her Cowles and Copes, she calls to us to reform our
Surplice. When we in a friendly way caution them not to feed upon the Devils
flesh, they answer, As good eat his flesh as the Broth he was boiled in.

2. She is all for blind Obedience at home; but preaches up tenderness of
Conscience abroad. And what the difference is between blind Obedience, and
Obedience merely on the account of the Command, I would willingly learn: And if
any can show us a better reason for the things commanded and enjoined then
that, we shall return him thanks.

If I might now borrow the Enquirers place so long as whilst I propounded a few
Enquiries, I would immediately resign to him his Province.

1. If the enmity between the two Churches be so great as is pretended, what
was the reason that so many Stars of the first magnitude in this Orb, were in
Conjunction with the Dragons Tail? why were they so ready to yield him his
Western Patriarchate, and all within the first four hundred years? which will
at once bring England under his Subjection: though I much question whether the
Grand Seignior will have so much good nature as to resign him the Eastern
Patriarchate so easily.

2. If the Church of Rome be this Churches Enemy, is she not then concerned to
get more Churches to be her Friends? It Is a wild Humor of some Churchmen,
that they will disoblige all the world, provoking every ones hand against
themselves, whilst their hand is against every one; If Rome be an Enemy, she is
a potent, malicious, subtle, and United Enemy, and it concerns a Church not to
be divided at home, when her Enemies are united abroad: and to combine with the
foreign Protestants in Love, were an excellent way to prevent the Combinations
of Romes hatred.

3. It would be enquired, If Rome be such an Enemy, what should be that which
provokes her wrath and indignation? what that should be that makes the envious
Snakes, wherewith Antichrists head is periwigg'd to hiss and spit out their
Venom? Does she Storm and Rage because we have retained two or three of her
fine Ceremonies? that cannot be the Origin of her spite! They are those things
wherein the Church of England, and Non-conformists are mutually agreed, that
Rome opposes this Church in, and they are those things wherein this Church
symbolizes with Rome, wherein she differs most from the Non-conformists.

When the Heathens triumphed in the great feats of their Maximus Tyrius, and
Apollonius Tyanaeus, the Christians answered. That whatever good effect their
Religion ever had upon the Lives of Men, was owing to those Principles and
Truths, which it had in Common with Christianity; Thus will Dissenters plead,
That whatever success this Church has had in its Ministry upon the Souls of
Men, is due to those fundamental Truths and Doctrines of the Christian Faith,
which she obtains in Common with the Reformed Churches: On the other side; The
Roman Faction persecutes and undermines this Church upon grounds equal to all
the Reformed Churches, and this Church is angry (at least) with Dissenters for
those matters wherein she seems to approach too near Roman corruption.

2. We come now to the Atheists; A Generation so abominable, of whom we may yet
say as was said of the Astrologers in old Rome, Hec genus hominum semper
vetabatur, and semper in urbe nostra retinebitur; A people always banished, yet
never departed from the City; such a Tribe are these Atheists. Every one has a
hard word for them, yet many entertain them: you shall not meet with a Man in a
Thousand, but will liberally tail at^ damned Machiavellian policy, which yet
according to the proportion of their little wit, they strive to imita^e: which
tempt me to think, the they hate not so much his Knavery, as they ^epine at
their ownf^lly, and judge not his politics so evil, as they are vexed tha^ they
cannot equallize him; That they Nibble at his principles, because they cannot
reach his Wit.

It is but a slender evidence that another is in the right, because Atheists
are so grossly wrong; And yet to declaim against Atheism, has these considerable
Advantages: First* some think they may be securely Atheistical themselves, if
they can but flourish with a few ingenious Sentences against them; and a witty
Libel against such, is a sufficient Purgation for him that has a Talent to
expose the rest of Religion: Secondly, it is a plausible Argument that that
Religion must needs (...) excellent, that has the worst of Men for its Enemies,
and they must certainly be adjudged worthy persons who are so Zealous against
such Impiety; what Man of Charity would suspect Irreligion to wear the Cloak of
f^rvency against Atheism? And yet it is common to hear it hotly prosecuted in
the Pulpit, by some who come warm from that S^rvice to the practice of it. I
dare (...) it to the judgment of the impartial world, whether he be not a ^in
to a practical one who disputes for a God, and then tears Men in p^eces for
worshippin^ ^im, according to the best Light they can get from Scripture an^
nature? And in (...) a manner, as where* (...) they ca^ find no (...), but that
it is not their ^on? and p^ly was their own to^ not many years since, and pr^ly
had ^een so still, had they not been purchased into a better?

There are Three Questions here to be res^ved. What Atheism is? Whence it
comes? And wherein does it oppose the Church, and contribute to a separation
from it?

1. What Atheism is, and who is the A^st? And this is as needfu^ an Enquiry, a^
any of those (...), wherewith h^ tormenced us in the ^ast Chapter: I assure the
Render, It is a word of a Volatile Nature, and Versatile Signification, as any
that gives us trouble with its double meaning. In Germany an Atheist once
signi^ed a Person that meddled with the Pop^s Mit^r, (...) the Monks fat
Bellies: Epic^s of old some think was (...) with Atheism, because he could not
swallow Poly^heisme: ^t home some conclude he must be an Atheist that s^ruples
the Ius Divinum of Ty^hes: And if he shall detein a Ty^ Pig, he is a
Sacrilegious Atheist to boot: Formerly it bordered upon Athei^m to have denied
the Divine Right of Episcopacy; but I see one may question that now, and yet be
a Christian: What then an Atheist is? I shall leave to the Industry of this
Enquirer.

2. But from whence this Atheism should proceed, is a Question that has been so
fully Answered by a Learned and Honorable Pen of lat^. I shall not need to
repeat any thing: Yet this is obvious; That when Preachers Preach against
Preaching, their Auditors may easily stumble into a belief, that what they
Preach is not much material to be believed, when they had rather it should not
be Preached at all, than not under their Formalities: If ever I should hear a
Tradesman bitterly inveigh against Trading; that it never was a good World
since there was so much Trading; that we never had peace since we had Markets
twice a week; that there can be no peace or settlement expected, so long as Men
may lay out their Money, and buy their Goods where they pleased, let such a one
be dealt with as severely as the Enemies of Trade can wish. I shall not plead
his Cause: To this if we shall add* that when the World takes notice, that
they who are called the Men of God, and are therefore supposed to know most of
him, to be most like him, and to represent him (...) their lives as a Holy,
Merciful, Tender, and Gracious God, a^ they present him in their Doctrine*
shall yet with unwearied fury prosecute Men to Poverty, P^ison and Grave,
merely for noncom^lyance in those things which themselves have invented; they
give great occasion to Atheistical inclinations to say in their Hearts, As good
believe no God, as one so cruel and unmerciful, as his own (...) repr^sent him
to us.

3. But the last is the most important Question: How, or wherein does Atheism
under (...) the Church? or contribute to separation from it? That Atheism does
oppose all Religion as such, was never doubted, in that it takes away the great
Principle pre-supp^sed to all Religion. That there is a God; but how it does
particularly oppose the Church of England, so far as she differs from others,
is I conceive the present Question. It is somewhat difficul^ to imagine, that
they who have put off Humanity, should scruple to put on an^ gat^ of obtaining
Conformity. They who have renounced on^ God, will easily own a Thousand
Ceremonies; what were it to them i^ all the Numerous Rites of Rome were
introduced, could they but get the sense of a Deity oblitera^ed out of their
Consciences, that they might sin without the stings and twinges of an
approaching Judgment, which is the prefection they aim a^? Their Heaven has no
God in it, their Hell no Devil in it; It must be a strange Imposition which an
Atheistical Throat cannot swallow; he that is of no Religion, (as I said) can
subscribe to any Religion, to which those Principles are very cognate, which
are contrived to avoid persecution under all Forms and Constitutions: How
therefore they should be such grand Enemies to Conformity, I wait to be
resolved. 1. The Atheists (says he) will not set their (...) against a
Fanatic, they must have higher Game: By this Argument our Enquirer has
demonstrated himself to be no Atheist; yet I would not have him trust much to
it; I suppose too they have found higher Game than Ceremonies, when they open
their black mouths against God himself. 2. They inflame the Causes of
Divisions, provoke Men's Passions, and exasperate Men's Minds one against
another, He has spoken more truth than perhaps he is aware of in these few
words: I have ever suspected, and now have warrant to utter my suspicions, that
it is a spice of Atheism that exasperates Men against those who quietly and
peaceably Worship God Blessed for ever.

3. They scurrilously traduce all that is serious; and what they cannot do by
Manly discourse, they endeavor by Buff^onry: Thus these blind Bettles that
rose out of filth and ex^rement Buz about the World. And now I am sure where to
find the whole Club of Atheists. Amongst those Churchmen who blaspheme the
Office of the Divine Spirit as a Noise and Buz: Amongst those who openly scoff
at the Beauty, Loveliness, and Preciousn^ss of a Redeemer: Amongst them who
have no better way to confute the satisfactoriness of Christ's death, then to
make God like an Angry Man when his passion's over, and has glutted himself
with revenge; amongst them who can no otherwise describe the Zeal of Christ for
his Fathers House, then by the furies of a Jewish Zealot.

He has now dispatched the remote Causes of separation; and if the Reader
complains, that amongst all these Causes he hears not a syllable of that grand
Cause of all Divisions, the needless imposing of things doubtful or sinful, as
the Terms of Union and Communion with the Church: Let him have a little
Patience, he may find it in its proper place, viz. amongst the nearer,
immediate, direct, and proper Causes of separation, whither we now follow our
Enquirer.

CHAP. III.
Where the more immediate Causes of Distractions, viz. Rashness of Popular
Judgment, Iudaisme, Prejudice, want of true Zeal, are considered, and the
Enquirer manifested to have been something ridiculous.

HItherto our Author has acted with good Applause the part of a Compassionate
Enquirer; he will now alter his Properties, and play the other part of the
Passionate Enquirer. He has worn the Person of a Friend long enough; and will
now put on the severer Habit ^f a Judge, and then he is resolved some body or
other shall smart sort it, though that belongs properly to the Lictor's or
Beadle's Office.

There is only one small matter which he would bespeak, and if he could procure
it too of his Reader, he need not doubt the happy issue and success of this
Discourse; and that is a certain Commodity which Men call Candor; a very
scarce and dear Commodity it is grown, since the Writers of this Age Appealed
from the Tribunal of their Judicious and Learned, to the Chancery of their
Courteous and Candid Readers.

If any should be so Critical as to enquire, what this Candor ^s; he may
understand that it is a Native Whiteness of Judgment, that has not yet
received the Prejudicate Tincture of any Color, but retains its Indifferency
and Neutrality to every Customer. Such a Mind the Reader is desired to bring to
the Perusing of this Chapter; that he be neither Black nor Blew, his affections
devirginated neither with Ass. nor Diss. but a mere Rasa Tabula. But how much
of this Candor might pleasure him, is a great Question; for if a small
Quantity would serve his occasions, no more then may incline one to think he
never expected a Bishopric, or more then a first-rate Benefice, for writing
this elaborate work; I have just such a parcel of Candor lying by me, that
will exactly fit his turn, But this will not do! He has bespoke so much of his
Reader. That he will believe, it is not any delight he takes to rake in the
Wounds of his Brethren and fellow Christians, that prompts him to this
undertaking: A Candor to believe all this? It must be a stretching
white-leather Candor indeed that will reach to the Belief of such Incredibles.
That he that makes Wounds does not delig^t to rake in them; that he that forges
Crimes, takes no pleasure in divulging them, that he who reproaches his
Brethren most passionately, tenders their repute; That he who would ruin Men's
Bodies, has such a Compassion for their Souls: I confess I cannot furnish him
wi^h such a Lot of Candor; but if I meet with Apella the Jew, or any other
Candid Wise-acres, that have enough to spare, he may possibly hear further.

Proceed we therefore to the next, and immediate Causes of the Distractions of
the Church of England.

1. The first assigned Cause, is popular rashness and injudiciousness. Whom he
should intend by the people, that are so rash and injudicious, I am at a great
loss in my Conjectures: One division of a Kingdom, is into the Sovereign* and
his Liege People. Now it must not be the People in this notion, that are so
hair-brained, for that would include the Clergy: Again, the Subjects of a
Kingdom may be divided into the Nobility, and the Common People: but neither
under this notion must rashness and injudiciousness be charged upon the People,
for besides that, this would still reflect upon the Inferior Clergy, it would
also cast reproach upon the Peoples Representatives. There is therefore another
distinction of us all, we are all either of the Clergy, or the Laity, that is
in plain English, the Populace or V^lg^: and there is good ground for this
classical distinction, not only because we hear of Sermons ad Cl^rum, that is,
to those who are Gods Lot, Portion, and Inheritance; and others ad Populum, the
common Herd and Drove of Animals: but because we read of old, such a division
made by the Learned and Judicious Pharisees, Joh. 7. 49. Have any of the Rulers
or Pharisees believed on him, but This People, that kn^ws not the Law, is
accursed. And yet it will be thought scandalously harsh to fix the guilt of
popular rashness and injudiciousness, upon the people in this Acceptati^* for
under this denomination will come, not only the Nobility and ^try of a Nation,
but the Prince himself, unless he should take on him the Office of the
Priesthood. We must therefore find out Another sort of People that must bear
the burden of this reproach; That which comes next to my thoughts, and offers
fairest to assail the difficulty, is the distinction between the Conformists
and the Non-conformists; and thus we shall need to seek no further for this
grand Cause of Nonconformity. The Non-conformists are a Rabble-rout of rash
and in^udicious People: And there needed not half so many words to assert it,
though twice as many will not prove it.

This Cause Of Popular rashness, is like the Chamaeleon, which they say
accommodates i^elf to the nearest Subject, and will resemble all Colors save
one, only it is not susc^ptible of that, which our Enquir^r wants most, Candor:
For the Dissenters complain of the in^udiciousness of the People, the rashness
of their Censures, how little they understand their principles, how wrongfully
they interpret their practices; and (...) at last, it wheels about t^ (...) a
reason of Conformity.

There is no Theme upon which School bo^s are more frank in their (...)
inv^ctives, then of the common People, That it is (...), (...) (...), A Hydra
with many Heads, ann ^er i^ no^e of them* (...) Consliu^, vel Ratio, vel (...),
vei D^gentia, so says ^is Comp^re the great Roman Orator.

But I admire h^ these M^n of Wit and Judgment would live. ^f the People w^om
they so undervalu^ as not worthy to wipe their She, d^d not Moil and Toil, and
Plow and Sow, and Spi^, that they might lie at ease, arrayed like Solomon in
^ll his Glory.

The method of our Enquirer in managing this business, is this: First, he will
(...) to the purpose, then a little nearer to the purpose, and let of all close
home to the purpose.

1. That which he says to the purpose, is this: When weakpersons judge of the
Determinations and Counsels of wiser men, and those that pierce no further then
the mere surface of things, pas^ a Ve^dict upon those whose Judgments are
profound and deep, there ^n no good issue be expected.

The Vulgar indeed do not wear the Head-pieces of States men, nor the Helmets
of Commanders, they have no need for, and therefore no ^st of them, they
pretend to no Authority to inspect the secrets of State, to dive into the
Intrigues and Mysteries of Government; but yet under correction, they are a
de^ree removed from Beasts; and pretend and plead a right to judge of their own
Actions, as they are accountable to the Divine Majesty. They are not concerned
to enquire upon what reasons the Legislators shall bring in a Law, but they are
concerned to enquire into the Lawfulness of the thing, that they may give a
more Humane, cheerful, and rational Obedience. Understand me in things
especially relating to the immediate Service of God, and their Acceptance with
him therein: In other things, they can part ^ith th^r ^n Right; and though the
Command should prov^ unrighteous, they may righteously submit; but in matters
of Religion they ought to be conducted by more manly Arguments.

Gods Worship, is a Service reasonable, and if I must not use my Reason there
to judge of its lawfulness, it had been an Advantage to be made, what some
would make us, ^rutes: for as he that has lost his smell, has this to comfort
himself withal, that as he enjoys not the satisfaction of the worlds perf^mes,
so he is not tormented with its Stinks. Thus though the Beasts have not the
contentment of en^anchised Reason, so they are discharged the cumber and
torment which necessarily arises from restraint put upon the dictates of Right
Reason. I shall never therefore reconcile the contradictions of those who cry
up a Rational Clergy, and yet at the same time revile a Rational Laity.

There was once one Virgilius Bishop of Saltzburgh, that held an odd Opinion,
that there were Antipodes, the Pope it seems suspecting some dreadful Heretical
pravity to lurk under that uncouth Opinion, convenes, condemns, executes him
for a downright Heretic: Our Enquirer protests, He can by no means commend the
Zeal of the Bishop. Its like there was some of that popular rashness and
iniudicious^ss in it: but what would ^e have had the poor honest man h^e done?
Su^scribe that twice two make f^ve and (...)? or against ^athematical
Demonstration swear, and d^clare. That the Glob^ of the Earth has no Dismeter?
I grant that weak persons ((...) we are all so weak) ought to suspect
themselves, and give very much to the Counsels and Reas^ns of wiser men: But to
deny our Reason in its most easy velitations, and famili^r instances, for fear
of being Schismatics, or causing Distractions is but a Whimsey, or a Windmill
got into some men's Heads; and as it came in, so let it come out again at its
leisure.

But this example of Virgilius was unto vardly applied; for if the good Bishop
had on his side Demonstration against Papal d^termination, as it proves that
the private reason may be more Orthodox then the public, so I dare refer it to
any ordinary B^dy to judge, whether in case any Distra^tions or Separations had
followed in the Church thereon, the Pope or the Bishop had been the Culpable
cause of them? The latter for asserting that which was simply impossible should
be otherwise; or the former, for executing hi^ as an Heretic for not denying a
demonstrabl^ verity?

2. But now he will come nearer to the purpose. I assure him he had need; for
hitherto we have been a filthy way off, Its an Ob^rvation not more ancien^ then
true, That the same thing seldom pleases the many and the few. And a wise
Observation it was, whoever first observed it to the World! I once heard a
Grave (...) in the Pulpit, after all the Civil Prefaces of the Learning, Piety,
and Orthodox of that Father, quote St. Austin for such another Observation, not
more Ancient then true. Omnes homines sunt pec^atores! All the Question here
will be, whether the many or the fe^, are more probable to be in the Right! Oh
no doubt the few: for the many are the People, the Vulgar: why then I refer it
again, whether popular Judgment can be the Cause or Reason of Nonconformity,
when the many are infallibly of that Religion which the Law allows and
encourages, and the few ever of that way which is discouraged and persecuted.

But (says he) wise men generally take middle Counsels; That was indeed a
little nearer the purpose, if not too near; for hence the World will discern,
that many Churchmen are none of the wisest, who are all for high-flying or
high-trotting Counsels: But what are those middle Counsels? He tells us in the
Instance of Erasmus, who was the Glory of his Time and Country, for the
sagacity of his Wit, and simplicity of his Temper; and he indeed hung in the
middle between Popery and Protestantism; or as some say, between Heaven and
Hell; so that hence we learn another secret, what are those middle Counsels,
which wise men would take, if occasion served; but then I doubt the many, and
not the few, would entertain those middle Counsels.

I meet with this moderation the word, at every Corner, but moderation the
thing is as great a rarity as Candor; moderation in Ceremonies that is a Vice;
hence we hear of these famous Sermons: Conformity according to canon justified,
and the new way of moderation reproved. A Sermon preached at Exon, ir the
Cathedral of St. Peter. At the Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God
Anthony -- This is that moderation our Enquirer attacques so briskly, p. 25.
charging the best of Clergymen with debauching their Office, and undermining
the Church; but now to be moderate like Erasmus, between Canterbury and Rome,
that is your commendable Temper.

And such a Religion did Calvin fear, like the Interim of Germany, the Articles
of H^n. 8. (...) of Zeno, the (...) of Heracli^s, the (...) of Constance. Such
a one as was too high for this World, and too low for the Next, such a one as
whether or no it provided a Heaven in the other world, would make a Purgatory
of this; Calvin was taught when to be Zealous, and when Remiss, to be Zealous
in Gods cause, and Remiss in his own, which seems somewhat a better frame then
theirs, who are ^re and ^ow for their own inventions, but as Cool as Patience
it self in the concerning Truths of the Gospel.

To prove the moderation of our Church, and that she cuts by a Thread, (or by
Threads) between both these extremes; he produces an Argument both from Papists
and Protestants; Those of the Church of Rome cannot but confess all is good in
our Liturgy: Protestants on the other hand generally acknowledge the main to be
good; And so between them both, give a glorious testimony to this Church as
guilty of neither extrea^. There is nothing more Childish then to use an
Argument, which with the same ease may be retorted as used; for those of the
Roman Church condemn the Liturgy as defective in necessaries and fundamentals,
and Protestants complain of many Redundancies and Superfluities; and so between
them both, they charge her as guilty of both the Extremes.

But I am afraid he has promised himself more respect from Rome, then they will
allow her. If they will confess that all is good in the Liturgy now, I am sure
they would not have confessed so much, when it prayed to be delivered from the
Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities. But if it
has been so well amended to gratify the Papists, give it one amendment more
to gratify the Protestants, that they also may say, There Is nothing but what
is good in the Liturgy.

I have read, that when the Ambassador of the Duke of Brandenburgh presented
his Mandate in the Council of Trent, he showed his Masters good Affection to,
and Reverence of the Fathers of that Synod, They answered very discreetly, That
the Council had heard his discourse with great content, especially that part of
it, wherein the Elector does submit himself to the Council, and promises to
observe the Decrees of it, hoping that ^is deeds will be answerable to his
word. But here (as the Historian observes) the Council pretended a promise of
Ten Thousand, when the bargain was but for Ten. The Ambassador proffered
Re^erence, and they accept of Obedience. And thus the Fathers of the Council of
Carthage, giving an account to Innocent I. that they had condemned C^lestius
and Pelagius, desired him to conform himself to their Declaration: He commends
them in his Answer, that remembering the old Tradition, and Ecclesiastical
Discipline, they had referred all to his Judgment, whence All ought to learn
whom to Absolve and whom to Condemn. An usual and pious allurement of the
Church of Rome, which yielding to the Infirmity of her Children, makes show to
believe, that they have performed their Duty. By the same Artifice would our
Enquirer wheedle the Non-conformists into a good mood, to acknowledge the
Liturgy to be good in the main, and that there are only some redundancies
which they would have taken away.

3. And now at last he will come home, and close to the purpose, That which I
chiefly intend (says he) is, that a great part of men have not their minds
Elevated above the Horizon of their Bodies, nor take an estimate of any thing,
but by its Impression upon their senses: from whence (say I) it must needs
follow, That most men Judge of the Excellency of a Religion, as it approves it
self to their Carnal Interests, and Ambitious Expectancies; and if that will
make to the purpose to prove, that popular injudiciousness is a Cause of
s^paration from the Church, let him make his best of it: some think it proves
the contrary.

Two things he will spend his Rhetoric upon as he goes along. The Excellency
of the Liturgy, and the Excellency of his own Preaching; which last we have had
enough of to sa^iety, if not to nauseousness, very lately.

The Excellency of the Liturgy lies, in being composed plainly, gravely, and
modestly, no Turgid or swelling words, no novelty of Phrase or Method, no
Luxurian^y of Wit or Fancy: And might not this have passed for proof of the
Excellency of the Homilies? If the plain Composition, the Gravity, the Modesty
of the Homilies, innocent of all turgid or swelling expressions, free from
novelty of phrase, or curiosity of m^thod, could not procure a reprieve, but
they are condemned to silence, and instead of them, we are all for Artificial
Composures, suggar'd phrase that will melt in the mouth; And meth^ such as
brings Foreigners to England to be instructed in it, Quaintness of Expression,
and Luxurianey of Wit and Fancy* why then was not the Liturgy a little lickt
over, and trimmed up more sprucely? But if those Characters of Plainness,
Gravity, Modesty, humble Expressions, Ordinary Language, be the Glory of the
Prayers. why not of the Preaching also? the old Homilies were too course Spun
for modern Ears to hear, the phrase too heavy and common, the method cryptic
and obscure; but Preaching is now more finical, and accommodated to the Itching
Ears of well-bred Christians, we are got into the mode of Lovedays Letters, and
Cassandra and Cleopatra; as if God did not understand strong lines, as well as
the Ladies, and as if we were not as much obliged to tell the People their
duty, as God our wants in small English.

Popular Rashness and Injudiciousness are great evils as it appeats; but how to
apply a proper and suitable Remedy to the evil is all the skill. And first, the
Church of Rome (says he) have a Cure for this; they appropriate all Judgment
to the Clergy and deal with the rest of Mankind as Sots and Idiots. But the
Church of England mak^s not her self the Mistress of Men's Faith, or imposes
upon their understandings; she ^eaches that our Savior has delivered the Mind
of God touching the points of Necessary Belief plainly, and in other lesser
matters she allows a Judgment of Discretion. And will not this Judgment of
Discretion, or Indiscretion become a cause of all those Divisions, Separations
and Schisms, of which so loud a peal has been rung in our Ears? And is not
this a New Name for Popular Rashness and Injudiciousness? Oh (says he) since
the peace of the Church often depends upon such Points as Salvation does not,
and ^nce in many of these every Man is not a Competent Judge. but must either
be ^n danger of being deceived himself, or deceiving others* or of necessity
(...) trust some body wiser than himself, she recommends as the safer way for
such private persons to compl^ w^ public determinations* and in so advising
she jointly consults the Peace of the Church, and the Quiet of Men's
Consciences. These ma^ters seem very Artificially put together, and the taking
them asunder will discover their weakness. 1. Let me have a solid Reason given,
why the Peace of the Church should be laid upon those things which Salvation
depends not upon? Is the Peace of the Church ^rown so cheap and vile that it
should be sold for things unnecessary? One while he cries up Peace so high, p.
108. That he protests, if a Man must suffer Martyrdom he thinks it equally
acceptable to God to lay down a Man's life for preservation of the Peace and
Unity of the Church, as in Testimony against flat Idolatry: Are they not to be
admired that value Peace more than their Lives, and yet will venture it upon
indifferent things? Are they not more to be admired, that extol Peace so
highly, and yet sacrifice it to their own mere wills and pleasures: But is not
this yet the greatest wonder, that Peace should depend o^ that which Salvation
does not; and yet he will sacrifice his Life for it, as soon as against that,
upon which his Eternal Damnation depends? 2. If Men be not Competent Judges of
their own Actions, what is become of that Judgment of Discretion, wherewith we
were even now gratified? Is this the Judgment of Discretion, to surrender our
Consciences upon Discretion? The Romanists, who appropriate all Judgment to
the Clergy, and deal with the rest of Mankind as Idiots and Sots, could have
said no more, then that Men are not Competent Iudg^ of their own good: And if
we may not be allowed a liberty to judge for our selves in those lesser matters
debatable amongst Christians; much less in those greater matters which they say
admit of no debate: And how much our Authors Cure is better than that of the
Romanists I know not; I think they are both worse then the Disease. 3. Why is
not the danger of trusting others, as great as trusting to the Word of God?
Mine Eyes may be presumed to see for my conduct as faithfully as another Man's;
and my own Conscience will probably be as faithful to my Eternal concerns as
any ones I could find. And I have tried it, that it is much easier to obtain a
moral certainty that I have the Mind and Will of God, then that I have grasped
the Mind of any Church from their most Authentic Articles, or Confessions of
Faith. 4. Why should others be troubled, that I am not so wise as they? It Is
none of my trouble that they use their liberty without dispising, whilst I
exercise that which God has given me without judging. If we must trust others
in composing Worship and Divine Service for us, Terms of Communion of
Christians, where is then the difference between That, and the Popish Implicit
Faith? This will make the People Sheep indeed, but silly ones I am sure; such
is my weakness, I can see no difference between Blind Obedience, and trusting
others with the determination of it; or between Implicit Faith, and trusting
others as the Reason of my Belief; either then here is no Remedy, or one worse
then the Disease: The Disease at worst is but to enjoy a liberty in those
things Christ left free; nor is there any necessity that freedom should be
(...); and the Remedy, to trust others blindfold with our Consciences, whom we
have no assurance will be over tender of them; and if we had* have no
Commission from Christ to entrust them any where but in his own hands.

But what now if the people be foolish, proud, and contentious; what remedy has
the Church (...)? Why she only declares them guilty of sin and cont^macy, and
casts them out of Communion But that if they be humble, and meek, and
peaceab^e, only cannot by searching, studying, praying, discoursing see the
lawfulness of the imposed Terms of Communion? Must the Church declare them
contumacious, and cast them out of Communion? It may tempt us to think that is
no Remedy of Gods prescribing, that deals alike with humble and pround, the
peaceable and contentious. But for all this demureness, I doubt there are other
Remedies besides a Declaration, other Weapons besides Paper Pellets. There is a
Significavit, a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo, de Har^tico Comburendo. An Oath
of Abjuration, a Warrant of Distress, if they submit not to those Impositions,
upon which Salvation depends not; and in their judgments, such as are sinful,
and then damnation is hazarded by them.

I have often admired the modesty of the Church of Rome: She never put any Man
to death: She never burnt any at a Stake: It Is not for Holy Men, Men of Peace
to shed Blood, to be Instruments of Cruelty; No, the Church only delivers them
over to the Secular Power, and what he does with them, how he treats them she
knows nothing: Thus having drawn in the Magistrate to do her Drudgery, she
wipes her Mouth, washes her Hands, and protests she is Innocent of the Blood of
these Men.

An Objection was timely foreseen that might be made against his Discourse, and
like a person that knew how to be friendly to himself, he has put it in
favorable and gentle Terms.

This will equally extend to all other Reformed Churches, as well as our own,
and might have brought forth all the evil we complain of, and impute to it in
former Ages as well as now; for the generality of the People were not much
wiser then now.

That is, the Protestant Churches have their Members as liable to mistake
beyond Sea, as ours on this side; they have Private Reason as well as we, and a
Judgment of Discretion too; and so had the Primitive Times too; Christians
then were equally in danger of being seduced by their own injudiciousness, and
yet the one continued in much peace, and the other still continues so, without
the Remedy of Imposing Mystical Ceremonies: Nay, to speak properly, without the
Disease of Impositions: The not imposing doubtful things as the Terms of
Communion, were with them the Prophylacticks of Schisms and Divisions, and the
imposing of them (which is strange) is the Therapeutick of Schisms and
Divisions, to which he answers two things.

1. That other Churches found the effects of Ignorance and Arrogance more or
less as well as we: To which might be returned; That they found it not in those
things which they left free; but if at any time they laid the weight of the
Churches peace upon unnecessaries, they found in proportion the same effects of
the same Cause, which we have found: But (says he) that was to be ascribed not
to the happiness of their Constitutions, but to the unhappiness of their
Conditions. I confess I am not altogether of his mind; it was mainly due to the
happiness of their Constitution there were fewer Contentions, because fewer
Bones of Contention; and less of Divisions, because they united upon a Scr^
ptural, and therefore secure bottom.

That the Church of Corinth needed a check for her Divisions, is very true, and
a smart one she deserved: And it is as true too; That the Apostle had not
Recourse to our Modern Remedies, to exert his Apostolical power, to silence the
Clamor by darting the Thunderbolt of Excommunication against the weaker Party;
and yet he had a far more specious pretense, then any Church Governors can now
justly Claim: His Apostolical Commission to Plant and Water Churches, which
would have commanded Reverence to his Person, and conciliated Authority to his
Determinations; and yet he either had no such power, or durst not use it, but
took the Healing way, tolerating things tolerable, and pressing them mutually
to Love and Peace under their various apprehensions about Mint, Anise and
Cummi^. But yet he thinks, That the Reason why Primitive Christians, whilst
under persecution, had one Heart and Mind, was, because they submitted their
private Fancies to public Safety: Which is only the assigning of an Imaginary
cause for a Real one. Primitive Christians, whilst surrounded with Adversaries,
were of one Heart and Mind in the main, and the true Reason was, because their
dangers and pressing fears had not yet let in that Prelatical Imposing Spirit
into the Guides of the Church, which Ease and Liberty afterward produced. And
though we dare not charge our Divisions upon Peace, Plenty and Liberty, which
are great Mercies to a sinful people; yet we would lay the Saddle upon the
right Horse, the blame at the right door; It Is not the injudiciousness of the
People, who are willing to be quiet, and accept of rest upon tolerable terms;
but the obstinacy of Clergymen, who make their own Wills, the reason of their
Injunctions, not considering that all men's Intellectuals are not of one size
and height; and yet as if Consciences were to be fooled with, Men's Souls
sported with, they necessitate the People either to act against their Light, or
to fall under the severe lash of a Poenal Statute.

2. That these Evils broke out no sooner (says he) is due to the contentment
generally took in their first Emerging out of the Darkness and Superstitions of
Popery: Very true! they were so full of Admiration at what God had done for
them; that they considered not what further to ask God to do for them: so
transported that they were out of Egypt, that they never considered how short
the Wilderness was of the promised Land; And hence he might have answered
himself, p. 13. If there be such a dangerous Affinity between the Church of
England and Rome, how came it to pass that Cranmer and Ridley, etc. laid down
their Lives in testimony to this against that? Rome was not built, nor will it
be destroyed in one day. Our first Martyrs laid down their Lives in Testimony
that Rome was guilty of dangerous Doctrines, but not that we had nothing
remaining that needed a Reformation.

2. A second cause is, That a great part of this Nation having been leavened
with Jewish Superstitious or Traditions, has thereby been indisposed to an
uniform reception of, and Perseverance in the Reformation of Religion held
forth by this Church.

When I first read the charge of Judaism brought in against the Dissenters, I
remembered what I had met with in the virulent Titles of some Lutheran Book:
Calvinus Iudaizans; Calvinianorum Nesterianismus; Calvine-papismus; No^us
Calvinistarum Deus; to which we may add, Calvine-Turcismus, and some others. I
began to cast about in my thoughts for the reason of such an Imputation: Have
they set up an Image of the Aaronical Priesthood? Have they their High-Prie^,
their inferior Pries^ and Levites, attired in the Linen Ephod? with all the
Accoutrements of the Aaronical Wardrobe? And that they may more exactly
symbolize therewith, have they provided for their Priests an Altar? settled
upon them a Levitical maintenance? and to carry on the parallel have they
erected Temples distinguished by sacred Apartments? Have they their Holy, and
most Holy place, Chancelled in for the greater Reverence of the sacred
Mysteries? to secure them from the Approaches of the profane and injudicious
Rabble? and have they all these enclosed within Holy Ground? And the rather
beacuse Dionysius assures us, That the Christians in his time, had solemn
Temples like the Jews, and the Chancel severed with special sanctifications
from the rest of the Church: whereas (says he) the Christians of the first Age
made their Assemblies both in such private places, and in such simplicity as
the Apostles did: I considered again, whether the Non-conformists had not
introduced a pompous padag^gie of Ccremonies* and imposed them upon the People?
whether they might not parhaps have instituted some Feasts and Holy Days, upon
an old Judaical account, as of the Circumcision, Purification? or whether they
had not appointed some Office, or solemn special Service for Lustration of
Women after Childbirth, in correspondence with the Jewish Purifications of
Women after their uncleanness? whether they observed any sacred time Analogical
to the Passover, or had any Footsteps of the ancient distinction of Meats into
clean and unclean? Or any thing that might give cause of suspicion, that they
had by a (...) revived Moses his extraordinary Quadragesimal Abstinence? or
whether they introduced Temple instrumental Music, whether loud sounding
Cymbals or Organs, having such good proof in Durantus his Rationale, from that
Text, Let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord! And when I could find
no track of reason for the charge upon these accounts, I went to enquire of the
Enquirer.

And it does appear (by his talk) that a more secret and mysterious Judaisme
then all this, has of old been rooted in this Nation, that no Ecclesiastical
Pick-axes have been able to extirpate it; for (says he) the greatest difficulty
that Austin the Monk found here, was to bring the Inhabitants from the
observation of Easter, and some other Rites according to the manner of the
Jewish and Eastern Churches; to that of the Roman and Western: and the doing
it, cost the lives of twelve hundred Monks, who stubbornly opposed his
Inovations.

This Austin was certainly a Formal Fop as ever this poor Nation was harassed
with. Two third parts of his whole Ministerial or Apostolical work, was
Ceremony; for upon these conditions he propounded Peace to the Britains. If you
will in these three things obey me, In celebrating Eastar in due time: In
Baptizing according to the manner of the Roman Church, and in Preaching the
Word to the Nation; all other Ceremonies, Fashions and Customs, though they be
contrary to ours, yet we will willingly bear with them. Was not this a person
of great moderation? But why not condescend in those two, as well as all the
rest? Oh, its the Religious policy of Rome, to reserve as much of Ceremony, as
like a Quit-rent, will serve to Recognize the Papal Sovereignty; and that point
of Sovereignty alone will in due time fetch in the other. To own that Churches
power to impose, ics Jurisdiction to award terms of Communion, though but in
one single instance, is the delivery of a Twig and a Turf, which give her
Livery and Seis^n of the Conscience in the name of the whole Man. But if
Austins Reformation was so Ceremonious in it self, and so bloody in its
effects, which are, if not inseparably, yet commonly linked together: If he
could have spared their blood. they could well have spared his Ceremonies.

But was this Austin so great a Saint, that he must be quoted for the famous
Reformer of Judaisme? or were those Martyrs of Bangor such wicked Jews, that
the Non-conformists should be their Spawn? No, This Austin made our Ancestors
only Romanists, he found them Christians before; and perhaps of a better, and
more generous race of Religion, then that he engrafted upon the old Stock. Then
it seems that Christians, however Iudaizing in one instance, may be of a Nobler
temperature then an old doting Ceremonymonger, that for a mere Caprice, would
mingle their Blood with their Sacrifices: But how does the Example come home to
the purpose? Austin was mad upon his Ceremonies? The Britains were tenacious of
their Easter: wherein are Dissenters concerned in their quarrels, who neither
dogmatize with the Quartodecimanes or Quinto-decimanes? Let the one plead
Traditions from Papias and St John, with the Eastern, the other pretend the
Pope and St. Peter, with the Western Christians, we can be contend they should
scuffle it out, about Goats-Wool, or Moonshine in the Water.

Our Enquirer nevertheless, will give us an Anatomy of Nonconformity, and lay
open their principles to view, that it shall appear that a vein of Iudaism^
runs through the whole Body of Dissenters.

1. The first Vein is: Their great Hypothesis is, That nothing is lawful in the
Service of God, but what is expressly prescribed in the Scripture. Which
proposition needs many limitations, before the Dissenters will Father it, and
when it is so limited, they will challenge him to prove, that there is the least
Capillary of Judaism in it: And 1. If by Nothing he understand no mere
Circumstance, as of general time, place, he may know what they have told the
World a thousand times, they hold many such things lawful, which are not
prescribed particularly in the Scripture; but if by Nothing he will understand
no Ceremony, being an outward and visible sign of inward and invisible Grace;
they do assert, that no such thing is lawful in Worship, but what is prescribed
in the Scripture. 2. If by in the Service of God he mean, only an action
accompanying Gods Worship, not of Religious Application, but such as is common
to civil and ordinary affairs, they deny it any principle of theirs, that
nothing may be done in time of Worship, by the Worshippers, that is not
commanded by the Scriptures. But if by in the Service of God, be meant, so in
it, that it is part of it, they own it to be their avowed Judgment, that
nothing is lawful in the Service of God, as a part of worship, which is not
commanded by God himself. 3. If by expressly commanded, be intended, what is
literally and Syllabi cally so; they disown it as any Hypothesis of theirs: But
if by expressly commanded be intended what is either (...), or by just
consequence derived thence, they are ready to justify it without fear of
Judaizing, That nothing, no outward visible sign of inward and invisible Grace,
is lawful in the Service of God, as a part of that Service, which is not
expressly, or by just and clear consequence prescribed in the Scripture, not
excluding whatever help from the Light of Nature, to give us a fuller prospect
into the Mind of God in his Word. Nor ought this to be stigmatized as a
principle peculiar to the Jews, but common to them, with all other true
Worshippers of God, from the beginning of the World. To impose a part of
Worship, is not only an Imposition upon Man, but upon God. The Imposer does not
only compel Man to offer, but God to Accept what is offered: for seeing the End
of All Worship is Acceptance with him whom we Worship: this End must influence
our whole Worship. And this is supposed by the Church of England, who prays,
(or invites to pray) for true Repentance and the Holy Spirit, that those things
may please him which we do at this present: Now it is neither our own Fancies,
nor the Will of Men, but the Word of God that is a Competent Declaration of
what will please our Creator. Dissenters plead further: That the same God,
that Jealous God, who Commanded the Jews not to add to Gods Commands, commanded
it upon Reasons common to all Mankind. It was well urged against the Jews by
the Learned Author of Orig, Sacr. p. 214. That the meaning of that strict
Prohibition, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. was no other, then that Men should not of their own
Heads offer to find out new ways of Worship, as Jerobo^m did; but that Gods
Revelation of his own Will, in all its different degres, was to be the Adequate
Rule of the way and ^rts of his own Worship. And I would fain know of the Jews,
whether their own severe and strict prohibition of things, not at all forbidden
in the Law of God, came not near the adding to Gods Law? Again, God having
given no rule to direct us in excogitating and imposing new Worship, it is
impossible but we should mistake; or if we should hit now and then upon some
happy contrivance, we must thank his blind Goddess fortune, rather then the
fruitfulness of our own Understandings: And this loose principle would make the
World a Pantheon, or encumber it with a (...), and would multiply Religions
according to the multitudes of the Churches, as they of old multiplied their
Idols, according to the number of their Cities. They do also still believe from
Heb. 3. That Christ was faithful to him that appointed him the Lord of the
Church, in making all necessary provisions for the increasing, confirming, and
perfecting their Graces, for their Comfort, Edification, and all spiritual
necessities, without any new Additional Contrivances for those ends: Nay they
say yet further; that as these new ways and parts of Worship, do impeach
Christ's faithfulness in discharge of his trust, so they do invade his Regal
Office too, in making new Laws to bind the Conscience; An usurpation which no
Earthly Prince would endure; For when a Prince has Established his Laws, though
he supposes that the Inferior Magistrates must have time and place to execute
them in, which are left at liberty according as emergency in particular cases
shall invite to determine them, yet he allows them to make no new Laws, upon
pretense of necessity to execute the old ones, nor to institute new
Observances, under color of more effectual managing old Customs: And it seems
reasonable that the People should not practice what Ministers may not Preach;
nor the Church impose what it cannot command in Christ's Name; but it can only
use Christ's Name to urge whatsoever he has commanded them; nay the Enquirer,
when perhaps he did not think of after mischief, told us p. 4. That we incur
St. Paul's Anathema, which he denounces against him (whosoever he be, nay ^f an
Angel from Heaven) that shall Preach any other Doctrine, then what has been
received: And if the Church has received any such command to invent and impose
Ceremonies, she can tell us where others may read it as well as her self. And
to conclude at present, they say, That this one Principle granted, That the
Church may impose upon her Members whatever is not expressly forbidden, does
either put the Body of Christians under a more heavy Yoke then that of the
Jews, or else torment them with fears, that they may be so: And indeed
supposing this exorbitant power to impose parts of Worship or Ceremonies, or
any of these things in Debate, the condition of the Jews was much more
desirable in this respect then that of Christians. For,

1. Their Lawgiver was Iehova, who had an absolute and unlimited power over
them, and they that are Gods Creatures will not grudge to be his Servitors: He
was Lord paramount of Worship and Conscience, and might he not be allowed to do
what he would with his own? He is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh and shall
they not live in subjection to him, who expect to live in a Kingdom with him?
Since there is a necessity of obedience, it sweetens it unspeakably, that it is
both Interest and Privilege to obey; and that he who requires obedience is
their God, a God whose Will is the Rule of Righteousness; and therefore the
most satisfactory Reason of his Commands, and his Creatures Duty; And Implicit
Obedience is then Honorable, when God calls for it.

2. As their Law giver had (...), Authority to Command, so he had (...), a
power to influence the weakest Elements. He was (...), and had absolute
Sovereignty, and (...), one of Almighty power, which was a double encouragement
to the observers of his precepts: For 1. He was hereby able to secure the
Obedient in his Service; upon which Account Christ claims the Legislative Power
over Conscience. ^am. 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver. who is able to save, and
to destroy, 2. By this Power he could render efficacious these Rudiments, which
in themselves were but beggarly Ordinances: and produce by them Spiritual and
Supernatural effects. And I am (...) the rather to think that God has not
committed the ^ral Power of instituting, much less the Sovereign Power of
imposing Religious Ceremonies and Observances, because he has not communicated
that other Power to bless their own appointments, ^or invigorate them with
success: God may well be allowed to Command what he pleases, seeing be can and
will bless whatsoever he Commands.

3. Their Lawgiver was Faithful, one to whom they might securely commit their
Consciences, one with whom they might ^ith the greatest satisfaction of Heart
commit their Souls; He that has a sole right to any thing will be faithful in
keeping it, because it is his own, and who may better be entrusted with the
Guardianship of Worship and all Religion, then their Owner? But though we ought
not to be Censorious, yet we may, and ought to exercise some prudence and
caution to whom we resign our selves in matters of Religion, though the best of
Men, not knowing how they may use us. but well knowing, that we may more easily
Captivate ourselves to the Will of an Imposer, then being once enthralled,
vindicate our selves into our Christian Liberty: Or if for no other Reason, yet
for this, because they are but Men.

4. The Jewish Yoke was a determinate Yoke: It was Onus, but Determinatum. A
Burden, but a stinted Burden: It Is no small alleviation to the Laborers toil,
when he knows his work; to the Traveller, that he knows his Journeys end: The
fews had their work before them, but upon the Modern Principle: The burden of
Christians is Indefinite, which is but a better word for Infinite: The Truth
is, in these Humane Impositions we see the beginning, but no Man knows the end
of them; it is a Nemo scit. Our load must be bounded with no other Limits then a
Churches Will; and that Will perhaps bounded with no other then its Power,
since it is Canonized for good Divinity, That the Church may impose whatever is
Decent, and that the Church is Judge of what is Decent; though who the Church
is, is not so certain.

5. Their Lawgiver was one of known and approved Tenderness, who either
apportioned his work to their strength, or their strength to his work; he
fitted the Yoke to their Neck, and their Neck to the Yoke. The main thing that
renders Christ's own Yoke so easy, his Burden so light, is, that as his
Authority imposes, so his strength supporta. Men may lay heavy burdens on our
Shoulders. but where there is most need, cannot touch them with one of their
Fingers.

6. Their Lawgiver was one, who in all his Impositions consulted their own
good and benefit, as well as exercised his own Authority: The Jews wrought hard
indeed, but their work had much of wages in it. The design of their Mystical
Rites and Ceremonies directed them to a Savior. Legal Administrations well
ordered, were Gospel Privileges: Before Christ came Ceremonies were
Illustrantia, such as discovered the Person, Nature, Office and Grace of the
Messiah; a Candle is better then no Light; but to us they are all Obscurantia,
such as darken the state of Christianity. As before the Sunrising, the
Prodromous Clouds, whose edges are fringed with Gold, comfort us with the hopes
of an approaching greater Light, which when the Sun is up, do but darken the
Horizon. Thus did Ceremonies illustrate Christ at the Annuntiation, but obscure
him at his Advent.

It will be needless further to Vindicate the Dissenters: I shall leave them to
the Enquirers Patronage; who by the same Reason, that he justifies the Church
of England from Popery, will I hope clear the Non-conformists from Judaism, p.
12. All (says he) is not to be accounted Popery which is held or practiced by
the Church of Rome: Nor (say I) is all to be accounted Judaism which was either
the principle or practice of the Jewish Church, p. 13. Nor is it reasonable to
say such a thing is received from the Church of Rome, because it is there to be
found, unless it be found no where else.

And as little Reason to say the Dissenters have received this Principle from
the Jews. [That no Worship is lawful (for that is their Principle) but what is
prescribed by the Scripture] unless it were found no where else. But this was a
Principle so clear in the Light of Nature, that Numa the great Ritualist of
Heathen Rome, durst not hope that ever his Ceremonies would ever ob^ein amongst
a people that had Fyes in their Heads, unless he had, or pretended to have, a
Conference with his Goddess Aegeria. Thus the Palladium of Troy, that Mystic
Ceremony, in which the Fate of their City was wrapped up, is supposed to have
come down from Minerva; the famous Image in Diana's Temple, 'Acts 19. 35. is
supposed to be (...), fallen from Jupiter; and whilst the World was filly
enough to be imposed upon by those little Artifices, we had scarce a New
Shrine, Altar, place of Pilgrimage erected, but upon pretense of some rising
from the Dead, or an Angel from Heaven, or a Letter from the Virgin Mary, or
some such Pious Frauds and Religious Cheats, which the Priests had at their
Fingers ends.

Let us now consider the Enquirers Discourse upon this Principle. That all
absolutely necessaries are so determined, we readily grant, (says he) and that
all those Rites prescribed by our Savior are necessary to be observed, we will
yield them; but that nothing is lawful but what is to be found so prescribed,
we utterly deny. And so do we! Let that end the Controversy: When Rethoricians
have flanted it out in fine Language, and Ruffled a little in Phrase, apposite
words and expressions they have satisfied their Office, and are not obliged by
the Rules of their Art, either to state the Question, or speak to it: Something
may be practiced which is not prescribed that we grant; but from something to
every thing is too great a Leap for Bucephalus: From practicing to prescribing
is another large stride; from Circumstances to Ceremonies is a third; from
Civil things to Sacred is one more; from Indifferent to Necessary Conditions of
Church Communion may go for another; and from the common Accidents that attend
the Worshippers as Men, to Parts of worship, are Inferences which we can
neither make to lead or drive.

2. We come now to a second Judaical Principle: That all Princes and Lawgivers
are bound to conform the Municipal Laws of their several Dominions to the
Institutions of Moses. This indeed has a strong taint of Jewish Leaven in it;
which they who plead so Zealously for the Ius Divinum of Tithes, and Holiness
of Places, because Moses once put off his Shoes may do well to advise upon;
the Non-conformists for ought I know are little concerned in it. We grant that
there is no necessity that the Temporal Sanction even of the Moral Law it self,
should be the same under the Gospel, that it was under the Administration of
Moses: That the Violaters of the Lords days Holy Rest should be stoned, as the
infringer of the Sabhath was of old; the Adulterers should be punished with
Death, or a Blasphemer endure the same now which then was exacted. Lawgivers
do consider the tempers and dispositions of their Subjects in these matters; we
are no further concerned herein then to pray, that they who moderate the
Affairs of the Empires of this World, may be directed with Wisdom from above,
may order all things in a subserviency to his Glory by whom they Reign, and the
public peace, welfare and prosperity.

3. A Third Instance is in Excommunication. Which (says he) they hold must be
by a Synod or Presbytery, and the Prince as well as the People must be subject
to the Sentence. Here are several Questions that invite our serious debate; as
1. What is the proper Seat of the power of Excommunication? 2. Who are the
proper Objects of this Power? 3. Whether to fix the power of Excommunication be
a Judaical Principle? And 4. Whether a Prince may come under the Edge of that
Sword? Any one of which would require more room then I have allotted my self to
turn in: What I shall say is this.

1. That the Synod or Presbytery are the Seat of Excommunication, carries as
fair proof at least, as the Chancellor who is a Layman, or at best a Deacon of
no Scripture Institution, can show for himself by Divine Right.

2. That all scandalous persons are liable to that Censure, is true in the
general, but that it may not be executed upon a Supreme Magistrate, arises from
peculiar Maxims of Government, upon which the safety of a Kingdom depends: I
know not that this is a Principle of the N. C. for my part I disown it.

3. That this was a Jewish Principle to excommunicate their Kings, I do not
certainly know, nor date positively determine: That they received any such
standing Law from God I do not find: That a High Priest did once actually
separate a King upon the score of his Leprosy, we read, and that others
perhaps would not do as much if a Prince pleased not their Humors we have no
security: I should shrowdly suspect their Inclinations this way, whoever they
were, that inse^ed this Doctrine into our Bibles; which we find in the Contents
of the 149. Psalm. The Prophet exhorts to Praise God, for that Power he has
given to the Church to Rule the Consciences of Men: Which they refer to v. 5.
and the following. Let the Saints be joyful in Glory; let them sing aloud upon
their Beds. Let the high Praises of God be in their Mouth, and a two edged
Sword in their Hand; To execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishments
upon the People: To bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters
of Iron. If this be the Power God has given the Church over the Consciences of
Men, the Non-conformists did not insert it, and wish it may be expunged the
Bible.

4. He must by no means omit their Superstitions about the Lords day; which
must be called a Sabbath too, though such Name is no where given it; either in
the New Testament, or any An^: Writer that he knows of. Here are two Branches,
the first de N^mine, the second de Re.

1. De Nomine; whether the Lord's Day may be called a Sabbath, especially with
the usual Epithete, The Christian Sabbath? That it must be so called (as he
falsifies) the N. C. assert not: That it may be so called, they are willing to
enter a sober discourse with him when he is at leisure. A Sabbath in general,
signifies no more then a Day of Rest. And he that owns the day may be called
the Lord's Day, must needs own it to be a resting day, and by consequence a
Sabbath day; and the greatest fault herein is, that it is good in English, but
stark naught in Hebrew. Nay there is somewhat more will follow, This day of
which we speak, is called the Lord's Day. Rev. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the
Lord's Day. And the reason of the Appellation is this, because the Lord Jesus
has a special interest and propriety in that day: As the great standing
Ordinance of the Gospel is called the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. because it was
instituted by Him, and was to be devoted to Communion with him; so this day is
called the Lord's Day, because it was determined by him, and ought to be
dedicated to him in his Service and Worship, that we may approve our selves
eminently the Lords Servants, upon that day which is eminently the Lord's Day.
And if so, it will challenge the Title, not only of a day of Rest, but Holy
Rest: And if Men were not swarming full of Crotchets and Idle Whimseys, and
Superstitious Dotages, they would never scruple to call that a Holy Sabbath
day, which they must confess a Holy resting day.

But how came this precise qualm over our Enquirers heart, that he is so
skittish at the word Sabbath, because forsooth it is not given the Day in the
New Testament? They have some singular privilege, and prerogative surely, that
may institute what Officers, what Offices they please, though neither Name nor
Thing be found there, nor print nor mark of the least Foot-step, when the poor
Non-conformists may not use indifferently an innocent word, which signifies no
more in it self, then he will acknowledge to be found there.

But how is this a point of Judaism; or how one of the nearer causes of
separation? If it be, we may confidently say we have imbibed both from the
Liturgy of the Church, which teaches the Minister to rehearse the Fourth
Commandment. Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy; and then enjoins us all
to pray, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law; but
if this Word, this Dactrine, be of such pernicious a contagion, as to insect us
with Judaism, and Nonconformity; we have need of another, miserere ^i Deus!
for keeping it.

That this name Sabbath, applied to the Christian Holy Day of Rest, is found in
Ancient Writers, I shall not urge. Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. Let every one of us
keep the Sabbath spiritually, not in bodily case, (only) but in the study of
the Law. Not the Author of the Sermons de Tempore, (none of Austins, for any
man's word will go further then his) for so we rightly sanctify the Lords
Sabbath, as the Lord has said. In it thou shall do no manner of work; but this
I shall say, that he that denies it to be a Day of Holy Rest, it is no great
matter what he calls it. And he that owns it such, must be most rediculously
obstinate, that denies it may properly be so called.

2 We come to the dispute De Re. And first he charges the N. C. That the
Lord's Day amongst them, must have all the Nicety of Observation that the Jewish
Sabbath had: and which is yet worse such Observation thereof is made one of the
principal parts of Religion.

What the Non-conformists hold and practice in this point, is so well known
from their Writings and Conversations, that no man can possibly slander them,
but he must do it against his Conscience; which had the Enquirer attended to
it, would have tought him other Language: what was the practice of the best
Christians who lived up in any good measure to the Holiness of their
Profession, that is the practice of the Non-conformists; and wherein they come
short, have cause to be humbled in the sight of God: If any Ind^viduals have
added any Jewish Austeri^ies, or invented any Superstitious severities to make
the day a Legal Yoke, we wish they may be no more favoura^ly dealt with, then
those other Additions that have been made to Religion.

For the public Service of the day, I shall give the Reader a piece of Clemens
Romans lib. 2. cap. 59. On the Lord's Day frequent more carefully the Temple of
the Lord, that ye may praise God who made all things by Jesus Christ; whom he
sent unto us, and suffered him to dye for us, and raised him from the dead; for
what can excuse him with God, who meets not to hear the saving Word of God
concerning the Resurrection. On which day, we pray thrice, standing, remembering
him who after three days rose again.

For the private observation of the day, the same Author lib. 5. cap. 9. thus.
We admonish you, Brethren and Fellow Servants, that you fly vain words and
filthiness, pleasant jests, and (...). for on the Lords days, which are our
days of Rejoicings, we do not permit you to do or speak any thing not savoury;
for the Scripture s^h, serve the Lord with fear.

St. Hierom commends the Egyptian Monks, that they designed the Lords days
wholly to Prayer, and reading the Holy Scriptures. The Author of the Sermons De
tempore. This day is called the Lord's Day, that in it abstaining from all
earthly works, and worldly pleasures, we should only give our selves to the
service of the Lord: Let us therefore Brethren, observe the Lords day, and
sanctify it, as it was commanded them of old concerning the Sabbath. If our
Enquirer had the trimming up of this Author, he had dressed him up for a
Marane, a baptized Jew. Chrysostom. on Genesis 2. God from the beginning did
insinuate unto us this instruction, to set apart, and separate one whole day in
the Circle of every Week, for spiritual exercises; And in Homil. 5. on Math.
Let us prescribe this as an unmovable Law to our selves, to our Wives and
Children, to set aside one day of the Week, and that wholly to hearing, and
laying up of things heard. Isidore Hispalensis: The Apostles therefore ordained
the Lord's Day to be kept with Religious Solemnities, because in it our Redeemer
rose from the Dead, which was therefore called the Lord's Day, that resting on
the same from all Earthly ^ts, and temptations of the World, we might intend
Gods holy Worship, giving this day, due Honor for the hope of the Resurrection
we have therein.

But because our Enquirer admires the Piety of former Ages in this our Britain,
I shall come a little home, and see what were the public Constitutions of our
own Nation. Leg. Inae. cap. (...). An. 692. Si servus operetur die Dominied per
praecep^ domine sui, sit liber; and Dominus emendet 308. ad Witam: si^servus
sine testimonio Domini sui operetur. Corium perdat, (i. e. vapulet) si liber
operetur ipso die, sine iussu Domini sui, perdat libertatem: If a Servant work
on the Lord's Day at his Masters Command, let him be free, and his Master be
fined thirty shillings, If a Servant without his Masters Order do any work, let
him be whipped. If a freed Man work on that day, without the Command of his
Master, let him lose his Freedom.

Council. Bergham, cap. 10. An. 697. Si in vespera praecedente Diem solis,
postquam sol occubuit, autin vespera praecedente Diem Lunae, post occasum
solis, servus ex mandato Domini sui opus aliquod servile egerit, Dominus factum
octaginta solidis Luito. If a Servant on the Evening before Sunday, after
Sunset, or on the Evening before Monday, after Sunset, shall do any servile
work by Order of his Master, let his Master pay for his fault 4 pounds, c. 11.
If a Servant on those days shall travel, let him pay to his Master si^
shillings, or be whipped, c. 12. If a Freeman be guilty of the same offense,
let him be liable to the Pillory.

Excerpt. Egb. Archiepiscopi Eborac, An. Chr. 750, c. 36. God the Creator of
all things made Man on the sixth d'ay, and upon the Sabbath he rested from all
his Labors, and sanctified the Sabbath for the future signification of the
sufferings of Christ, and his rest in the Grave; He did not rest because he was
weary, who made all things without Labor, whose Omnipotency cannot be wearied;
and he so rested from his Labors, that he made no other Creatures then he made
before; He made no other Creatures afterward, but whatsoever he made, he makes
them every year, to the end of all time; He creates men in their Souls and
Bodies; living Creatures and Beasts, without Souls; The Soul of Man is given by
God, and he renews his Creatures, as Christ says in the Gospel, My Father
works hitherto, and I work; Christ suffered for us in the sixth Age of the
World, and on the sixth day, and reformed lost Man by his Sufferings, and the
Miracles which he wrought, He rested in the Sepulcher on the Sabbath Day and
Sanctified the Lordsday by his Resurrection; for the Lord's Day, is the first
day of the New World, and the day of the Resurrection of Christ; and therefore
it is Holy, and we ought to be his, spiritually keeping a Sabbath Day, Sabbatum
Sabbatizantes

Leg. Presbyt. Northumbr. Mereaturam in Die solis exercere, and Curias allicubi
celebrare prohibemus, opus etiam quodlibet, and omnimodam vectionem, sive in
plaustris, sive in equis, sive in aliis oneribus ferendis, Qui contra hoc
deliquerit solvat, -- We forbid any to Trade, or keep open Courts on the
Sunday, and also all other work whatsoever, and all manner of Carriages,
whether with Carts or Horses, or in bearing any other Burdens: he that
transgresses this Decree shall pay -- nisi sit viator necessitate compulsus,
vel ob cibi inopiam, aut ex caus^ evitandi mimicos. Except he be a Traveller
compelled by necessity, either by the want of Food, or to avoid the Enemies.
Reader, whether this be Judaism or no, I shall leave to thy more sedate
judgment; but it is a mighty strong temptation rather to be one of those old
Jews, then one of the new Christians.

Leg. Eccles Canut. An. Christi 1032. Die quidem Dominico, mercata
concelebrari, Populive conventus Agi, (nisi stagitante necessitate) planissime
vetamus. Ipso Die sacrosancto, praeterea a venationibus, and opere terreno
prorsus omni, Quisque abstineto. We do absolutely forbid all Markets, and
Assemblies of the People to be kept on the Lord's Day, (except in case of urgent
necessity) and moreover. Let every one refrain from Hunting, and from all other
earthly business upon that sacred day.

A little now for diversion let us step over the Seas, and look into the temper
of the times, under the Reign of Charles the Great: Statuimus secundum quod
Dominus in lege praecepit, ut Opera Servilia diebus Dominicis non Agantur,
sicut, and bonae memoriae Genitor meus (Pipinus) in suis Synodallbus edictis
mandavit, i. e. Quod nec viri Ruralia opera exerceant, nec in vinea colenda,
nec in campo Arando, vel foenum secando, vel sepem ponendo, vel in sylvis
stirpare, vel arbore caedere, vel in Petris laborare; nec comus construere, nec
hortum laborent, nec ad placita conveniant, nec venationem exerceant: We
ordain, as also the Lord has commanded in the Law, that no servile works be
done on the Lord's Day. As also our Father of happy memory, in his Synodal
Edicts has commanded, that is to say, That Men neither exercise the labors of
their Farms, neither in dressing Vineyards, nor in Plowing, nor in Mowing
Grass, or in laying a Hedge, or to grub up, or cut down Trees, or to labor in
Quarries, or to build a House, or to order a Garden, or to hold pleas, or to
practice Hunting. Item foeminae opera Textilia non exerceant, nec Capillent;
vestitus non consuant, vel Acupictile faciant, nec lanam Carpere, nec linum
battere, nec public vestimenta lavare, nec verveces tondere, habeant licitum,
ut omnimodis. Honor and Requres diei Dominicae servetur, Let not Women practice
Weaving; let them not take pains about their Hair, nor mend their Clothes, nor
work Needle Work or Point; nor Card Wool, nor Heckle Flax, nor wash Clothes
openly, nor Shear Sheep, That the Honor and Rest of the Lord's Day may by all
means be secured. Constable. Carol. M. fol. 32 It will be time now to draw to a
conclusion, when I have noted:

1. It looks like a piece of great disingenuity to Bait Dissenters like Jews,
for the indifferent use of the word Sabbath, because not found in the New
Testament, and at the same time to worry them with Barking words, and Biting
penalties, for not practicing upon that very day. Humane Ceremonies, which
(name and thing) are perfectly strangers to the New Testament.

2. It seems so far from a next cause of Nonconformity, Religiously to observe
The Lord's Day, that it were rather an Allurement to Conformity, when we observe
the Church so strictly commands her Children in the Rubric, After every
Commandment, Kneeling to ask God mercy for their transgression of the same. And
if the Dissenters were of this Enquirers principles, they must be obliged to be
Non-conformists, till the Liturgy in that particular should be Reformed.

3. Its highly disingenuous to upbraid them with the less strictness of some of
the Reformed Churches abroad in this one point, when they are not allowed to
vouch their principles and practices in twenty others.

4. It deserves a most serious Enquiry, whether any Church did long maintain
any splendor of Practical Religion, that grew remiss and loose in the
Conscientious Observation of the Lord's Day.

5. Whether the strict and Religious attendance to the Worship of God on that
Day, be a cause of Nonconformity or no, is uncertain; but this is certain,
that the loose and formal observation of it, has been a direct and immediate
cause of that Atheism and Profaneness, and perhaps of those Judgments which
have broken in upon us.

6. It ought to be matter of serious Humiliation and Repentance, both to the
Conformists and Non-conformists, that between them both, they have suffered
Piety to decline in their hands, by a visible degeneracy from the strictness of
former time, in Sanctifying Gods name on his Holy Day.

7. It ought to be considered, That they who of late times have written against
the Divine Right of that day, have yet spoken so honorably of, and pleaded
for, the Holy use of the day, as will justify greater Reverence to the day,
then I fear the Non-conformists are guilty of. The Learned Brerewood, Tract. 1.
p. 47. I confess, It is meet that Christians should on the Lord's Day abandon
all wordly affairs, and dedicate it wholly to the Hunour of God. The B. of Ely,
p. 255. Devout Christians, who are so piously affected, as that on the
Lords-days, and other Holy Days, they do resolve to retire, and sequester
themselves from secular business, and ordinary pleasures and delights, to the
end they may more freely attend the Service of Christ, and Apply their Minds to
Spiritual and Heavenly Meditations, are to be commended and encouraged; for the
doing thereof is a work of Grace and Godliness, and acceptable to God.

8. It would be enquired, whether it have not a greater Tincture of Judaism, to
enjoin other days for Holy Days, which have no f^ting in Gods word, then to
spend the Lord's Day in pursuit of those things which concern our Everlasting
peace, which is clearly warranted thereby: B. Andrews urges this against Trask.
The Apostles kept their Meetings on that day; on that day they were (...), i.
e. held their sacred Synaxes, their solemn Assemblies: to preach, to pray, to
celebrate the Lords Supper, (...), The Lords Supper, on the Lord's Day; for
these two words only, the Day and the Supper, have the Epithete of (...), in
the Scripture, to show that its alike in both.

5. A Fifth Instance of their Judaical Principle is their Doctrine of Absolute
Predestination.

This Doctrine has perplexed the Enquirer beyond measure, he would mention it
every where willingly, but knows not where to mention it pertinently: It was
lately one of the Pretended, or Apochryphal, and now its become a Real and
Canonical, nay a near and immediate Cause, or at least the just sixth part of a
Cause of separation.

I shall for once suppose, that all the Non-conformists are Sublapsarians: Now
let him show me that Article or Doctrine to which this Church requires
subscription, relating to the Decrees of God, to which a Sublapsarian cannot
freely subscribe.

The 17 Art, of the Church speaks without question her fense in this matter:
Predestination to life, is the Everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the
foundations of the World was laid, he has constantly decreed by his Counsel
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in
Christ ou^ of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting Salvation.

It were more for this Gentleman's comfort and credit, to write a serious and
Compassionate Enquiry into the Pretended and Real, the Remote and near Causes
of his own conformity to that Doctrine which he so pleasantly derides. And with
what Engines, Machines, Screws and Pulleys he could hale his Conscience to a
Subscription: The old Device was good. Lingud juratus sum, mente juravi nihil:
It Is a happy freedom of Spirit, a blessed enlargement of mind to subscribe any
thing, and believe nothing.

Two things there are which ought to have been cleared; first, that the
Doctrine of predestination is a Jewish Principle, secondly, that it is a Cause,
or a piece of a Cause of Nonconformity.

For the former he makes it out thus: He that seeks the source of so odd an
Opinion, can in my ^ind pitch no where more probably, then upon the absolute
Decree of God to favor the Posterity of Abraham for his sake: Alas Poor Man!
And had the Church of England (thinks he) no more wit, then to talk of an
Everlasting Purpose before the foundation of the World, of a constant Decree to
deliver from Curse and Damnation some that he had chosen out of Mankind, and
bring them to Everlas^ing Salvation, from such a Ridiculous Ground? But the
difficulty was, how to make this a piece of Judaism; and when Men set
themselves insuperable Tasks, they must rub through them as they are able.

The Second will yet be more difficult: For many Conformists have been, and are
Sublapsarians. and some Non-conformists Subter-Sublapsarians: And the Enquirer
told us p. 7. That the Articles of the Doctrine of our Church do with such
admirable prudence and wariness handle these Points, (the Five Points) as if
particular respect was had to these Men, and care taken that they might
Abundare sensu suo. So necessary it was our Author should confute his own
Contradictious Cavils!

Well! Whether this Church, the Jewish Church, the Non-conformists, or any, or
all, or none of them be of this opinion, yet it is a most monstrous one! For
(says he) The N. T. has often assured ^s, that at the great day God will judge
the World in Righteousness, and that without respect of Persons, he will render
to every one according to his Works. Wonderful! And are the Sublapsarians all
this while to seek, how God may be righteous in the Great Day; if he Derceed to
give Grace to some Men which he never owed them, and left others to perish
under the Fruits of their own Apostasy and unbelief?

6. The last Instance is their superstitious observation and interpretation of
Prodigies.

The Works of God are all Admirable, those of Creation Glorious, those of
Providence Mysterious; we have reason to Revere his Greatness in all that he
does them; his Wisdom in all, in that he can; his Goodness, in that he will
make them Bow to subserve his own Counsels, and Purposes, in working together
for good in them that love him. To fetch our Creed from that Book of Providence
we allow not, it is well if we can make Gods use of them to awaken a sleepy
World to Repentance.

The greatest Prodigy that has startled me of late, has been a Story that many
tell us: That in several places in the Nation the Graves have been seen to
Open, and many old Heretics to have risen, and walked, and talked, and
preached, and printed Books; whom we verily believed to have been as dead and
rotten as their Heresies. Thus I remember Lirinensis calls Coelestius,
Prodigiosum Pelagij Discipulum, That Prodigious Scholar of Pelagius: Something
was useful to have been said about Prodigies, and it must come in here, or no
where, and therefore let it pass for a Jewish Opinion, and a sixth part of one
whole Cause of Nonconformity.

[3] He reckons Pre^udice amongst the causes of our distractions, and let it
pass for a third: There is a sound sense, in which our Enquirers Notions may
be very true, could we be but so happy as to hit out.

Tertullian complained sadly of those insuperable prejudices against the
Christian Religion, under which they all gro^ed. Non s^lus aliquod in Causa
est, sed Nomen. It was the Name of a Christian that was their greatest Crime.
Bonus Vir Cajus S^jus tantum quod Christianus. A poor Woman amongst the
Ignorant Devoto's of Rome, was instructed by her Ghost^y Father, that the
Hugonots were all Monsters: It happened that one of her Neighbors spying a
Protestant passing by, told her, That Man is a Hugonot: It Is imposible replied
she, He looks as like a Man as ever I saw one in my life. Thus are Dissenters
by prejudice and partiality sentenced and executed in the peremptory Judgments
of Many, before their Cause is heard, or thy admitted to a fair Defense and
Trial.

I shall therefore spare my common place Book, and reserve my stores for more
important occasions, and at present borrow our Enquirers more refined
Collections (for they will serve any Man's turn) to evince that prejudice is a
Cause not why there are so many Non-conformists, but that there are no more.

This Prejudice alone was able to Seal up the Eyes of the Gentile World against
the Sun of Righteousness, when he shone upon them in his brightest Glory, and
to confirm them in th^r blind Idolatries, when the God that made Heaven and
Earth gave the fullest discoveries that it was fit for Mankind to expect.

Upon the Account of this, the Jews rejected that Messiah, they had so long
expected, and gloried in before he came, though he exactly answered all the
Characters of Time, Place, Lineage, Doctrine and Miracles that their own
Writings had described him by.

No wonder then if the Non-consormists suffer under Prejudice amongst those
that have not only seen their Doctrine stigmatized with the odious Marks of
Judaism, their Churches with the Brand of Schism, their Persons with Treason
and Rebellion, but also had been formed into a Combination against them; and so
had both their Consciences and worldly Interest engaged against them and it.

For few have the generosity, and strength of mind to bear up against the
Torrent of Times, or confidence enough to oppose the Impetuousness of common
Vogue, or prevailing Opinion. There are not many that have the sagacity to
discern the true Images of things, through those thick Mists that cunning
Politicians cast about them, It Is very ordinary to take the Condemnation of any
Person or Party for a sufficient Proof of the Accusation, and to think the
Indictment Proved. It was enough both with the Jews and Gentiles against our
Savior, that he was condemned as a Malefactor: The Ignominy of his Cross was a
greater Argument against him with the Generality, then the excellency of his
Doctrine, or Evidence of his Miracles was for him.

The Arguments against Nonconformity were not weighed, but numbered: An
Impeachment of Accumulative Disorder, Schism, Faction, Judaism, Popular
Rashness, and Disobedience to Magistrates, was formed against them, and still
there was more in the Conclusion then ^uld be made ^ut by the Premises, and in
the Sum Total, then in the Particulars of which it consisted; for though no
Point of all these could be proved against their Doctrine, Worship or
Discipline, yet they must be so upon the whole, This being Agreed, the Cry is
then, Crucifige! Destroy it Root and Branch.

To all which add, that it was the corrupt interest of some to deceive others
into an ill Opinion of the Reformation, partly as being enraged, that any
sparks of Primitive Purity should be left unquenched, which might burn up their
vast hopes they had conceived of dividing the spoil amongst themselves: Partly
being conscious to themselves, that by Reason of their no more then
Declamatory, Vulgar and Puerile Abilities improved from Apothegms and
Proverbial Sentences, they could not be fit to fill any considerable place in a
Church Reformed according to the Scriptures; nor yet to content themselves with
a private station in a persecuted Society; they therefore chose to fall in,
where they might be entertained as useful Tools, and rewarded for their
singular Talents of Reviling.

And when once it is come to that pass. That by this Craft we get our Livings,
(one, two, or three) like the Silver-smiths of Ephesus, no wonder if the
Apostolical Doctrine and Government be cried down, and the Great Diana of
Pauls-conformity, cried ^p sooner then built. The sum is this; some men are
blindly led by their Education, and care taken that they never come to a view
of the Dissenters principles; others by Interest, forced to espouse that
Religion that has the fairest Dowry; A third sort, by their Reputation, that
they may not seem to have been in an Error; And when all these Causes shall
(as they too frequently do) happily concur, such an associated and complicated
Temptation, will form a prejudice strong enough to oppose the clearest
Demonstrations, and to stir up so much rancour and malignity, as shall
incessantly persecute misrepresented Truth.

I will add one word from the Learned Author of Orig. Sacr. and conclude. It
cannot be conceived. That many out of Affectation of Novelty, should declare
themselves Christians in the Primitive times, when so great hazards were run
upon in the professing ofit: Few soft spirited men, and lovers of their own
^ase, but would have found out some fine distinctions, and nice evasions, to
have reconciled themselves to the public Laws, and such things which the
Primitive Christians so unanimously refused, when tending to Idolatry and
Profaneness.

An ordinary Judgment will soon determine, whether party may more plausibly
complain of being pressed down with unreasonable prejudices. They that will
appear in the Quality of Dissenters, must stem the violent Current of
prevailing Example, inveterate Custom, whilst others have nothing to do but
skull away with the Tide, when it comes in, with the Celeusma of Queenhithe,
westward hoe! Lambeth hoe! Dissenters must storm the Turn-p^kes of Reproach,
Poverty, and those more formidable ones of the displeasure of Friends, and
wrath of Superiors. smoking out in Imprisonment, or other penalties, besides
the Ecclesiastical Chariti^s of Excommunication: The rest have nothing more to
do, but patiently and meekly submit to Preferments and Dignities; And if they
can but compass such a measure of self-denial, as to renounce ruin and misery,
and rise to such a height of contentment, as to be willing to enter upon Ease
and A^luence, the worst is over, and their greatest prejudices conquered.

4. The last cause of the Distractions and ill Estate of this Church, is the
want of true Christian Zeal, and of a deep and serious sense of Piety. And the
Enquirer wishes that it be not the greatest as well as the last. And so do I
too! for the want of Zeal for Gods Commands, makes us so scalding hot for
Humane Constitutions. The want of such a Zeal for the Authority of Christ as a
King, makes us so bold to Invade his Office. The want of Zeal for the
Perfection of Scriptures, makes us so Zealous for unscriptural Traditions. The
want of Zeal for the substance, makes us so Zealous for Ceremonial shadows.
When all those Spirits, that Holy ardour of Soul, that flame of Affection which
ought to be expended in the love of God, and his Law, is evaporated in Airy
speculations, contentions for, and impositions of new Inventions.

This Cause is plainly in the number of those, which like the Weathercock,
conform to every gust of Wind, It is Communis juris, and therefore the first
occupancy creates a Title.

What was it made the Primitive Church so unanim^s that it was not crumbled
into parties, nor mouldred away in Divisions, nor quarrelled about Opinions,
nor separated one part from another, upon occasion of little scruples, but
because the turbulent spirit of Imposition was not yet raised, nor ambitious
domineering over the Faith and Consciences of the Brethren, had not yet got any
considerable Head? It Is true there was a spice of this encroaching Humor found
amongst the Iudaizing Christians, who would needs obtrude their Ceremonies upon
the Gentile Converts, as necessary to Communion with the Church; but the
divinely inspired Apostles were ready at hand to check the growing Evil, and
vindicate the Churches from the servi^ude ^f beggarly Rudiments. It Is true,
Diotrephes his fing^rs it ^hed to be tampering; but the Beloved Disciple that
lay in his Masters Bosom, who was privy to his meek and gracious Temper, and
knew how displeasing such imperiousness was to him, gave an early and timous
rebuke to the Attempts and Essays of Praelatical Arrogance; and indeed he could
not but remember, and was concerned in it, how smartly Christ had snibb'd
Aspiring Churchmen.

That there was so much Tranquillity therefore amongst the Primitive Christians,
was not that they were without differing apprehensions; for men's parts were no
more alike, nor their Educations more equal, then now: But because there was a
Spirit of Condescension to, and mutual forbearance one of another. The strong,
either in Knowledge or Authority, did not trample upon the weak; There was then
some diversity of Eupressions, in which the Pastors of several Churches
delivered themselves, (for there were neither Homilies nor Li^urgies) yet they
did not dispute themselves into parties, because they made not their own
Sentiment; the Test of Orthodoxy, nor their private Faith the public standard
and measure, to which all Christians should be tied to subscribe; They allowed
a latitude in things not fundamental, nor had learned the modern Artifice of
Fettering Consciences in the Chains of Assent and Consent, to the Dogmats of a
prevailing party.

In those days me^ were sincerely good and devout, and set their Hearts upon
the Main; the huge consequence and concern of which, easily prevailed with
those Holy men, to overlook other men's private Opinions: They were intent upon
that wherein the power of Godliness consisted, and upon which the Salvation of
Souls depended; and so all that was secure, they were not so superstitiously
concerned for Rituals, either to practice them, much less to impose them; They
would not stake the Churches Peace against Ceremonies, and then play it away
rather then not be Gamesters. They considered that they had all one God, one
Faith, one Baptism, one Lord Jesus Christ; and never insisted upon one Posture,
one Gesture, one Garment, one Ceremony: They, Good men! found enough to do to
mortify their Passions, to bear their Burdens of Afflictions and Persecution,
to withstand the temptations of the Devil, and the contagion of evil Examples;
And had no strength to spare, nor superfluous time to wast, to Conn the Theory
of Ceremonies, and practice new devices.

But when men grow cold and indifferent about great things, then they become
^ervent about the lesser; when they give over to mind a holy life and heavenly
Conversation, then they grow fierce Disputants for, and rigid Exacters of the
sul^ Tale of Ceremonies. Thus when the Scribes and Pharise (...) became so
violent for the necessity of washing hands, they little regarded the cleansing
of their Hearts; They that will make things indifferent to become necessary,
the next news you hear of them is, that they make things necessary to become
indifferent: when men cease to study their own hearts, they become very
studious how to vex and torment other men's; for then they have both leisure and
confidence enough to trample upon their inferiors. Then it shall be a greater
sin for a Monk to lay aside his Cowle, then his Chastity, and to be a
scrupulous Nonconformist to the Laws of Men, then a scandalous Nonconformist
to the Laws of God.

In short (that I may say the same thing over again, which I have twenty times
already said, and that I may convince the Reader that I have read Erasmus de
(opi^ v^orum, as well as his famous piece of the Art of Preaching) Then, and
not till then, do the little Appendices of Religion grow great and mighty
matters in men's esteem, when the Essentials, the great and weighty matters, are
become little and inconsiderable; which I had had little need to have
mentioned, but for the sake of those Elegant and Modish words, Appendices and
Essentials, which in an Eloquent Oration ought not to have been forgotten. --
Dixi!

That there are Distractions in the Nation. Divisions amongst Christian
Brethren, and a separation from the present Church of England in various
degrees, is evident; The Industry of our Enquirer in Tracing out the Causes of
them, has been very commendable, though his success has not been answerable.
Had he pleased to approve himself a skilful and impartial, as well as a serious
Enquirer, he had certainly directed us to one cause more, which for want of
Ariadnes Thread, in the Anfractuous windings of this Labyrinth, he has quite
lost himself, and his Travels. Honest Gerson of old has notified it to the
nonobserving World, and from him I shall recommend it to the Reader.

There, can be (says he) no General Reformation without the Abolitions of
sundry Canons and Statutes, which neither are, nor reasonably can be observed
in these times, which do nothing but ensnare the Consciences of men to their
endless Perdition, no tongue is able to express what evil, what danger and
confusion, the neglect and contempt of the Holy Scripture, (which doubtless is
sufficient for the Government of the Church, else Christ had been an imperfect
Lawgiver) and the following of Humane Inventions, has brought into the
Church. Sermon. in die circ. part. 1. It Is that which has ever been lamented, and
by all moderate persons complained of: That unnecessary Impositions, have been
made the indispensible conditions of Church Communion, without precept or
precedent from the Word of God.

To this cause had he reduced all our Divisions, he said more in those few
plain words, then in all those well coucht periods wherewith he has adorned his
Discourse, and darkened Counsel. As the matter of Law arises out of the matter
of Fact, so the Justice of the Non-conformists Cause, appears from the terms
that are put upon them in order to Communion; If the Terms be unjust, it will
justify their Cause; If they have sinfully managed their Cause, its goodness
will not justify their Persons; what Dissenters usually insist upon for their
Justification, I shall reduce to these Heads.

1. They plead, that some things are imposed upon their Faith, tendered to
Subscription, as Articles of Faith, which are either false, or at best, they
have not yet been so happy as to discover the truth of them: In Art. 20. They
are required to subscribe this Doctrine, The Church has power to Decree Rites
and Ceremonies; which Clause of the Article, as we fear, it has been by some
indirect means shuffled into the Article, it not being found in the Authentic
Articles of Edw. 6. so it proves also, that the Terms of Communion have been
enlarged since the first times of the Reformation.

They object also against that Doctrine in the Rubric; That it is certain from
the Word of God. That Children Baptized, and dying before the Commission of
actual sins, are undoubtedly saved. The Scripture, the Protestant Churches, nor
any sound Reason, have yet given them any tolerable satisfaction of the Truth
of the Doctrine about the Opus operatum, of Sacraments: That Doctrine laid down
in the Catechism; That Children do perform Faith and Repentance by their
sureties, is also as great a stumbling to our Faith, and we cannot get over it:
How the Adult should believe and repent for Minors, or Infants Believe and
Repent by Proxy. I omit many others.

2. They plead, that they are not satisfied in the use of any Mystical
Ceremonies in Gods Worship, and particularly they judge the use of the Cross in
Baptism to be sinful: A Sacrament of Divine Institution according to the
definition of the Church in her Catechism, is an outward and visible sign, of
an inward and invisible Grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a
means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof: where we
have 1. The matter of a Sacrament, An outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual Grace; 2. The Author of a Divine Sacrament, Christ himself 3. The End
of it: to be a means to convey the thing signified, and a pledge to assure us
of it. Hence it is evident. that it is simply impossible that any Church should
institute a Divine Sacrament, because they cannot give it a Causality to those
Graces it is instituted to signify: Nevertheless it is possible for Men to
institute Humane Sacraments; which shall have the Matter of a Sacrament, That
is an outward Visible Sign of an inward Spiritual Grace; and they may pretend
to ascribe an effect to it also to stir up, to excite, or increase Grace and
Devotion: And yet because it wants the right efficient Cause, it is no lawful
Sacrament, though it be an Humane Sacrament; Such an institution (say they) is
the Sign of the Cross. An outward Visible Sign of an inward Spiritual Grace,
Ordained by Men as a means to effect whatever Man can work by his Ordinance.
Here is the matter without Divine Signature, which is the thing they condemn it
for.

3. They plead, that since Communion with the Church is suspended, and denied
but upon such Terms as take away Christian Liberty in part, and by consequence
leave all the rest at Mercy; they dare not accept of Communion upon those
Terms: There are some things which God has in the general left free and
indifferent, to do or not do; yet at some times, and in some Cases it may be my
great sin if I should do some of them, as when it would wound the Conscience,
and destroy the Soul of a weak Christian: If now I shall engage my self to the
Church, that I will never omit such an indifferent thing; and the Soul of that
weak Christian should call to me to omit it, I have tied my Hands by
engagement, I cannot help him, though it would save his or a thousand Souls out
of Hell, because I have given away my freedom to the Church.

4. They plead, that they ought not to hazard their Souls in one Congregation,
if they may more hopefully secure them in another; for that their Souls are
their greatest concernment in this World and the next: Now say they, there is no
Question but Men Preach such as they Print with pubiick allowance; and
therefore they ought to provide better for their Souls elsewhere: Especially
they say, That the Doctrine of Justification is Articulus stantis vel cadentis
Ecclesiae, an Article with which the Church falls or stands: This Article, say
they, in the Parish where we live is quite demolished by the Doctrine of
Justification by Works; we are bound therefore to provide for our safety and
depart; and when we are once out, we will advise upon another Church, not which
is tolerable, but which is most eligible, and in all things nearest the Word.

5. They plead, that there is no obligation upon them to own the Churches Power
to impose new Terms of Communion; unless the Church can prove her Power from
Christ: it is not for them to disprove it; it lies upon her to prove it, and to
prove it substantially too, or else it will be hard to prove it their duty to
own it.

6. They say, the World is pestered with Disputes about Worship, about
Religion; and therefore since all cannot be in the right, they are willing to
go the safest way, and Worship God according to his Word: If the things
disputed be lawful to be done, let 'em be so; they are sure its lawful to let
'em alone; and they think there is no great hazard in keeping to Scripture Rule,
nor can believe that Christ will send any to Hell, because they did not Worship
God in an External Mode, more neat and spruce then God commanded.

7. They pretend, that the things imposed are parts of Worship, which none can
Create but God, nor will God accept of any but such as are of his own Creating;
and whether they be Integral or Essential Parts they do not know, but in the
Worship of God they find them standing upon even ground, with those that are
certainly Divine: or at least as high as Man can list them.

8. They do not find that God ever commanded the things imposed, either in
general, in special, or their singulars; If God has commanded a Duty to be
done, the Church must find a place to do it in; but though the Church must find
a place for the Duty, a time for the Duty, she may not find new Duty for the
time and place.

9. They are the more cautious of all Ceremonies, because the old Church of
England, in her Homilies Sermon. 3. Of Good Works tell us: That such has been
the corrupt inclination of Man, superstitiously given to make New Honcuring of
God of his own Head and then to have more Affection and Devotion to keep that,
then to search out Gods Holy Commandments, and do them.

10. They say, they have read over all the Books that have been written in
justification of those things, and they find their Arguments so weak, their
Reasons so futilous, that setting aside Rhetotick and Railing there is nothing
in them, but what had been either answered by others, or is contradicted by
themselves, which hardness them in their Error, who are gone astray into the
right way.

11. They say, it is their duty to endeavor a Reformation according to the
Word, which if others will not, they cannot help it, and hope they will not be
angry with the willing.

PART. II.
CHAP. I.
The several ways for prevention of Church-Divisions mentioned by the Enquirer,
considered. The Papal Methods: 1. Keeping the People in Ignorance. 2. An
infallible Judge. 3. Accommodating Religion to the Lusts of Men. Three other
ways mentioned by the Enquirer. 1. Teleration. 2. Comprehension. 3. Instruction.

AS that Person will highly merit of this present Age, whose discerning eye
shall discover, and his charity propound to the world such rational expedients,
as may amicably compose our present differences, upon terms comporting with the
Conscientious principles of the contending parties; so our fears of the success
are justly greatned by the frequent disappointment of our hopes; Confident
Pretenders posting up their Bills in every Corner, promising nothing less then
miracles, but performing nothing more then pretenses.

It is some encouragement to expect more then a Palliate Care from this
undertaker, to see him fall to his business so like an Artist: It cannot be
hoped (says he) that where the business is Religion, and the concern Eternal
Life, that men should incuriously swallow every thing without moving any
Question, or stirring any Debate. To which I subjoin, nor can it be expected
that when they have moved the Question about the important concerns of
Eternity, they should acquiesce in their own Question, without a satisfactory
Answer: like that Governor who scorned to surrender before a Gun was shot off,
but then thought it enough for his Credit to Capitulate.

Most men swallow their Religion, as the Insant does it^ Pap, which has no
other previous chewing, then what the Nurse gives it: and are driven into
Profession just like a stock of Geese with no greater difficulty, then holding
over their Heads the Ceremony of a Long Pole. And I will add further, that as
this is not to be hoped from all: so neither is it desirable in any, That they
should cease to be rational Creatures, before they become Christians.

The Enquirer had curiously and carefully searched all the Dispensatories, and
out of those stores, promises us the choicest Medicines that may fit the
Patients Case, and seem most practicable: And we cannot pray for a Physician
better qualified, then one who is Master of many Remedies, and of a judgment
to choose out those which are agreeable.

The Church of Rome has been an old Empirick; so noted a Quack, for a desperate
Cure in a desperate Case, that the greatest civility we can allow her here, is
that which we commonly give your Mountebanks; lend them a Hearing, and do as we
see Cause.

She Glories indeed in her Unity and Peace, and it might invite a modest
curiosity to desire a sight of that sympathetical Powder which has effected
such wonders: And to satisfy you in one word its nothing but the Jesuits
Powder, or a Great nothing in a Iuglers Box,

1. Her first prescription is Prophylactick, by way of prevention: the best of
Remedies (no doubt) since its more desirable not to have needed, then having
so, to have obtained the help of A^sculapius And it is nothing more then this
plain, cheap, and easy Recipe. That the People be kept in profound Ignorance:
Thus when the Philistines had put out Sampsons Eyes, they knew he would make a
stout Mill-horse; Thus when the Empress Irene had plukt out her Sons Eves, who
could see, she found it easy to set up Images which have Eyes, and see not.
But our Enquirer looks upon this prescription as too strong a Narcotic, that it
will not down in England, though it has done great feats in Italy and Spain,
and the Uniformity of those Nations, is an unquestionable Certificate to avouch
its excellency. And it is to be feared at present it will not: for some Learned
Men are very confident, that our own English simples are more connatural to
English Bodies, then the exotic Druggs of Pont^s, and that we have the true
Dictamnum growing in our own Gardens, had we but skill to use and apply it.

But we ever doted upon foreign Novelties, and prize nothing that liberal
nature has bestowed on us; King Lucius, the Glory of our Island, and the whole
world, who first submitted his Crown of Gold to one of Thorns, and laid his
Scepter at the foot of him who bore a Reed, not well instructed in the Riches
of his own Dominions, must needs send to Rome for advice; Eleutherius good Man,
who had not yet learnt how to make all Thrones depend upon his Infallible
Chair, sends him this Answer, That there were already in Britain, the Old and
the New ^estament, out of which, by the Council of his Kingdom, he might take a
Law to Govern it. Did England know its own strength, it is so well furnished at
home, that it might spare its Travels, and never cross the Seas, or climb the
Alps to seek new Models of Religion; The Holy Scriptures being (as Lirinensis
well says) perfect, and abundantly sufficient for all things, yea and more then
sufficient. And on this account too there would be less need of Trade and
Navigation.

Two Reasons there are why our Enquirer thinks this Papal Dose of Ignorance
will not be admitted in England.

1. Because it comes too late: Ah! It Is thousand pities that a Receipt of (...)
fame should be like, post mortem Medi^na; but is there no hope left under the
lid of Pan^ra's Box? The Church is a ^uccessive Body; and though she m^ b^
(...) in her present Individuals, yet she may (...) and re^ in those of the
next Generation: The Disease is not (...), but Chronical, and ^ere may be some
(...) roo^ ^or ^vour. What if a Thousand or ^wo more of (...) (...) sile^ (...)
and the labors of as many discourag^d and (...)? wh^ ^ctures were pro^ibed?
private (...) (...) ^d your Twicers suspended? If it perfo^m (...) that may be
desired* it might effect more then co^ be (...): O^ no! It comes too late! for
the People of England (...) so (...) already, that the only way to Cure the
inconvenien^ies o^ tha^ is to let them know more: This is excel^ent indeed,
when the Poison becomes its own Antidote, and Death proves its own Cure, w^ch
but in one only Case, the amazed world never yet saw, and will hardly yet
believe; but thus they tell us of Quicksilver, that a little Dose will
certainly kill, when a great o^e will Cure the twisting of the Guts, and th^se
Intes^ine Dissentions which thence ari^e in the Bowels: yet so it is A little
knowledge only ferments the natural pride of the Heart, which a round Quantity
would wipe off, and carry away: or to express it more elegantly from our
Author: When men know a little, they con^it they understand all that is
knowable, and here^pon refuse instruction, and oppose their private Opini^ns to
the public Wisdom: whereas, did these Men see further into things, they would
then dis^ver a reason, of ^any things they are now dissatisfied with, or at
l^ast distrust their own Understandings, and grow modest and peaceable. It
becomes every good Christian, and good Suject, (and he that is really the
former, will certainly be ^he latter) to suspect the shallowness of his own
judgment, and to Revere the depth of his Governors Wisdom; he may be an
useful Mariner, that is no skilful Pilot, nor knows how to steer the public
bottom; but I do not remember that we have been discoursing about the
expedi^ncy of the transporting of Wool, the making of War or Peace, or the
mysteries of Government, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; but our business is
Religion, and the direct and immediate concerns of another Life: and how to
Cure the Pride of the Understanding without putting out its Eye, and ^aking it
a P^lyphemus: And here, though I suspect not the shallowness of the Governors
Judgment, I dare not Act against my own. I confess my self to seek in the
great secret of a private and public Wisdom, ^s much as I am in that of the
private and public Conscience, a superstructure raised upon that foundation:
Nor have I learnt the difference between the Roman Ignorance, and resigning my
own R^ason, between darkness, and no use of Light; between having no private
Reason, and renouncing it for the public Reason in things directly respecting
God and his Worship: The one is born blind, and the other has lost his Eyes;
the one is the Romish Opiate, and the other a more gentle; (if more gentle)
preparation of (...).

2. He answers Secondly. If it had come timely, yet the Remedy is worse then
the Disease, we esteem it better if one be necessary, to ^rr like men, then to
be driven like Beasts, or Act^d like ^ppets: An Heroic Spirit! and such as may
assure us, that our Physician will not cast us into a Lethargi^, to prevent the
Ravings of a Fever; and that he will not follow that Bish^ps ^thod, who had no
other Cure for the Head-ake, then to cut it off.

I have read of a King of France, who was extremely delighted in a Gentleman of
his B^d-chamber, who had the proper Case of a Man* b^t his upper Rooms it
seems, were but furnished like (...), wit^ Lumb^r; T^is young Courtier by some
accident, took an occasion to fall into a (...), which elevating his B^ain
^bove its natural and dull temper, to a due height requisite* or Raptures,
created him ex tempore, a most accomplished Poet: Physicians are al^ ^ummon'd,
and they summon their Art to restore him to his form^r little self; success
attends their Endeavors, and the Gentleman is at once delivered from his
Distra^ion, and that ^reater madness, Poetry: The King having lost the
satisfa^tion he conceived in his Airy Fancies, and valuing a Mad Vi^oso before
a sober Logger-head, threatens to hang 'em up every Mothers Son, unless they
did presently recover him again to Wit, by putting him bes^des it: such
Mountebanks there are in the World, who cannot keep Men peaceable, unless they
make them ^ocks and Stones.

2. A second (...) for ^visions much used by the Romanists, is their Infallible
Judge, ^o which, whosoever pretends on this side a Deity, needs only his own
mouth to confute him; what follows in our Enquirer I read with much complacency
The Scripture plainly t^lls us that all men are liars, such as may deceive, or
be deceived; and most undoubtedly would never h^ve made such a distinction of
Christians, as strong men, and Babes in Christ, nor made it our duty to
consider one another weakness, and practice mutual f^rbearance, if it had
intended any where to direct us to such an Umpire; as should have ended all
differences, and made all men equally certain. Much less, that the weak in
judgment should be forced to keep pace with the strong in their practices; or
that Babes should drive at the rate of grown men: Again, There ^as (says he) a
time when the Apostles had the assistance of the H^y Spirit, in such a manner
as to guide them into all Truth, and gave miraculous proof that they had so,
and yet this would not cure all the Schisms, nor resolve all the Scruples, nor
silence all Disputes, It must needs therefore seem unreasonable for them, who
confessing a fallibility of judgment, should yet as peremptorily bind their
Deoretals upon the Consciences, as if they not only pretended to, but could
give evidence of their infallibility: It Is noted for one of the impudent Essays
of Papal presumption and Hypocrisy, that he calls himself, Servus Servorum
Dei, and yet Acts as if he were Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium. I never
liked Jacobs smooth voice, when I felt Es^'s rough hands, and heavy Fists: when
we hear of the Public Wisdom and Conscience, and both fallible; and yet like
Moses his Rod, swallowing up the private Wisdom and Conscience, because they
are fallible, I rejoice in the great Advantage of an Infallible God, who guides
us by an Infallible Rule, to whom we may securely commit our Souls.

Nor can I see the so much boasted pre-eminence of their Infallible visible
Judge, above our certainly Infallible Rule; for whatever this Infallible
Gentleman determines, it must come to our Cognizance either by word or writing,
and then it amounts to no more then an Infallible Rule, and by consequence,
liable to mis-interpretations, and all the inconveniences which they have
unjustly charged upon the Word of God: which has been confirmed to us by
Autopsy; for whatever have been his Determinations De fide, the Contenders
retain their former sentiments, which they protest they would never do, were
they assured in the true meaning of his Decrees.

Here I began first to suspect that this second part of the Enquiries could not
possibly be the Child of the same Father with the former: For that other
Enquirer assured us, that in the Primitive times, All good men were of one way,
and All bad men of another: that there was but one division of men; that (...)
and (...), were the only Sects that the World was known by; but this Enquirer
tells us, That there were Schisms, Divisions, Scruples, Disputes in those
early days, which the Holy Spirit given to the Apostles in such a manner as to
lead them into all Truth, would not Cure, resolve, nor silence.

Had the Apostles understood those frightful consequences which we have learnt
to impute to diversities of judgment in lesser matters, with suitable variety
in practice attending it, they might easily have silenced those disputes by the
interposition of their Authority; and the Churches no doubt would as easily
have acquiesced in the judgment of the Apostles, who could give irrefragable
proof that they were sent of Christ.

Nor have these rigorous Decisions ever reached their pretended ends, in healing
differences, but only consopited them under the Ashes for a while, or taught
men a little more craft to draw over the Articles to their private Opinions,
rather then conform these to the public belief.

Another Papal Remedy, is the Accommodation of Religion to the Lusts and
Interests of Men, allowing them to think, believe, do any thing in the world,
provided they be subject to the universal Pastor: for the Pope seeing that the
World will not be brought over to him upon the Terms of Christ, is content to
come over to the world in Morals, if they will but come over to him in his
Ceremonials. Much what of the same good nature with that other grand Impostor
Mahomet, who when that sullen Mountain would not stir a foot to come to him,
very courteously answered, Then let us go to the Mountain.

Whether this Prescription will be agreeable to, or practicable upon English
Constitutions, is a great Question; The Author of this Second part, concludes
that we of this Church have too much simplicity and sincerity of Devotion to
make use of this Remedy to put an end to our Distractions. And yet I find some
have been tampering with it; who will be very strait laced in Ceremonies to
gratify the superstitious, and widen the moral part to humor the voluptuous:
Thus if men's Lusts will not bend to the strait Rule of the Word, they can
gently bow the Rule to their corruptions and crooked propensities: And the
Author of the former part seeing well that Men are grown too Pursey to be
crambt up with the Religious observation of the Lord's Day, has pruden^ly
accommodated the day to their latitude; They that have no great mind to keep a
Christian Holy day, shall need but to call it a Iudaical Sabbath, and they are
well fortified against all the checks of their Consciences. I know the Reader
will pity him that must contend with two such Adversaries, (Hercules himself
would not engage a couple, but though they be Two, they have but one single
weapon.

We want not some who can reconcile the levity of the Stage and Theater, to the
gravity and severity of the Christian Doctrine; that can teach men by their
writings or practice, how they may retain these vanities, and never throw off
their Baptismal Livery; and it is upon good Advice: for should they lose such
numbers from the party, it would make a filthy Hole in it; and the weeding out
such Tares would make a thin Field of Corn; and therefore some plead that they
ought to grow together till the Harvest.

4. We are now come to the great and infallible Remedy, which the Pope trusts
more to, then his great Infallibility; But there are considerable diversities
about the form of this Medicine in the Dispensatories: some (as Mr. Necessity
Bays) express it by a tedious Periphrasis, Axes, Halters, Racks, Fire, Faggot,
with an Et catera, which has more in it then all the rest; but the Romanists,
who are concise men, and love short work, and to express multum in parvo, have
Epitomized all in that one word, the Holy Inquisition, so called by the same
Catachresis, by which we call our former Antagonist, the Compassionate Enquirer.

If you enquire a Reason of this various reading; know that it arises from the
different Copies of the Dispensatories: The Pharmocopaeia of London calls it
one thing, that of Rome Another; the Titles differ, but the Medicine is the
same, only Rome, according to her old overdoing and undoing Humor, has added a
few drops of the Spirits of Vitriol; And yet the last Edition of ours at the
Old Bailey, re-assumes its former Title, and calls it downright, The Inquisition
of Spain.

This Medicine is truly Sovereign; it has the Probatum of thousands who being
dead yet speak, its answerableness to its primitive design, to silence all
disputes, and stop the mouth of all gainsayers; when all is done, there is no
Argument convinces so effectually as Stone-dead; The wild-Irish themselves will
believe their Enemy to be dead, when his Head lies severed a Yard from his
body; But the Question will be still, whether it will down with Englishmen?
for though they have good Beef Stomachs, they want that of the Ostrich to
digest Axes and Halters: There Is no Question but it will go down well enough
with them that give it, but it needs the assistance of much Rhetoric to
persuade them into a willingness of mind, who are to take this wallowish
potion: If we could agree who should be persecuted, there are enough could be
content to be the persecutors, and this is one of the greatest Quarrels.

That the Genius of this Nation (as our Enquirer informs us) is so courageous,
and withal so compassionate. I am very glad to hear; the one part so tender
hearted that they will not inflict, the other so tender Conscienced that they
will endure what shall be so in^icted, rather then prostitute them to the lust
and tyranny of men; but then I must conclude, that some of our Churchmen, are
either no Englishmen, or no Christians, whose tender mercies have been
Cruelties, and whose compassions like Draco's Laws written in blood; And I
rejoice to meet with these concluding words: The exercise of so much cruelty
upon the Account of Religion in Q Mary's days has made that profession
detestable to this day, and it looked so ill in the Romanists, that we shall
never be persuaded to practice it our selves: Had we but now an exact
Definition of Cruelty, we should soon be satisfied whether the Enquirer would
not persuade Another to it, if not be persuaded to it himself.

None of the Romanists Expedients then will work this blessed Cure, they are
either Impracticable, or come too late, or are worse then the Disease, or one
mischief or another, There are therefore three others, which he will mention,
Universal Toleration, Comprehension, and Instruction and Consideration

1. The first is Universal Toleration. But here the Doctors Man, whom he sent a
simpling, was horribly mistaken. And like Elisha's Servant whom he sent to
gather good wholesome Pot-hearbs, has imprudently picked up your poisonous
Colequintida; An oversight that might have lost the Patient his Life.

Universal Toleration? I have observed English Spirits to bear some secret
Antipathy to these Universals; They like not either Universal Bishop, nor
Universal Monarch, nor Universal Grace, nor Universal Admission, nor this
Universal Toleration. But what if he had omitted This Universal in the Receipt?
There may be a Toleration of what is Tolerable; whatever disturbs not the
public Peace; whatever contradicts not the Scriptures, the Creeds, whatever
crosses not the great ends of Religion, whatever is peaceable, holy, humble,
just, modest, righteous, though perhaps not Ceremonious: This Corrected
Toleration has been given with Admirable success in the primitive and purer
times; It fills up both pages in the Apologies of Justin Martyr, Athenagora^,
and Tertullian, who pleaded for a Toleration of their Innocent profession: It
is the main ingredient in that famous Mass of Pillulae sine quibus esse nolo,
nay of Pillulae sine quibus esse nequeo. The Scripture (said the Enquirer just
before) has made it our Duty to consider one another weakness, and practice
mutual forbearance: and what forbearance is without Toleration I do not
understand. Had the Imposing Spirit obtained in the Infancy of the Church, they
had saved the Heathens a labor, and destroyed each other; He might safely
therefore in his Irenicon have used from a Scruple to a dram of this
Toleration; It Is the Herb Gratia Dei, the great fraenum cholerae, which
Addulces the blood, begets good Spirits, restrains surley Humors, and sweetens
the Tempers of one Christian toward another.

It Is not the opening (...) Pantheon, but not shutting up the Temple of the one
true God; not a licenciousness to blaspheme, but a liberty to glorify our
Redeemer that we plead for; it is a privilege that every one has a claim to,
That the Lives and Souls of them that have not wronged their Country may be
secure in it: If the works of the flesh be found amongst us, Adultery,
Forn^cation, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulation, Bitterness, Strife, Seditions, Herefies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like. We plead not for the guilty;
only let the innocent find mercy at home, who in other places might expect a
Reward. Is he a meet person to undertake the Healing of our Breaches, to
compose our differences, that cannot distinguish between a Toleration in
Ceremonies, and the Tolerating of Idolatry? that knows not the nice difference
between Tolerating every thing and nothing? If it be all one to Indulge in
things confessed Adiaphorous at best, and the necessary duties of the
Decalogue, talk no more of Healing; He must prove a Physician of no value, that
when the balm of Gilead drops into his mouth, knows not how to Apply it.

2. The second propounded Remedy, is an excellent Opener, known to this present
age by the name of Conprehension, which in our Authors Glossary signifies, The
making the Terms of Communion more free and easy, opening the Arms of the
Church, to receive more into her Bosom, thereby to enlarge both the Society and
Intrest of the Church: and one would think that so much Reason coucht in so few
words, might have vindicated the Receipt above contempt, and recommended it to
a probationary experiment; selfpreservation would make a harsher medicine then
this go merrily down; If any thing make a Building strong, that must be carried
to such a vast Height, that must bear such a weight, that shall be exposed to
such shaking Winds, it must be a proportionable widening the foundation: But
let us hear our Betters.

1. For my part (says he) If such a Course please our Governors, I have no
mind to oppose any thing to it. They are infinitely obliged to him, surely,
that if they please to show kindness to tender Conscienced Subjects, he will
not oppose, not declare against them. This is a Moderation far beyond Mr.
Bayes's hotter temper; he will tell them: If they will Rule, they must, they
must, they must, -- but is this all? I had thougt he had brought with him
Licentiam ad practicandum, A Commission to prescribe, and now I see he can do
nothing without the College: but what now if such a wholesome course please
not, though it profit, might it not have become a Compassionate Enquirer, to
have forwarded them with a humble Hint or two of their interwoven Interest and
Duty? when he preaches so admirably upon those points of Reverence,
Contentment, Submission, Charity, and has shown his skill in the Theory, does
he use to Rivet it no better then thus? If these virtues please my Auditors, I
have no mind to oppose; If you will be chartiable, you may for all me, I Will
promise you I shall never study your ruin, and plot your destruction. If
Church Governors please to enlarge the Society and Interest of the Church; If
they please to strengthen it against (...) Enemies abroad, and procure it peace
and contentment at home, he will not oppose: The best natured man that ever was
in the World!

They who are Governors of the Church, are bound in Con^nce to make the Terms
of Communion eas^ and free; not to make the Yoke heavier then Christ made it.
They that came in easily, ought to let others in upon the same Terms: whoever
they were that first clogged the Churches Communion with multitudes of
unnecessary Conditions, are like him that receiving a clear Estate of
Inheritance from his Father, leaves it encumbred, and charged to his Son, who
perhaps may never be able to take off the Mortgage, and so shall thank his
Father for just nothing: Christ made the way to Heaven narrow enough, and
there is no need to make it straiter: Governors in the Church may easily
mistake in the Quantity of their power, but this is sure. How great soever it
be, they have all for Edification, none for Destruction. They ought not to
reject those whom Christ will receive; And a little plain English would here
have done no hurt, but have been Acceptable to the best of Churchmen, whose
misery it is, to have many flatterers about them which let them know their
virtues, but few faithful Monitors, who will acquaint them with their Duty.

2. He desires it may be Considered, that there are many things that look very
probably in the general notion and speculation, that would flatter one into a
great opinion of them, which when they come to be ^ycd, are no ways answerable:
Therefore never attempt any thing that wears the Appearance of Honorable to
the Worlds end: the benefits may possibly exceed, as well as fall below
expectation. It was David's counsel to Solomon, Up, and be doing, and the Lord
be with thee! There are many things which in the generalnotion and speculation
would terrify one with appearances of Inconveniences, which when they come to
be tried, were the suggestions of Cowardice. Thus Children in the Twi^ght,
seeing every object through the spectacles of their own fears, make that a
Bear, which Nature calls a harmless Bush.

3. But many difficulties occur in the Reducing things of this Nature into
practice; that were not foreseen in the Theory; And many blessings and mercies
may and will occur, which will overweigh the difficultes in attaining them: the
difficulties momentany, the advantages perpetual; the inconveniences personal,
the benefits general, the prejudices to some sew men's too much plenty, the
Advantages to many men's Souls. It Is a strange resolution, that we will not
endeavor to be happy, for fear we should encounter a difficulty in the way
thither; If the knot cannot be untied, Alexanders Sword will cut it, to
withdraw from Apparent Duty, for fear of uncertain danger, is but like his,
that would not shoot the Bridge, because it might possibly fall on's Head.
Those accidents which can neither be foreseen nor prevented in doing a good
work, are by wise men not to be regarded: I never hear such Arguments used
against the Attemps for preferments: I shall judge them real in their
Declamations against Comprehensions, when they use to discourage themselves
from the same Difficulties in seeking great things for themselves. The Sluggard
cries out. There Is a Lion in the way, when it is nothing but his own lazy Soul,
that paints out dread and terror to his Imagination: let none hereafter ^at,
because he may possibly find his death, where he sought his life: let none
Travel, because he may be robbed, nor ride on Horseback, because he may
possibly get a fall: There Is nothing truly Glorious, but must be waded to
through difficulties, but some secret Lusts commonly pretend them greater then
they are.

4. This is not done, (says he) and we do not know when it will be set about.
That is, we will use the means when the end is effected: How happy had the
Christian World been, if the first Imposers of Ceremonies had acted by those
principles: suen conditions are not imposed, and we know not when they will
therefore we will never begin: But though it be not yet done, I know when it
will be: When God shall open the Eyes of Church men to see the things that
belong to their Duty, and the Curches peace; when all our totterings and
shakings, shall have humbled us into more Condescension and Evangelical
tenderness; When men shall see it both their Interest and Duty to secure the
Building by enlarging the foundation; and that the security and stability of
Society, lies in the Close Union of the parts, that the Beauty of a Church
consists much in the amplifying of the fold; Then will something of this nature
be done, for which all generations shall call the Authors Blessed.

3. If then none of these Remedies be practicable, what must the languishingh
Patient do? There is yet one thing more, which is like those Cordials we use to
drop into the Mouths of the dying to procure the old admired (...), and that is
Instruction or Information. It Is pity the poor Clinical Church should dye
under so many hands, and in the view of a whole shop of Medicines, and
therefore rather this then nothing, which that it may be effectual, it will be
necessary to consider, 1. Who are meet to give, 2. Who ought to receive
Instruction, 3. From what grounds the instructions are to be setcht. 4. What
other means may possibly be administered.

1. It Is very considerable who are to be the Instructors, and called into the
Consultation? for every one would be in the Chair, and none willing to be
Auditors. The Brethren of the Episcopal persuasion having got the privilege of
Law, take it for granted that they are the only persons meet for this service;
whereas, if the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline of the Dissenters, should
prove nearer to the prescript of Scripture, no subsequent Law can possibly set
it further off: That which was better before the Ordinance of Man, cannot be
made worse by it; Let therefore neither the one nor the other be the
Instructers, but let the Word of God Instruct both: And this was the expedient
of Constantine the Great at the opening the Council of Nice; He did not turn
the Scale by his Authority; but delivers himself thus impartially to the
wrangling factions. All seditions Contention set aside (says he) let us discuss
the things in Controversy by the testimony of the divinely inspired
Scriptures, as we are informed from the Cath, Moderator: And it was Austin's
great reserve when he was pressed with the inartificial Argument of Authority,
Ne audiantur haec verba, Ergo dico and tu dicis, sed quid dicit Dominus. Tell
not me what you say; any more then I tell you what I say, but let us both
hearken to what God shall speak. Quod enim (as Hierom) de sacris Scripturis non
habet authoritatem eadem facilitate, contemnitur, qua^ proponitur; Whatsoever
is not grounded upon the Scriptures, may with as much case be slighted as it is
urged.

2. Its material too, who are to be instructed? It Is presumed by our Enquirer,
that the Dissenters alone want a word of Advice, they only are Crooked; but
whatever they want, as they will submit to, and be thankful for wholesome
Counsel, so they conceive a word of Instruction will be necessary another way.
When the Non-conformists are come to the End of their Tedder, when Conscience
will suffer them to Advance not one step further. Others will need an Use of
Instruction too, to go to the End of theirs: such Instruction as this of our
Enquirers, The Creditor can give his Debtor whom he laid fast in Ludgate: Truly
Friend! You have been reputed a discreet person, I wonder at you, and so do all
that know you, that you will be so little a Friend to your case, so obstinate
against liberty, as to lie reezing your self in a smoakie hole, you ought to
submit your private judgment to that of the generality of mankind. who with
one voice agree, that the fresh Air is much sweeter then this nasty Lodging!
How much more proper had it been to have expostulated with this Cruel Creditor,
Sir! The poor man has paid you all he has, he is not worth a groat more in all
the world, you may have his skin, but flesh he has none, show now your Charity,
and since he cannot release himself, but you may, show your Charity. The
Dissenters say this is their Case: they cannot come up to the propounded
conditions without sin, the Imposers may abate of the Conditions without sin,
and therefore they are the proper Subjects of Instruction: Indeed I find the
Non-conformists very shy in charging the Terms to be sinful; they are loath to
speak a word that may be interpreted any reflection upon the Church, and
therefore commonly insist upon other pleas: but when Importunity shall extort
it from them, they must deal liquidly, and assert, that they cannot do these
things, and sin against God thereby.

3. From what grounds will this Instructor draw his Instructions? I do the
rather propound it, because I meet with great variety of them: some say,
Master, save they self; and to this they answer, my Scul is my self, and if the
Soul be lost, the man is lost. Others cry, oh be very tender of Peace! and they
reply, yes, and a little of Truth too. Others exclaim, you will bring in Pop^y!
And they return, we did not make the Terms of Communion; They that speak thus,
are more Zealous to keep us out then Popery: The Arguments then must be drawn
from such heads as are agreeable to the fixed Scripture principles of those
that come under instruction. Otherwise the Advice is no more but this: Come
over to our party, and there will be Peace! why, so there will (reply the
Dissenters) if you come all over to ours, or to any third party, There would be
a Peace, an ill Cemented, ill grounded one; and such, as upon every occasion
would bre^k out in a more desperate Rupture.

4. It Is very considerable what this Gentleman (...) (...), (...) his
Instruction should prove Addle; For if neither a well ^tressed Toleration,
cramped down soundly with wholesome Law^, nor yet a due Comprehension will be
admitted; The condition of Dissenters would yet be supportable, if they might
be kept to this wholesome Kitchen Physic of Instruction: But his Instructions
look very like those of Spain, who use to exhort and instruct the poor wr^tches
caught in the Iron Claws of the Inquisition; to be pitiful to their Souls, not
to throw away their Lives, and presently shut up their last words with the
flames. What the Operation of this Instruction may be, I cannot tell; but the
Dissenters I perceive have their last propositions sent in, and the next is
Escalado; for he tells us, p. 214. That if they will not be instructed, he sees
no Obligation upon the Magistrate to forbear to make or execute such Laws as he
apprehends for the good of his Government: so that after all his experiments,
and great show of skill in healing, he is wheeled about to that last, and worst
of Papal Remedies, which some call Axes, Halters, Gibbets, Racks, Pillories,
Imprisonment, others the Holy Inquisition; which is just the plea of the
Papists for all their Barbarities: That if the People will not be persuaded,
they see no Reason why the Church should not deliver the ^er to the secular
powers to be burn for Heretics.

CHAP. II.
The Enquirers notion of Schism examined, and as Applied to the sober
Non-conformists, proved uncharitable, unjust and false.

SChism is an Ecclesiastical Culverine, which being overcharged, and ill
managed, Recoyles, and hurts the Canoneer. He that undertakes to play this
great Gun, had need be very Curious, and careful to sponge his Canon Well, lest
it fire at home. Nothing has more naturally tempted the Imprudent to account
nothing to be Schism, then that some hasty angry men have made every thing so.

That causeless separation from a particular Church of Christ, whereof we were
once duly Members, is a sin of a deep dye, is owned by all that own the Gospel,
and have any tender regard t^ the prosperity of the Church, or propagation of
the Truth, but yet we ought not to be so easily credulous, as to believe every
departure to be that heinous thing, which passionate men, in hot blood, out of
prejudice to the persons of others, or a necessity to secure and establish
their own Acquists over m^ns Consciences, are resolved to call so.

It was not therefore lightly, but with great judgment, that the learned Hales
calls it, one of those Theologi^al (...), with which they who use to uphold a
party in Religion* use to fright (...) (...) making any enquiry into it, are
ready to Relinquish and oppo^ it, if it appear either erroneous or suspicious.

St. Cyprian (it seems) affirms it to be of so hor^ble a G^, the Martyrdom was
not a sufficient Expiation of it. And upon the like occasion, he might have
said as much of any other si^, for I have not learnt, that Martyrdom was
designed to expiate our si^, but to bear witness to Gods Truths: And the same
Cyprian at another time will inform us, that Plebs obsequens praeceptis
Dominicis, and Deum metuens a peccatore praeposito separare se debet. A people
fearing God, and Conscienciously obsequious to his Commands, (not only may,
but) ought to separate it self from a scandalous and wicked Pastor. And
therefore we may secure our selves, that such separation (in his judgment) is
not That Schism which Martyrdom will not expiate.

The true reason why separation in the Scripture, and purer Primitive times,
was esteemed a Crime so unpardonable, was, because the Church made no other
Terms of enjoying her Communion, then Christ had made: That Superiors
durst-not venture the Churches Peace upon such a sandy foundation, as her own
Inventions, turned into Impositions: for if the Terms of Communion be of Man's
making, the separation that en^ues will be but a Schism of man's making too, and
whether a Church has first a power to make a sin, and then to make it damnable,
I have some reason to question.

Let nothing be declared Schism, but what the Scriptures ha^ made so, and we
shall be content it be made as great a sin as he can reasonably desire.

Had not our Enquirer been carried down in the torrent of his own overflowing
Eloquence, till he had quite lost himself, he might have answered himself from
his own words, p 109. For this cause (says he) it pleased God that his Church,
in those early days, should rather be harassed with persecutions, which made it
unite it self the closer, and paring off all superfluities, keep to the
necessary and essential Doctrines delivered to it, then to be softened, and made
wanton by ease, and so to corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel: Let a Church
then return to the simplicity of the Gospel: Let her repent of that softness
and wantonness of Spirit, which by Ease she has contracted. Let her pare off
all superfluities, and keep close to the necessary and essential Doctrines
delivered to it, and she shall find us as ready to write Philippics against
Schism as him self, though we want his Ciceronian quill, and wordie
excellencies.

Now though we are all convinced that Schism (very nominis) is a most
detestable Impiety; yet to beget in us a greater aversation from it, it may be
profitable to listen to his reasonings, which are so potent, as will doubtless
drain both the Conventicles and the Theaters.

1. None (says he) can doubt of this, who considers what care our Savior took
to prevent it, what pains he took with his Apostles that they might be
thoroughly instructed, and not differ in the delivery of his mind to the World.
We do with all humble thankfulness own the faithfulness of our Savior in
instructing, and the Carefulness of the Apostles in following their
instructions. They delivered to the Churches, as the whole Counsel of God, Acts
20. 27. so, only the Counsel of God; 1 Cor. 11. 23. I have received of the Lord
that which I also delivered unto you; And let but the Pastors of the Church
imitate these patterns, keep exactly to their instructions from the Lord
Christ, which we doubt not are proportionable to reach the ends of Unity and
Peace, (else they had not been sufficiently instructed) and either we shall
have no separations; or the case will be so plain; the separation so evidently
Schism; that the Schismatics shall not be able to obtend the least umbrage to
cover their gross prevarication: But when Ambassadors thoroughly instructed in
all the means to prevent that evil; shall go beyond their Instructions, and
impose new, unheard of Terms of Communion, which never came into his heart to
approve, nor ever came out of his mouth to impose, give me leave to say thus
far, they are not Ambassadors, and by consequence, a Noncompliance with them
therein, cannot be interpreted any affront, but faithfulness to him who
entrusted them with those dispatches: And if Christ's instructions given to his
Apostles to prevent this growing evil were insufficient, I am afraid they will
be but sorrily helped out, who have recourse to men for fuller instruct^,

2. To prove the greatness of this sin, he observes (and we thank him for the
observation) that the Apostles were industrious to resist all beginnings of
Schism in every Church, to heal all breaches, to take away all occasions of
Division, to unite all hearts, and reconcile all minds: and to requite his
kindness, I will repay his observation with this other; that they either are
not the Apostles Successors in their healing Spirit, or else have seen some
weighty reason to depart from their judgment about the hainousness of that
sin, who instead of taking away the occasions of Divisions, which they have
given: or removing the stumbling Blocks out of the way of Union, which they
have laid, do give greater to, and lay more obstacles before the Christian
world.

3. His third proof is taken from the loveliness of Unity. It Is not (says he)
the sublimity of Christian Doctrine, nor the gloriousness of the Hopes it
propounds, that will so recommend it to the opinion and ^steen of beholders, as
when it shall be said, Ecce ut Christiani Amant: when they shall observe the
Love, Concord, and Unanimity amongst the Professors of it. The Enquirer has
here stumbled at unawares upon the formal reason of Schism, or sinful
separation, which lies not in the variety of Opinions, or differing practices,
modes or forms of Worship, but in a want of true love and charity: That which
renders Christianity truly beautiful and amiable in the Eyes of Beholders, is*
that it teaches the Professors thereof to love one another with a pure heart
frvently* though under different persuasions, as to Modes of Divine Worship and
Discipline; That their hearts are larger to receive one another persons, then
their heads are to conceive one another notions. But yet, as he is a fond
Lover that chooses his Wife by the Eye, for the symmetry of her external frame,
or clothing of wrought Gold, rather then those virtues which adorn the Soul;
so he that chooses his Religion by Sense, and not by Faith, will make a most
lamentable bargain; He that falls in love with Christ's Church upon External
Allurements and Extrinsick Motives, will either repent, or quit his choice when
she is persecuted, her outward frame discomposed, her order violated, the
Shepherd smitten, and the Sheep scattered; whereas, he that espouses Religion
for those invisible glories which she propounds, and keeps in his steady eye
the recompense of reward, will adhere to his choice when she is most black, and
the Sun of Persecution has too familiarly looked upon her.

But I shall not need to trouble my self, or the Reader, with any more of these
fine Arguments; Schism is an evil, whether he be angry at it or no. And
separation may be good, whether he be pleased or no: All the Question will be,
that seeing there is an apparent separation found amongst us from the Political
Church of England, and supposing that there is sin one where or other, where
the guilt of it ought to lie! The Enquirer has spoken a great deal of Truth in
in a few words, That some have found pleasure to get that Child, which they
would by no means have laid at their own doors* A successful piece of Villainy
it is, which sometimes passes for a virtue, for the Fathers who have begot
these Brats, to expose them to be kept and maintained at the cost of the poor
innocent Parish. And if we might guess at the true Father by the Child's
Physiognomy: All the divisions which have so heavily charged the Churches,
having sprung from Ceremonies, from needless Impositions, from unnecessary
Terms of Communion; They who take such pleasure to beget the one; may be
presumed to have been the Grand-fathert of the other.

If yet there be any controversy depending whose the Child is: The Enquirer
recommends to us the Wisdom of Solomon, for discovering the True Mother, and
because we know, Partus sequitur ventum, if we can once find out the Damm, we
shall make her confess the Sire: It was the early proof (says he) Solomon gave
of his Wisdom in discovering the true Mother of the living Child, to which both
the Litigants laid equal claim -- I confess his illustration proceeds hitherto
but very oddly, for there, the quarrel was, who should have the Child, and be
reputed the true Mother but with us, all the controversy is who shall be
discharged of it: but all similitudes do not run of four Legs, and it is very
well if this will hop on one: observe how he lays both ends of his discourse
together: As that wise Prince discovered the true Mother by the tenderness of
her Bowels toward the Infant, so we may perhaps discover the true Children of
the Church by their respect and tenderness to her. Ay; just so no doubt! Even
as the Wheelbarrow rumbles over the Pebbles, so a Thumb-rope of Sand, will make
an excellent (...) for Fishers folly; The comparison would run a little more
naturally and regularly thus. As the true Mother was discerned by the
tenderness of her Bowels toward the Infant, who would rather part with her
right, then that her bleeding Eye should ever see her Child divided, so we may
perhaps discover the true Mother of the Church, by her condescending and
relenting pity, who would rather wave her claims, and resign her right* in some
lesser instances, then ever endure to see the body of Christ divided by a
Schismatical Dichotomy. And as the Harlot, notwithstanding all her pretenses,
bewrayed her self to the discerning eye of that Judicious Prince, who could be
content the Child should rather dye, then she lose her moiety, so will she
evidence her self to be a Stepmother Church, which peremptorily insists upon a
pretended right to Imp^se, at the Peril of the Churches Peace, rather then by
waving those pretenses, save the endangered Church from imminent destruction:
but some men's Allegories are never so excellent, as when they are impertinent,
or non -- sense; and I presume he found this Allusion in the Wisdom of Solomon,
in the Apocryphal Writings.

We are come at length to the Question, what is the true notion of Schism? A
point that deserves to be handled with the greatest exactness; for upon the
True stating hereof, the issue of the whole controversy depends. His notion,
or definition of Schism, is this. Schism is a voluntary departure or separation
of ones self, without just cause given, from that Christian Church, whereof he
was once a Member: Or, Schism is a breach of that Communion wherein a man might
have continued without sin. I shall not need to find faults, or pick holes in
this definition, they will offer themselves as he opens the Terms, only I
observe, (1) That it offends against one of the sacred Laws of Definition,
which ought to be most religiously and inviolably preserved. Definitiones
debent cum Definito reciprocari; The Definition ought to be convertible with
the thing defined: And that this is not so, is evident, because there may be a
Schism where there is no separation from External Communion: There is a Schism
in a Church, as well as from a Church. The Churches Garment may be rent, and yet
not rent in two: Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together in the
Church, I hear there are Divisions amongst you: (...), chapter 12. v. 25. That
there may be no Schism in the body, (...). That Definition which is as narrow
as his Charity, and leaves out those who ought ^o be taken in, must necessarily
be stark naught. (2) This definition is very short, in expressing that which is
indeed the Poison and Venom, the formal Reason of all Schismatical departure,
viz. the want of Charity, and true Evangelical Love; for he that departs from a
Society, yet loves the real Christians therein, and the Society it self, so far
as it is a Church of Christ's institution, only he loves his own Soul with a
more intense love, and accordingly makes the best provision for it he can, and
would rejoice that others would accept of the same advantages, ought not to be
called a Schismatic; but if they who pretend to a power to stamp what
significations they please upon words, will call him so, the best is, no
Nicknames will prejudice him in the sight of that God, who searches the
heart, and tries the reins. As Heresy is opposed to the Faith, so Schism is
opposed to Love; and Heresy and Schism are distinguished by those things to
which each of them is opposed.

3. It Is faulty for its ambiguity: because he tells us not what the Christian
Church is, from whence the departure must be made to denominate it Schism^ical:
If he means a particular Congregation united under its proper Pastor according
to the Laws of Christ, it will prove it Schismatical to depart from a Church of
Non-conformists. If he understands a National Church, he should do well to
prove, that such a Church is of Christ's institution; but I shall wave these and
many more, till he has discanted upon the particulars of his own Definition.

1. I call it (says he) a departure or separation from the Society of the
Church, to distinguish it from other sins, which though they are breaches of
the Laws of our Religion, and consequently of the Church, yet are not a
renunciation of the Society. There may be such a person, who for his wickedness
deserves to be ^ast out of the Church as being a scandal and dishonor to it,
yet neither separating himself, nor being cast out of the Society, remains
still a Member of it. This is indeed too true, And hence it is, that many
Churches are so overrun with scandalous Debauchez, that there is very little
difference between the impaled Garden, and the wide Wilderness: And perhaps was
there more of this Authorative separation, there would be less of that
prudential separation: If rotten and gangreened Members were cut off, the sound
would not have that necessity to provide for their own security; If the
Contagion were not so Epidemical* there were less need to seek out for better
and more wholesome Airs: when an Impudent Blasphemer, who out-faces the Sun,
the Notoriety of whose Crime needs no Dilator, shall yet quietly maintain his
station in a Church, whilst others for not coming up to a Ceremony, shall be
rejected, though otherwise holy and inoffensive, men may make Models and Idea's
of Schism to save their Credits long enough, before they will be much regarded.

2. I call it (says he) a voluntary separation to distinguish (...) from
punishment, or Schism from Excommunication. Yes, but he ought to have called it
Voluntary upon a higher account, in opposition to such departure as is made
with regret and reluctance: for when a sincere Christian has used all due means
to inform himself of the Truth of such a principle, or the lawfulness of such a
practice as may be made the Conditions of Communion with that Society; when he
has asked advice of God in his word, when he has prayed with David, that God
would open his Eyes, when he has conferred with the most judicious and
impartial Christians, when he has humbly and modestly represented to the
Pastors and Governors of that Church, the suspected Condition, or the
innovation crept into the Church, and yet can neither procure Reformation of
the abuse, not toleration of his particular non-complyance, nor yet find
satisfaction of the lawfulness of such practice, he may without guilt withdraw
himself from that Society; nor ought this to be charged upon him as a
departure, having in it any thing of sinful voluntariness: when a Merchant
throws his Lading overboard to preserve Life, I grant that he may be said
willingly to throw it away, because his precious life preponderates and turns
the Scale of the will, yet none will condemn that poor Merchant of too little
affection to his Merchandise. Thus when a Christian can find no rest, no
satisfaction to his Conscience from those suspected Conditions, which in the
constant exercise of his Communion do recur, and shall re^ede from that
Society, joining himself to another, where with full satisfaction of spirit he
may pursue his own Edification, such a one ought not to be charged with a
voluntary departure, nor shall it be charged upon him as such in the judgment
of him that shall judge the World.

3. I call it (says he) a departure from a particular Church, or from a part of
the visible Church, to distinguish it from Apostasy, which is a casting of the
whole Religion, the name and profession of Christianity: But here his
definition is very Crazie, and ill joynted: for it ought to be defined a
departure from a particular Church of Christ; to distinguish it from such a
Constitution, as is either no particular Church of Christ's institution, or
none, so far as the separation is made from it: such a one as is not united
under Christ's Officers, nor conjoined by Christ's Ligaments: Christ has taken
special care that there may be no Schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12-25. And for
this end he has commanded a spirit of mutual forbearance and condescension; he
has mingled and tempered the body together with such exact geometrical
proportion, that each of the parts may care for the other; for this end also he
has instituted some extraordinary Officers, whose work and Office, was to cease
with the present exigency and occasion, and the ordinary, whose Office and
Employment (as the Reasons of them) were to be perpetuaI. Now if any Society of
Men, calling themselves a Church (and in the main respects being really so)
retaining the great Doctrines of Christianity, and such Ordinances whereby
Salvation is attainable, shall yet put it self under other Officers then Christ
has appointed, and practice other Ordinances then he has instituted, and make
Communion with her impracticable, without submitting to such Officers, such
Ordinances; separation from that Society, can be no separation from a
particular Church of Christ: Because* though they may be such a Church in the
main, yet so far as the separation is made, they are not so: And they deny
Communion with them, so far as they are a Church of Christ; because of
non-submission to them, so far as they are no^ a Church of Christ.

4. I add (says he) those words -- whereof he was once a Member, because Schism
imports division, and making two of that which was but one before. So that if
an Act was made to divide some of our greater Parishes (which are much larger
then some of the Primitive Diocesses) into Two, under their distinct Pastors,
this must be a Schism, according to this famous definition; for here is, 1. A
voluntary departure, 2. From a particular Church, 3. whereof once they were all
Members; and wherein 4. they might all have continued without sin.

But the most considerable thing here will be, how I became a Member of that
Church, from which the departure is supposed to be made; for 1. To be forced
into a Church, will never make me such a Member, but that I may reassume my
liberty and right when the force is removed; Violence and Constraint unite me
no otherwise to a Church, then a great Beetle unites a Wedge to a Tree; which
though it may by main strength be driven into the Tree, yet not being engras^ed
into it, no Union is created with it, nor does it derive any nourishing juices
from it. 2. Baptism alone will not do it: because as I conceive, that Ordinance
solemnly unites me only to the Catholic visible Church, and not to a
particular Congregation; otherwise, whenever the providence of God shall
transplant me into another particular Church, I must be rebaptized, and so as
often as I remove, because as to that Church I am unbaptized. 3. Nor will my
being born and bred within national limits and precincts, denominate me a
Member of such National Church or Constitution, because it passes for a Current
Maxim. That the Church is in the Commonwealth, and therefore Church and
Kingdom; Churchmember and Subject are not Terms of equal extent and
demensions. And besides, there are many Congregations of Christians in this
Nation, not syncretizing with the National Policy, who yet are not stigmatized
with the Brand of Schismatical, but without the least reproach of Schism
Worship God, and exercise Discipline according to their own private and
peculiar Laws. 4. Therefore to make me a Member of a particular Church, there
must be the concurrence of my own free choice, which whether it ought to be
signified by express and over^ Acts* or that an implicit and tac^te consent
may not suffice, is he^ no season to discourse.

5. But the only difficulty (I am sure the gr^est) is, that which he subjoins
in th^se words -- An unn^ssary separation, or without just cause, or to
separate from that Society wherein I may continue without sin. Two extremes
there are it seems.

1. Of The Zealo^s of the Church of Rome, who scarcely allow any thing as a
sufficient cause of separation* But I look on this as a very unjust surmise of
the Romanists; for their most rigid Zealots will in The^ allow sinful
conditions, imposed for a just ^round of sinless departure, only they deny to
individuals a judgment of discretion to determine each for himself of the
sinfulness of the Condition; And thus what they seem to give with the right
hand* they take away with the left: And herein our Enquirer is as strait laced
as they; for though in the general he will prodigally allow us, that sinful
Impositions are a just plea for separation, yet he has forestalled that
concession all along with a fine contrivance; That our private Wisdom must
lower the Top-sale to the public. Thus p. 64. Since the peace of the Church
often depends upon such points as Salvation does not, and since in many of
those, every man is not a Competent judge, but must either be in danger of
being deceived himself, and of troubling others, one of necessity must trust
some body else wiser then himself; so that the matter according to this
Gentleman's Hypothesis, is just as long as it is broad; but that the Church of
Rome speaks that with open Mouth, which he delivers between the Teeth.

2. The other supposed extreme is, that of some Protestants, who make the
Causes of separation as many, and as light as the Jews did of Divorce, almost
for any matter whatsoever: But as our Savior, when the case was put, found out
a middle way betwixt Divorce for no cause at all, and for every cause, so ought
it to be done in this business of Schism.

Reader! we are now in a hopeful way for the compromising all the Controversies
that have vexed our Northern Climate, and to seal general Releases of all
Actions, and causes of Actions against each other, from the beginning of the
Reformation, to the day of the Date of these presents: for as we may charitably
presume of all our Episcopal Brethren, that they will stand to the final award
of so great an undertaker as our Enquirer, so I am confident I may engage for
all the dissenting Brethren, that they will abide by the Umpirage of Jesus
Christ; and that whatever expedient he used in deriding the grand Question
about Divorce, shall conclude them in all their Debates about Schism: Now the
final Decision of that affair we find, Mat. 19. 8. where our Savior considers
not what could plead inveterate Custom, or a gray headed practice to abet its
pretensions, he slights all the Arguments from laudable Examples, and the
Traditions of their Forefathers, and runs up the practice to its Primitive
Institution; and tells them, From the Beginning it was not so. And indeed if a
Transcript be blotted or blurred. we presently have recourse to the Original,
and from thence redintegrate whatever the hungry worm, or greedy Moth has
de^aced: when the Streams are muddied and polluted, we relieve our selves from
the Spring, where the Virgin, and unpolluted waters, flow clearest and
sweetest, without adulterate mixtures. It was the cry in the Council of Nice,
(...), and we cry the same one and all, Let the terms of Comunion in the first
plantation of the Gospel Church be produced, and he that will not subscribe,
and submit to those Archetypes, let him be branded for an obstinate Schismatic.

Now therefore if ever our Enquirer promises himself and us, that he will Hit
the m^rk; I say then, and then only, is there just cause of separation, when
perseverance in the Communion of such a Church cannot be without sin, that is,
when she shall impose such Laws and Terms of Society, as cannot be submitted
to, without apparent breach of the Divine Law. Thus he says! And if I should
tell the Reader, I say the contrary, we should make a squabble on it, to render
our selves ridiculous; let it therefore neither be what I say, nor what he
says, but what wiser men then us both say, who may be presumed more impartial
in their Judgments, wherein they vindicate the Dissenters, because they were,
or are eminent Members of this Church. And first I will present him with the
judgment of Mr. Hales, a Person of whom the Church of England has great cause
to boast. Now amongst many other things to our purpose, in his Treatise of
Schism, he acquaints us; 1. That when either false or uncertain conclusions are
obtruded for Truth, or Acts either unlawful or ministering just scruple, are
required of us to be performed; in these cases, consent were Conspiracy, and
open Contestation, is not Faction or Schism, but due Christian Animosity. 2.
That nothing absolves men from the guilt of Schism, but true and unpretended
Conscience. Therefore such a Conscience will absolve from the guilt of it. 3.
That where the Cause of Schism is necessary, there not he that separates, but
he that is the Cause of the separation is the Schismatic. 4. That to require
the execution of some unlawful or suspected act, is a just cause of refusing
Communion; for not only in Reason, but in Religion too, that Maxim admits of
no Release,* Cautissimi cujusque praeceptum, quod dubitas ne feceris. 5. That
it has been the common Disease of Christians from the beginning, not to
content themselves with that measure of Faith which God and Scriptures have
expressly afforded, but out of a vain desire to know more then is revealed, they
have attempted to devise things, of which we have no Light neither from Reason
nor Revelation; neither have they rested here, but upon pretense of Church
Authority (which is none) or Tradition, (which for the most part is but
^eigned) they have peremptorily concluded, and confidently imposed upon others
a necessity of entertaining conclusions of that nature. 6. To l^ad our public
forms with the private fancies upon which we differ, is the most Sovereign way
to perpetuate Schism unto the worlds end. Prayer, Confession, Thanksgiving,
Reading of Scriptures, Administration of Sacraments in the plainest and the
simplest manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy,
though nothing, either of private Opinion, or of Church pomp, of Garments, or
prescribed gestures, of Imagery, of Music, of matter concerning the Dead, of
many superfluities which creep into the Church, under the name of Order and
Decency, did interpose it self. To charge Churches and Liturgies with things
unnecessary, was the first beginning of all superstition. 7. That no occasion
has produced more frequent, more continuous, more sanguineous Schisms, then
Episcopal Ambition has done. 8. That they do but Abuse themselves and others,
that would persuade us, that Bishops, by Christ's institution have any
superiority over other men, further then that of Reverence: or that any Bishop
is superior to another, further then positive order agreed upon amongst
Christians, has prescribed, 9. In times of manifest corruptions and
persecutions wherein Religious assembling is dangerous; Private Meetings
howsoevr, besides public Order, are not (...) lawful, but they are of
necessity and duty: All pious Assemblies (...) times of Persecution and
Corruption, however practiced, are indeed, (...) rather Alone the lawful
Congregations, And public Assemblies, though according to form of Law, are
indeed nothing else but Riots and Convemticles, if they be stained with
Corruption and Superstition.

There is one person more, whom, since he has quoted Incognit^ for an excellent
person, I will the rather recommend to his consideration. Irenic. p. 109. where
speaking of the private Christian, he says; He is bound to adhere to that
Church, which appears most to retain the Evangelical purity. And p. 116. He is
bound to break off from that Society which enjoins a mixture of some
Corruptions as to practice: One word from Dr. Iackson, chap. 14. of the Church:
where he acquits those of the Schism which withdraw from^hat Church which
imposes Rites and Customs, that cross the Rule of Faith and Charity. Bishop
Bramhalls Testimony will pass for sterling. p. 7, 8. of Schism: When there is a
mutual division of two parts, or members of the mystical Body of Christ one
from the other; yet both retaining Communion with the universal Church,
quamcunque partem amplexus fueris Schismaticus non Audies, quippe quod*
universa Ecclesia neutram damnavit: Which side soever you close with, you shall
not be reproacht for a Schismatic, because the universal Church has condemned
neither side: And he plainly tells us, p. 101. That it was not the erroneous
Opinions of the Church of Rome, but the obtruding them by Laws upon other
Churches that warranted a separation.

Next we will hear a word from the Learned Lord Verulam, It Is a sign (says he)
of exasperation to condemn the contrary part as a Sect; yea, and some
indiscreet persons have been bold in open preaching, to use dishonorable and
derogatory speeches and censures of the Churches abroad, and that so far, as
that some of our men (as I have heard) ordained in foreign parts, have, been
pronounced no lawful Ministers, -- And further; let us remember, that the
ancient and true bounds of Unity, are one Faith, one Baptism, and not one
Ceremony, one Policy; and endeavor to comprehend that saying,* Differentia
Rituum, commendat unitatem Doctrinae: Christ's Coat was indeed without Seam, yet
the Churches Garment was of diverse Colors.

Amongst all these, we must not forget that noble and gallant Person the Lord
Falkland, A little search will find them, (He speaks of no little ones) to have
been the destruction of Unity, under pretense of Uniformity; to have brought in
superstition and scandal under Titles of Reverence and Decency, to have slacked
the strictness of Unity, which was between us, and those of our own Religion
beyond the Sea^.

S^rates, lib. (...). cap. 21. tells us, that in his time there could scarce^
be found two Churches that used the same forms of prayer. In France, the Ritual
of Paris differed from that of Anjou, and in England we had our Devotions
secundum usum Sarum, and secundum usum Bangor; and yet the one never reproacht
the other for Sectaris or Schismatics; I am consident therefore to assert it.
That neither the Wit nor Malice of man can prove him a Schismatic, who
maintaining Evangelical Love toward, and holding the substantial Doctrines
owned by the Church of England, shall either out of choice, or necessity,
transplant himself from under the spreading shadow of a Goodly Cathedral, to a
Parochial Church, and yet the one has its Organs, Adoration toward the East,
and Altar, Adoration at the Naming of Jesus, with multitudes of Rites and
Observances, unknown to the Villages, and far more differing from the Parochial
Usages and Customs, then the Worship of most Country Towns differ from that of
the Non-conformists.

After all this, I shall throw up the Authority of these great names, and give
him full scope for his Rational Abilities, to prove his proposition, when I
have first noted those few things.

1. He requires an apparent breach of the Divine Law, as the only thing that
can excuse separation from the guilt of Schism: but will not a real breach of
the Divine Law serve the turn, unless it be so apparent as he can desire. I
persuade my self, God never yet spoke so loud, that they who have barracadoed
their Ears with prejudice, will hear him: nor ever yet wrote so plain, that
they will see his mind, whose Eyes interest has sealed up: And what if it be an
apparent breach of the Divine Law in the sincere judgment of him that
separates; must he never discharge his Duty, till he can persuade all the world
to see theirs, and pursue it.

Who shall be Judge, whether the Imposed Terms contain an apparent breach of
the Divine Law? and such as will justify a separation? Mr. Hales indeed tells
us, It Is a point of no great depth or difficulty; but yet the true solution of
it, carries fire in the Tail of it; for it brings with it a piece of Doctrine
which is seldom pleasing to Superiors. But were it not that men hate
chargeable Truth more then cheap Error, and love cheap Corruptions beyond
costly Reformation, there could be no great difficulty who should be judge in
this case: For 1. Who may more justly challange a Liberty to judge what is sin,
then he that must be damned if he do sin: He that sins at another; Command will
hardly persuade him to be his substitute in the Condemnation, nor will God
accept him for the sinners proxy. 2. If the Church must judge; Then though her
terms be the most apparent violations of the Divine Law, yet there can never be
any lawful separation, unless we can Imagine her so modest, as to confess a
sin, and yet at the same time, so immodest as to impose it. To acknowledge her
Terms sinful, and yet with the same breath to enjoin them as necessary to
Communion.

It will be pretended, that the same Inconveniences will follow the other way:
for if a particular person who withdraws, must judge, then let the Terms be
perfectly innocent, yet to be sure, he will plead, that they are sinful; unless
we can suppose him so modest, as to confess himself a Schismatic; and yet at
the same time so immodest, as to persevere in his Schism. But I conceive that
this arguing is very wide: 1. Because every Man's Soul lies at stake, and it
cannot be imagined that he should either not study its Interest, or that
understanding it, he should not endeavor to secure it: I speak of such as are
otherwise Conscientious; for if he be a person vicious, and pro^igate, one
eaten up of wickedness, we ought not to flatter our selves with any great hopes
of the impartiality of his determinations: And if he have thus debauched his
Conscience, the Laws are open; The Magistrate who has his power from the Moral
Law, has by the same Law sufficient Authority to coerce by punishments,
whatever Enormities are committed against it. 2. We have no Reason to suppose
any Man to be a Hypocrite in the matter of separation, which is attended with
so mamy dreadful penalties, unless notorious evidence will warrant such a
Judgment.

3. A rational suspicion of a breach of the Divine Law is enough in the
Apostles judgment to justify the suspension of my own Act; and if it prove no
other then a thing indifferent in it self, yet such dissatisfaction will excuse
from sin: for so the Apostle, Romans 14. 5. Let every man be fully persuaded in
his own mind. 14. To him that esteeme^h any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean, 23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he eats not of
Faith; for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

The Enquirer has all this while stood like the very picture of Modesty,
equally placed between the two exar^ams of All separavation, and no separation:
have but a little patience, and you shall see how manfully he will behave
himself against them both.

1. For the poor Romanists, he gives them a small pat with his Foot, and they
are silenced for ever. It Is plain (says he) it can be no sin to separate, when
it is a sin to Communicate Yes very plain it is! but so say the Dissenters. It
can be no sin for us to separate, when it is a sin to communicate: Ay but (says
he) It was an apparent breach of the Divine Law upon which we separated from
Rome. Why so say the Dissenters: It Is an apparent breach of the Divine Law,
upon which we separated from the Church of England. Ay but (will he say) you
ought to have trusted wiser men then your selves, and not like the Antipodes,
to have run upon your heads: Oh! but then comes in the Romanists, and falls
upon his bones: You ought to have trusted wiser men then your selves, your
Superiors in the Church, from whom you separated, and not have ran upon your
own heads: Nay replies he, but we have a judgment of Discretion, and ought to
be Masters of our own Reason, so far as to take Cognizance of our own Acts:
Well! The Non-conformists catches that word by the end, before it be well out
of his Mouth; We are for a judgment of Discretion too, and ought so far to be
Masters of our own Reasons, as not to Act against them; nothing can be returned
that I can foresee, but that it is not for such pitiful sneaks as the
Dissenters, to talk of Conscience, and a judgment of discretion, its enough
for the Gendarms of Reason to make use of that plea against Rome. But I will
leave him to squabble it out with the Romish Synagogue.

2, He has quickly (you see) shaken them their foddering; but these cumbersome
Fanatics stick as close to him as a Burr, and therefore he must now give them
a rattle.

It Is plain (says he) that Schism being so great a sin, and of so extreme bad
Consequences, that which must acquit me of the guilt of it in my separation,
can be nothing less then an equal danger on the other hand, and that when I
may persevere without sin, it must of necessity be a sin to separate upon
inferior dislikes. This looks pretty well at first but for a few Inconveniences
in the Argument. 1. That he begs the whole Question at a Clap, the question was
whether the Imposition of such Laws and Terms of Society as cannot be submitted
to without apparent breach of the divine Law be the only just cause of
separation? He affirms it, and for proof gives us this, that Schism being so
great a sin that which must acquit me of the Guilt of it in my separation, must
be equal danger of sinning: wherein he supposes that all separation is Schism,
where there is not equal danger of sinning that is of an apparent breach of the
divine Law, whith is but the question it self a little disgnised to make it
more passable to the unwary Reader; the truth is, Schism is so great a sin that
no danger of sinning whatsoever can acquit me of it, for I do not know that any
thing will compound for uncharitableness, for pride, for obstinacy, but
separation for the benefit of all Gods Ordinances, that I may be edifyed and
built up in the most holy faith, but nothing of the nature of the abominable
sin in it. 2. Dissenters will answer, that the danger of sinning is more clear
and evident when I act against my Conscience, then in separating peaceably and
modestly from a particular Church: for it cannot be lawful in any Case to act
against my light, but it may be lawful in some Cases to separate from a
particular Church: there is less danger of sin in breaking a humane
constitution, whitch ('it is at least) questionable whether man has power to
en^oyn, then of violating the dictate of my own reason informed by all the
means I can use from the word of God. 3. Non-conformists say, that they ought
not to separate, but when non-separation is sinful, but then they say, that
non-separation may be sinful upon other accounts then the apparent breach of
the divineLaw made the terms of entering into; or continuing in communion: for,
say they, it is our sin, if a Church retains some corroptions in it, which
prejudice edification, and she shall resolve never to make any alteration in
her worship; or discipline, nor make any further progress toward a through
Reformation, not to provide for my self elsewhere, and having opportunity, I
sin if I take not, accept not the advantage which providence offers me, and
wherein the word warrants me.

And yet he wonders that any doubt should be admitted in this Case. Let me
advise him to beware of Excessive wonderment: they say, it will make a man as
lean as a rake: but what is the Cause of his admiration? Why some think to wash
their hands of the Imputation of Schism upon other terms as namely; if a Church
shall not require such terms of Communion as are Expressly sinful, yet if she
shall require indifferent unnecessary or at most suspected things that in this
case there is enough to Excuse the person that shall separate from a
participation of this sin. There are some no doubt of that judgment: and when I
have praelibated a few things, he shall have his full blow at them.

1. That when they join issue upon this point, it is not because they are
satisfied that the things required unto Communion as the antecedent conditions
of it, or to be practiced in communion as the mattor of it are indifferent in
their use and application, for they are ready to maintain it upon equal laws,
before equal Judges, that they are sinful in their use, antecedent to, their
imposition, but the true reasons why they use this place, are. 1. Ex abundanti
thinking that their very outworks are impregnable against his batteries. 2. Out
of respect to this Church which they highly honor, and reverence her too much
then to charge her flatly with sinful impositions; and therefore do offer this
state of the question, and are hardly capable of so much incivility to so
considerable a body, and so great a part of the visible Catholic Church,
unless the importunity of some modest men did extort that answer from them. 3.
They doubt whether some Churchmen will be Masters of so much patience as to
bear freedom though temperateness of speech, which is absolutely necessary to
the manadging the Controversy when thus stated: and have reason to fear that
some who provoke them to assert the sinfulness of the terms, will make such an
Assertion an unpardonable sin, not to be expiated without, if with Martyrdom.

2. When he states the question about things suspected to be sinful, I hope he
will give them the common civility to draw up their own plea in their own
terms, and to ^xp^ane what they mean by suspected things in the question:
because they are not compelled to maintain Every proposition which he in his
well known charity shall obtrude upon them: A pract^se th^n may be taken upon
suspicion of sinfulness two ways, first upon light slighty, trivial grounds of
suspicion, which have no w^ight, with a serious and rational Considerer: Or
2dly, upon violent presumptions, such as may s^agger a person of good judgment
and diligence: and it is these that they are willing to argue it with him;
whether if a Church shall impose such things as the terms of Communion with
her, as have, or do, or may puzzle judicious persons about their Lawfulness,
and cannot clear it up to their Consciences that they are Lawful, yet they may
not forbear Communion in this Case.

3. They desire the same justice in Explaning themselves about the term
indifferent: A thing may be indifferent in its own nature, which is not so in
its use, as applied to and practiced in the Immediate worship and service of
God; If the things under debate be found upon diligent search to remain
indifferent, after they are vested with all their circumstances in Gods
Worship, they have no quarrel against them that I know of; but if they be only
indifferent in their own general nature, they desire to be Excused if they dare
not admit the consequence, that therefore they must needs be so when used in
Gods worship, and then made the terms of Communion.

4. Unnecessary things may be either such as are absolutely unnecessary, or
such as are hypothetically so, some things that are not absolutely and in
themselves necessary, yet may become necessary pro^ic and nunc, even antecedent
to the interposition of the Churches Authority; And Dissenters say that what
ever the Church shall impose ought to be necessary, either in it self, or by
concurrent Circumstances, which when they shall conspire together, may be by a
Lawful Authority Enjoined pro tempore, that is so long as such necessity shall
continue, which when once removed the things ought to return into their former
Classis of Indifferents.

5. When they deny the Churches power of imposing things Expressly sinful, they
deny also a power of imposing things sinful by just consequence; They judge
many things sinful which are not forbidden. (...), in the Scriptures, and many
things duties which are not Literally and Syllabically commanded in the
Scriptures: They say not that the sign of the Cross was ever by name
prohibited: but they say there are undoubted maxims laid down in the word,
from which it will undeniably follow that in its present station in the Church
it is sinful; And now he may when he pleases speak his three things, which if
they be pertinent and proved as strongly as they are spoken confidently, I am
content.

(1.) His first say consists of a Conce^ion and an Assertion.

1. His Concession, I willingly acknowledge that such a Church as shall
studiously or carelessly clog her communion with unnecessary, burdensome and
suspected conditions, is very highly to blame, that is, the sins; but that it
became not him to tell her so; and then I will venture to say a few words also.
1. If it be the Churches sin to command unnecessary burdensome suspect
Conditions: It cannot be my duty to obey; A Church may possibly sin in the
manner of her Command, and yet I not sin in doing the matter of the Command,
but when the sins in the Enjoining, I cannot conceive how it should be my sin
not to give obedience; for I look upon my duty as the result of the Churches
Authority. and wherein she has no Authority it will be impossible to find a
foundation upon which to build my duty: All Offices of Justice arise from that
relation wherein he that claims and he that yields subjection stand to each
other: And where there is no relation, there can be no relative duty: now in
this case before us where the Church has no power to command, nay where she
sins, if she commands, so far she is none, of my superior; and therefore so far
the relation is none, and by consequence the duty just as much. 2. If the
Church be to blame highly, nay very highly to blame, that clogs her Communion
with these burdensome things, then we may presume she sins, for who shall dare
to assume so much freedom as to blame her, unless she transgress the Law of her
God? If then she have sinned and transgressed some Law of God, it must be some
negative precept, thou shall not impose burdenso^ things; for it is a principle
our Enquirer will not sell for Gold: That what ever is not forbidden, is
Lawful; If then God had not forbidden her to impose such burdensome things, she
could not sin, or be to blame in so doing (according to his principles) now say
I, the same God that has prohibited the Churches Imposition of, has also
prohibited my subjection to burdensome conditions: And let this Gentleman
produce his Scriptures for the one; and I will drop texts with him for the
other when he pleases; Thus we are commanded, 1 Cor. 7. 23. not to be the
servants of men: not only bought with a price, and set free once, but commanded
to assert that freedom, and 5. Gal. 1. to stand fast in that liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, and not again to be entangled with the yoke of
bondage; Now if ever these Scriptures do us any service, or be of any use, it
must be in this particular, that I am obliged not to take a burden and cumber
upon my soul, at his hands who has no authority to impose it: If then a Church
shall clog her Communion with burdensome things, she is to blame, she sins, and
I am not bound to obey, and therefore my departure can be no Schism. I mean no
Schism but one of man's creating; 3. If a Church sin in clogging her Communion
with things which without crime or fraud are suspected of sin upon such grounds
as are allowed just and ponderous in other cases, then it cannot be my sin to
separate: for the Church sins in commanding, and I should sin against the
authority of God in my conscience in doing what I really upon Strong
presumptions judge to be sinful, though it were not commanded: And no^ one
would think it could be no such meritorious work, no act so acceptable to God
to persevere in the Comunion of a Church, when she sins in commanding, and I
sin in obeying suspecte^ conditions.

2. We come now to his Assertion notwithstanding all this, which he has granted
he will fetch it back again, if it be possible, and we shall gain nothing by
any thing he gives us, and there are also two parts of his Assertion. 1. The
negative part; It Is not burdensomness, nor every light suspicion of sin that
can justific any separation; concerning the burdensomness we have spoken
somewhat before; yet a word or two about the suspicion; it is not a light, or
however not every light suspicion that is but like the dust of the balance
that will do it: really it was cunningly fenced! He expects perhaps that we
should assert every light suspicion that weighs no more then a feather should
be enough to justify a separation; Ay; but there are violent presumption,
which they say in some cases are admitted for good evidence. If I meet a person
coming out of the house in a great rage with a bloody sword in his hand, and
Immediately I enter in and find a person lying in his blood, I do assure you I
shall not condemn my self for lightness of belief, or casmess of entertaining
suspicions; if I suspect the man I met to have been the murder or; light
suspicions may be as easily shook of as fastened on, and contemned as tendered:
but it becomes no wise man to act against these strong presumptions of sin,
which the Dissenters have of the imposed terms of Communion; And it will appear
they are such as may make a hardy resolute person stand and pause before he
rushes upon the practice: 1. They are sure that Christ is the perfect and
therefore the only Lawgiver of his Church: had he not been the former, there
had been no pretense he should be the later: Now seeing these terms of
Communion, are Laws imposed upon the Church; they seem to impeach his wisdom
that he saw not the fittest terms for his Churches to hold Communion upon, they
do reproach his care that he has not left laws enough for his Church, and they
seem to invade his Authority without any warrant: all which things are enough
to raise a suspicion (at least) of good strength in a wisemans breast, which
none but a hardy spirit would act against.

2. They are sure that some of these conditions have been occasioned by and
used in and with, and are suited and accommodated to the grossest Idolatry that
ever was in the world, and is at this day used to give countenance to it: And
they say they are sure that God did once hate Idolatry, and so hate it as that
he could not endure to be served in the vessels, worshipped in the places, not
after the manner (in the most minute circumstances) that Idolatry was committed
in; and therefore we have Reason to suspect that the things required of us are
displeasing to God: our using of them has emboldened Idolaters, and hardened
them to go on without repentance in the way of so great abomination: Nor have
they been a Bridge as was hoped, to bring them over to us, but a Boat to waft
us over to them, they being more hardened by our retaining them, and some of
our own made more wavering; thinking there can be no great difference between
those Religions, where there is so great a Symbolizing in outward modes and
Ceremonies.

3. They are sure that all uncommanded worship is forbidden worship, and do
think their time ill bestowed with him that shall deny it: All worship being
part of that Homage and service we owe to God, it will be impossible to Guess
what he will accept as such without revelation: Now we are sure that the
Enquirer owns the Liturgy to have been a principal part of worship: and we are
as sure that the Ceremonies are part of the Liturgy, and that which is a part
of a part, is part of the whole, nor can any man discern any difference between
them, and other things which are confessedly parts of worship, and therefore
they think they may with modesty say, there is ground enough for a violent
suspicion of their sinfulness.

2. The affirmative part of his Assertion follows; It must be plain necessity
or certainty of sin in compliance that can justify any separation: I should be
glad to know what cortainty of sin he will allow to justify a separation? does
he Expect a mathematical certainty? or only a moral assurance? If you ask, an
Arithmetician says (I: Martyr in his dialogue with Trypho) how many twice two
will make? he will answer yo^ as often, four! and if I were asked a thousand
times what certainty of sin were required to the suspension of my own act, I
would as often answer no more of necessity then that the thing does not appear
to my best and Impartial judgment to be Lawful, separation is not necessarily a
sin, there are as pregnant Commands for it, as prohibitions of it, It may be a
duty, and it may be a sin, and why need we not as plain argument to prove that
separation is not my duty, as that it is not my sin? seeing it may be one as
well as the other? why now he arrests us with his Reasons.

1. Forasmuch (says he) as I cannot be discharged from a plain duty, but by an
equal plainess of sin. This reason looks very prettily at first sight, and yet
it demonstrates no more then a great good will to the cause: And 1. It Is no
more then a plain begging of the Question; viz. That Compliance is a plain
duty, Schism indeed is a plain sin, but separation is not plainly Schism; It is
a plain contradiction to the Assertion, but not a plain confutation of it,
unless the denial of it in other words be a confutation. The business in short
is this; I suspect such Compliance is not my duty; and again, I suspect the
terms of Communion are sinful, and surely we may set suspected sin, as a Bar
to what is but suspected duty at any time of the day; let us a little compare
things: that which he calls plain duty, is compliance with such a Church as
imposes things unnecessary, burdensome and suspicious, that which he calls plain
sin, is refusing such compliance; now this say I, is a plain begging of the
Question which is all the plainess in his Reason: First to enquire whether such
a separation or non-Complyance be Lawful, and then to suppose such Compliance
to be plain duty. And then to assign this for the Reason that nothing but equal
plainess of sin can discharge me from a plain duty. 2. Dissenters do affirm
that it is as plain, nay more plain, and if he will have it so much more plain
a sin to practice the Ceremonies then to separate, for separation may be a duty
in some cases, but the practicing of such Ceremonies cannot be a duty in any
Case, on this side divine prescription: God has warranted separation in the
General, but he has not so warranted Ceremonies.

2. His second reason is; And for this phrase suspected; it is so loose and
uncertain that there is no hold of it, men will easily suspect what they have no
mind to: whether this word suspected be a phrase or no, I shall leave to the
wrangling Grammarians, only I am afraid in a while, every small particle will
be a phrase, where these Gentlemen's occasions require it. A suspected evil is
no such trivial thing in the Apostles divinity as the Enquirer would persuade
us: to act in any case when we have not clear light into the Lawfulness of the
action is sin, and such a one as renders the actor obnoxious to eternal
damnation. He that doubts is dammed if he eat. And indeed to act against the
restrain of our own judgment though mistaken, argues a mind prepared to act
against our judgments, if they had not been mistaken: He that shall attempt to
clip the Kings Coin, may meet with a plated piece, yet had if been right
stander'd, he would have served it no better: that men will easily suspect what
they have no mind to, ought not to prejudice those woe have no mind to a thing,
because they suspect it to be evil. It Is as easy for another to say that what
men have a desperate love to, they will never be brought to suspect its
sinfulness. What wise man would suspect four or five hundred pounds per Annum
to be unlawful? our Inclinations naturally warp toward ease, and rest, and
they that know no God but their mistaken selves, will own no Scripture but what
is dictated from the inspiration of fleshly Interest. The Byas of nature draws
us more to suspect the Lawfulness of that which being unlawful would undo us,
then to suspect that to be unlawful, which being Lawful would advance us.

And this may justify all sober Dissenters, that they who condemn them are
confessed to be too blame in clogging their Communion with unnecessary,
burdensome and suspected Conditions, and they who are condemned for suspecting
it to be as sinful in them to obey as it is in others to command, and thereupon
suspending their Compliance, are either violently cast out of, or not admitted
into Communion. And this is your monstrous Schismatic.

And I am very confident, that not only the Scripture, but all Antiquity with
the unanimous su ^rage of the Reformed Churches will justify and acquit that
person of the Guilt of Schism, who being found in the faith, holy in his life,
earnestly pleading, and petitioning for Reformation, humbly desiring he may
have Christ's ordinances upon Christ's terms, and yet being denied his Right
shall make his applications to some other particular Church of Christ, where
his admittance may be more easy, his continuance more certain and safe, his
mind not distracted with suspicions about his own actings, but his whole
strength and spirits expended in the edification of his own soul in truth,
holiness, and peace, which before were wasted in doubtful disputations.

(2) The second thing he will say is, if the non-necessity of some of the terms
of Communion be a warrant of separation, then there can be no such thing as
Schism at all: I doubt not but he intends that his argument shall proceed a
remotione Consequentis ad remotionem Antecedentis: But there is such a sin as
Schism, therefore the non-necessity of some of the terms of Communion is not a
warrant of separation: there are many things I would answer to this argument:
1. That the whole Syllogism is troubled with an old malady called ignoratio
Elenchi, for it is not half an hour ago since he undertook to prove that the
Churches requiring indifferent, unnecessary, or at most susp^cted things would
not excuse the person that should separate from the Guilt of Schism. Afterward
he put in burdensome into the Question: And now I perceive he would be glad to
take Eggs for his money, if he could get them, and sit down content with this
sorry conclusion, that the non-necessity of some of the Terms is no sufficient
warrant of separation: which fault is an argument some call an Ignorance of the
Question, but I call it a fighting with his own shadow, what if bare
non-necessity alone, without burdensomness, or what if both these without
strong suspicion of sin will not warrant it, yet if all conjunct will do the
feat. Dissenters will Escape the Hue and Cry after Schism, and Schismatics; 2.
I deny his Consequence: there might be, there would be Schism, to much Schism,
though I confess not half so much as there is, though the non-necessity of the
Terms were a good warrant of separation: If Schism lay in nothing indeed but
running away from a Church (as the vulgar error carries it) he had come a
little nearer the mark; but if we durst content our selves with the Scripture
notion of Schism which includes those feuds, heats, intestine broiles, those
envyings malignities, wherewith factious and bandying parties in the besome of
a Church do persecute each other, there might be as much Schism as almost the
Devil could desire, and yet no separation: But let us hear his proof of the
Consequence, forasmuch (says he) as there never was, nor probably ever will be
such a Church as required nothing of those in her Communion, but things
strictly and absolutely necessary, Ergo what? why therefore if the
non-necessity of some of the terms of Communion be a sufficient warrant of
separation, there can be no such thing as Schism, pray forbear, there is a
medium as I take it between non-necessary, and strictly and absolutely
necessary; I mean those things which being neither necessary in their own
nature, nor made so by any positive Law of God in particular: yet by a
concurrence of weighty circumstances serving under some General Command of God,
do become at that time, and under those circumstances necessary, and these are
those things wherein many Churches, I suppose all Churches, have at one time or
other Exercised their power, now then though it is true that if the non-absolute
necessity of the Terms of Communion be a warrant of separation, there would be
no such thing as Schism at all by unwarrantable separation from a Church,
because perhaps there never was a Church that required nothing of those in her
Communion but things absolutely necessary; yet it may be true, that the
non-necessity of the Terms of Communion may be a good warrant for separation,
and yet there may be Schism enough in the world: for captious froward Spirits
will be cavilling at, and dividing upon the account of those things which by a
particular Church are required becoming necessary from circumstances: but to
inform him aright in this matter; Non-conformists do affirm, that what ever is
made a condition of Communion, ought to have some kind of necessity in it or
with it, antecedent to its imposition; and being made such a condition; still
he is harping upon: and has great mind to prove what we are not concerned to
deny: but if he tempts to it, perhaps I may deny it: That there was never, nor
ever will be any such Church, etc. And because I would entertain the Reader
with a little of our Enquirers merriments, he shall hear his proof of the point.

1. He tells us he has showed us this partly in the Intro^uction, and so page
2. For proof of the soundness of this Church^ constitution, he posts us over to
the Introduction, and when we come to turn over this Introduction, there is an
honest we^lmeaning oration of something or other without proof* 2. He could
easily make it appear at large through all Ages; we^l, then we will suspend our
belief till his Magd^burgensis come abroad; 3. He will save himself, and the
Reader the labor (of writing the Century's) very good! We are satisfied any
way in the world, he shall find us the most reasonable people in the world, if he
will but abate us these unnecessary i^positions: But which way shall we spare
our pains? oh thus! name one Church if you can that has admitted of no other
opinion or Rites, but such as have been absolutely necessary. And has this
great montain teemed this little mouse? He should have proved that never any
Church in any age, in any Country, but had imposed things not absolutely
necessary, and he like a modest man that can be content with a Competency,
proved only that there never was any Church but admitted such things: is there
no small critical difference between admitting in the use, and practice
somethings indifferent in an indifferent way and imposing, requiring, and
enjoining them as necessary Terms of Communion: I will make a fair motion; Let
this Church admit of the use, and practice of some things not absolutely
necessary, yet neither in their nature sinful, nor for multitude burdensome, nor
for abuse suspected, nor in their Instituted use Sacramental, and yet not
impose them as necessary, Conditions of Communion, and if there be less
uniformity, there will be a Thousand times more unity, and true inward love,
Evangelical tenderness, and fra^nal forbearance to compensate a little outward
decorum, which perhaps is very Surprising with women and children.

All this while I distrust not the Readers A^umen to see the Sophistry; He
would make it out there is no Church which admits not some determinations, not
strictly and absolutely necessary; and he would thence infer that there is no
Church, but what imposes such not absolutely necessary determinations, and
thence that if non-necessary Terms of Communion be a warrant of separation,
there can be no Schism in the world at all: whereas there are such things as
being neither unnecessary, nor yet absolutely necessary, may be ^it matter of
agreement in Christian Societies, that they may be more stedily governed, more
peaceably and inoffensively manadged, the Ord^ nances more methodically and
orderly administered, and the spiritual and eternal welfare of souls more
effectually advanced.

(3) The third and last thing he will say is, that somethings are necessary to
the Constitution and administration of a particular Church, that are not in
themselves necessary absolutely considered; This he will say, and who can help
it? why will he say it? why doubtless as a medium to prove his conclusion, or
he had better have said nothing; now that which he engaged to prove was this;
That things indifferent, unnecessary, etc. Imposed as conditions of Communion
are not enough to Excuse the person that separates, from a participation of the
sin of Schism; the argument marche^ in this order: If somethings are necessary
to the Constitution of a Church, which are not absolutely necessary in
themselves, then the Imposition of unnecessary Terms of Communion is no Excuse
for separation; but the former is true, Ergo so is the later; or in short, if
some things be necessary then, the Church may impose things not necessary: quod
er^t demonstrandum.

He has been told over and over again, that many things not necessary in
themselves, may become necessary pr^ hic and nunc, but then they must be thus
qualified, before they can be fit matter of a Churches determination. 1. They
must be necessary one way or other, Antecedently to the Churches determination;
2. The necessity must extend as far as the determination: For if they become
necessary to one particular Church, and not to another, it will not oblige the
other Church to come under the Imposition, unless they come also under the
necessity. 3. That when the necessity evidently ceases, the Imposition ought
also to cease, and the members of the Church may claim it of right to be
relaxed of the burden, and may reassume their former liberty, which the present
necessity did restrain. 4. Churches are not to feighn necessities, and
Imaginary Exigencies as an Engine of ambitious spirits to try conclusions upon
men's Consciences, or practice upon their ^ameness, and therefore the necessity
ought to be such as carries its own evidence along with it.

There are many things which the Divine Authority had determined as to its ^id
and sort, which yet are not so determined in the In^viduals; now when a Church
meets with any of these, she must come to a determination, for otherwise the
Divine Commands cannot possibly be reduced into act, nor our duty Exercised:
Thus he has commanded his Churches to assemble themselves together for public
worship, he has appointed them Ordinances wherein to receive mercy, and grace,
from him and Officers to administer the Ordinances in the Church, the Church
therefore is obliged to do whatsoever is necessary to the doing of her duty;
Thus Go^ having obliged them to worship, they must come to an agreement about
the place, merely because it is impossible to meet no where. But if the divine
will has not determined in specie, man cannot under the most specious pretense
of decency, or adorning the worship institute any thing, because it wants some
head of a Divine Command, to which to reduce it; Thus God having given no
Command to any Church, to worship him under sensible forms, and signs of
Invisible Grace, no Church has power to Institute any such, and worship God by
them; For in this case Divine wisdom, Love, and Authority, have demonstrated
themselves, and settled Enough to answer Gods Ends and ours.

If he had said, as often as you baptize, besides the washing with water which
I have commanded you, see that you make some figure over the face of the person
to be baptized, and not determined the figure, whether Hexagonal, pentagonal or
the like, the Church must come to a conclusion about some figure, or the duty
must for ever lie fallow.

But a General Command, that all things be done decently and in ^der, will
never introduce these Symbolical Ceremonies, because the Command may be
satisfied without them, or any of them, they are ^ot necessary so much as by
disjunction; whatsoever is comprehended under a Divine precept, is a necessary
duty at least by disjunction, Antecedent to any Command of any Church; but
these Ceremonies are not necessary in any sense antecedently to the Command of
a Church, and therefore are not comprehended under that General precept. Let
all things be done decently and in order; And indeed if they were, the sign of
the Cross would be a necessary duty, not only in o^ at Baptism, but in the
Lords Supper, in every prayer, in al^ preaching, in singing of Psalms, and in
every Religious Exercise, seeing that precept enjoins all things to be done
decently and in order. And we may presume that our Savior, with his Disciples
and Apostles, performed All divine service in the most decent, congruous, and
edifying modes, and yet they never practiced that* or any other Ceremony of
that sort; and therefore they are not comprehended under the Rule.

Nevertheless our Enquirer is resolved he will give us two Instances of this
Truth that some things are necessary to the Constitution, and administration of
a particular Church, that are not in themselves necessary absolutely
considered: And if he thinks it worth the while, he may give us two hundred,
for we are perfectly unconcerned in them all.

(1) The first instance is in the Apostles times: the abstaining from things
strangled and blood, was by the Council of Jerusalem adjudged and declared
necessary to be observed by the Gentiles, in order to an accommodation between
them and the Jews; and yet I suppose scarce any body thinks the observation of
that Abstinence so Enjoined necessary in it self: Let us apply it, either then
the abstaining from Ceremonies must be adjudged necessary in order to an
Accommodation between our Church, and other Protestants, or the obs^rving of
them be adjudged necessary in order to an accommodation between us and the
Romanists, which he would choose, I am not informed.

But let us Examine a little his great Instance.

1. It was adjudged and declared necessary to be observed (sa^ he) Therefore
(say I) it was enjoined, because first necessary, and not made necessary by the
Injunction: The thing was not unnecessary before the Syn^dal Letters, nor the
Council at liberty to have determined the contrary unless an accommodation
between Jew, and Gentile, was a thing unnecessary, 15. Acts 28. It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon yo^ no greater burden then those
necessary things, (...). Now let him try his skill to conclude a power to
impose things unnecessary from this fact of theirs, who only imposed things
necessary.

2. That a Council had the Immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost, and might
more safely adventure upon such an Imposition, then any particular or National
Church, who as they have no promise, cannot in faith expect any such
extraordinary direction; and we hope that no Church will assume equal power to
impose, unless they could produce equal authority for their power, in which the
Consciences of Christians might securely acquiesce: It would be strange
language from a Synod. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon
you no other burdens then these necessary things, that yet observe all
Ceremonies of our appointment.

3. The people might reasonably conform to that decree, which had their own
Antecedent consent, and the more patiently bear the burden, which was not
imposed upon them, without themselves, for this Canon was not only sent to the
Churches by the order of the Apostles, and Elders, and the whole Church, v. 22.
but what ever obligatory power there was in it from man, It ran in the name of
the Apostles, Elders and Brethren; But alas the Case is otherwise with the poor
Churches in reference to impositions of late Ages, who know no more what
Impositions shall be laid upon their Consciences, then the poor horse is
acquainted whither his Master intends to ride him.

. 4. This was a Decree not to burden them, but to case and relieve them, not to
pinch the Gentiles, but to discharge them of those servile loads, which some
Judaizing Converts, would have imposed on them; we read v. 1. That certain came
down from Judea which taught the brethren; and said, Except ye be circumcised
after the manner of Moses ye cannot be saved. And when Paul, and Barnabas
opposed this Tyranny, yet such was their Zeal for their old Ceremonies, that
they reinforced their scattered squadrons from certain of the Sect of the
Pharisees who believed, (v. 5.) saying, That it was necessary to Circumcise
them, and Command them to keep the Law of Moses: At last the Case comes before
the Council, and they determine against these Judaizing Bigots; That their
blind Zeal should not be the measure of what was necessary, or unnecessary; and
yet not to Exasperat^ them, left perhaps they might apostatize wholly from
Christ, and relapse to Moses, (as they were in a fair way,) They determine to
Lay no other burden upon them but those (really) necessary things: In
opposition to those other, which the Jewish Brethren falsely pleaded to be
necessary: so that they eased the burden which some would by doctrine have laid
upon their shoulders, and only charged them by their determination with what
was really necessary.

. 5. Let us consider the things Imposed. v. 29. Abstaining from meats offered
to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication. Of
which, fornication, was unlawful in it self; By Blood, many Learned men
understand Murder, which opinion the Learned Dr. Hammond recites, and, as I
remember approves: As to the not eating of things strangled. It had Contracted
a very Reverend, and Grave Countenance by its Antiquity, being Numbered amongst
the seven percepts of the sons of Noah: And lastly, as for meats offered to
Idols, under that Notion, it was, and is still, unlawful.

. 6. All this was for Avoiding scandal; The Morality of which praecept, had it
been understood by the Raw Novice Professors of the gentiles, it had taught
them to abstain from a greater matter then Blood or things strangled (supposing
them indifferent) that they might give no offense. And therefore whilst this
Canon was in force, and the sharpest edge set on it, I question not but that
the Gentile Christian might have eaten the (...) priyately, or in Company where
no offense was taken, for what were the Jews concerned what I should eat at
home, either of the (...), fragments, or portions of the sacrifices sent to me
by the Heathen Relation, or of those things that were killed by sus^ocation:
for thus was the end of the Decree attained, the Apostles satisfied, the Jews
pleased, and Christian Liberty asserted, and vindicated: But the Case is
otherwise with us: for such is the Holiness of a Cross, or Surplice, that if a
Minister satisfied in their use; and yet convinced that they ought to know
their distance, and give place to the Conscience of the weak, or of the strong,
who is supposed weak in this instance, shall omit them, he shall be liable to
be reviled by the Author of the former part of the Enquiries. p. 25. for an
underminer of the Church, A debaucher of his Office, and what not, and for want
of a white garment, shall have a hole picked in his black coat, and suspended
both a^ Officio, and beneficio.

. 7. Here was no penalty annexed by way of sanction to this Decree. The Apostles
contented themselves with that spiritual Power wherewith the Lord Christ had
Armed them: nor do we read that ever any were excommunicated about it, nor
urged it as an indispensable Condition of enjoying the ordinances of the Gospel.

. 8. It appears from the Apostle Paul, that when this Decree had a little
gratified a people ter^cious of old usages, and humored them into some
handsome Compliance, it Expired of Course, (as to whatever obligation arose
from the prohibition of things in themselves indifferent) and lay amongst the
Obsolete Canons not regarded, for when the Reason of an Ecclesiastical Law
ceases, the Law it self ceases, without any formal repeal; which some expecting
should have been more solemn, conceive it i^ force to this day.

There is no question but those Churches who going of from the Dregs of Rome,
finding their people both Ignorant, and obstinate, and extremely a verse to a
through Reformation, did in prudence leave them some of their old little toys,
till they should know better, and then they would throw 'em away of themselves;
They that had sucked in Popery with their Mothers milk, would be very pievish,
and wrangle unmercifully to be weaned all at once: stayed nurses did therefore
deal with them as they could bear, expecting when they should fall to more
manly food: But seeing by this time they have either reached their end, or never
will; and seeing the subtle enemy of Purity and peace, would pervert their
ends, if they be permitted quietly to expire, and dye of themselves, (which
they would soon do, if not fetched again by their over-Officious friends
importunity) The Protestant Religion should have no Cause to bewail their
funerals.

[2] His second Instance is in Church Government. The short of, it is thus
much: That some Church Government is necessary, yet no particular form
necessary. As whether it ought to be Monarchical, or Aristocratical, Episcopal,
or Consistorial. This seems very dangerous Doctrine, for now it seems Episcopal
government is degraded of its old pretense to a jus Divinum: And now the
Presbyterian and Congregational forms stand upon even grounds with the
Praelatical, saving wherein this last has got the advantage by Law. But here we
are to understand that his Text and his marginal reading; his Chethib, and
Keri, do strangely vary, and its like to cruciate our Rabbines to reconcile
them: for his Text reads thus: Few, or none will affirm that either of these
forms (Episcopal or Consistorial) are necessary. But his Margin reads thus; I
do not mean to weaken the Authority, and reputation, of Episcopal government,
which I sincerely think to be both best in it self, and Apostolical for it is
Antiquity: Thus the Author of the Introduction, calls it the Most primitive
Government. Now some will perplex themselves how to Agree his scriptio, and his
Lectio: The text, and the Comment. He tells The Episcopal Mode is not
necessary, and yet he does it not at all to weaken it is reputation; though it
has been hitherto reputed to stand upon a divine bottom by our Learned
Churchmen; but yet he does not Mean any harm, Good man, no not he: but with
such good meanings, filly souls use to palliate the irregular effects of
gross Ignorance. If a Man should come to my house, and with his crows, and
pickaxes, begin to belabour the foundation, Alarmed with the noise, I come out,
friend what do you mean to weaken the foundation of my house, I shall have the
Roof shortly come about my ears; Oh Good Sir. (replies he) I do assure you I
have no meaning to weaken your house, or shake its walls, I sincerely think
your house is the strongest house in all the Parish: and to his work he falls
again as hard as he can drive: A declaration contrary to the fact has no more
Credit with me then it needs must.

But this is not the worst on it. Here seems to be an irreconcilable
Contradiction. Episcopacy, is Indifferent, and yet best in it self: Not
necessary, and yet Apostolical, and yet some think there was an absolute
necessity of this quarrel between the Text, and Margin; The Margin was Added
to make the Text pass muster, and if the one had not been a Deleatur, the
other had mi^'t of an Imprimatur; The necessity of the Argument required
Episcopacy should be a Thing indifferent: but the necessity of pleasing his
Patron required it should be Best in it self; And in what a Lamentable plight
must a Learned Author be, to gratify such Contrary demands? Let him then Agree
himself with himself, whilst I examine his Reasonings.

Church government is Necessary in the General; but this or that form of
government, in particular, is not necessary, (not absolutely necessary)
therefore somethings not necessary in themselves, are, or may be necessary to
the constitution, or administration of a particular Church. This, if I greatly
mistake not, is the whole strength of this Period. To which I answer in these
particulars. (1.) That though the Scripture does not trouble us with Terms of
Art, Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical, Yet at least all the Officers
belonging to the Church of Christ are there specially determined: And from the
Nature of the Officers, the species, or particular form of the Government, will
of necessity emerge; If the Officers of the particular Churches stand upon
equal ground one with another, the government which results from thence will be
Aristocratical: If there be an Imparity, and subordination of the governors of
one Church to another the government which results from thence will be
Monarchical; And if the Churches governed by their respective Pastors are not
knit together by some Common bond, the government will be denominated
Congregational. (2.) Supposing that the government is only Commanded in the
general, but the particular form not determined, yet this will never conclude,
that the Church may Impose such things as Terms of Communion which are noe
Commanded in the general. It can never follow that a Church may institute, and
impose Ceremonies, for which there is no General warrant, because it must agree
upon a Government, for which there is a General warrant: Nor that she may
Impose those things which are not necessary either to the Constitution or
Administration of a Church, because she must determine upon that, which is
necessary both to the constitution, and administration of it. (3.) He pretends
to prove that it is unlawful to separate upon the Account of unnecessary
Conditions of Communion, and he gives us an Instance in Episcopacy, which yet
his Margin affirms to Be best in it self, and Apostolical for Antiquity: from
hence we are instructed, That unnecessary conditions, are such as are or may be
Best in themselves: And let him but produce such Terms of Communion, as being
unnecessary in themselves, are yet best in themselves, and I am confident there
will be an end of this Controversy: whereas therefore his Margin tells us,
That this is Argumentum ad Homines: he says very true, it is so to himself and
his friends. If Episcopal government be best in it self, how will he thence
conclude the Churches power to Impose indifferent things, unnecessary things;
which are not best in themselves? But if Episcopal government be indifferent,
and unnecessary in it self, how is it best in it self, and Apostolical for
Antiquity? An indifferent thing, best in it self, An unnecessary Apostolical
constitution, is a notion which founds very harshly in my ears, and perhaps the
most of our Readers.

But we are all tired out with these paralogisms, we have heard a great clamor
of Schism, Schism, as the manner is, and when we come to Enquire after that
Reason, we are returned with a nihil dicit, or which is all one, nothing to
that purpose.

CHAP. III.
Of the Nature of the things scrupled by Dissenters: Showing that there is no
necessity to sacrifice either Conscience or Truth to Peace, which may be
purchased at lower Rates, or else would be too dear.

IT was my Unhappiness to read of one; who, to an excellent Discourse of the
influence of Adams Transgression upon the misery of mankind, made this
Blasphemous return; What a stir is here about the eating of an Apple? Much what
of the same Temper was that Blustering Hector Pope Julius the second: Who being
humbly advised by a Cardinal not to Rage so immoderately for a Peacock, (which
it seems was stolen) answered like himself, God could be Angry, and Plague the
World ser a sorry Apple, and shall not I much more for a delicate Peacock?

When our Enquirer would persuade us, that the Things in Controversy are of
small Importance: Let me persuade him, that no Disobedience to God, or
Treachery to our own Souls, can be little to those who understand the Majesty
of the one, or the Worth of the other.

When the Compilers of our Liturgy shall plead on the behalf of the Ceremonies,
that though the keeping or ommitting of one, in it self considered, is but a
small thing; yet the wilful and contempinous transgres^ of a common Order and
Discipline, is no small offense before God: I hope without offense we may
affirm a little more of the least of Christ's Precepts! That little sins will
find a great Hell.

It Is the solemn, and Religious custom of those who would make their own
pleasures the supreme Reason of their own Commands, and our Obedience; first to
flatter us, that the matter is inconsiderable, till we have submitted; and then
to threaten us with the sanction of those commands, as no less then Eternal
damnation, when violated.

But if the making the Things in Dispute a Sacrifice, would satisfy our
Enquirer, we are content they be immediately offered up as a Holocaust, to the
peace and unity of the Church, in those flames they have kindled: But he comes
to explain himself: It Is not that the Ceremonies should become a Burnt-offering
to Peace; but that the Consciences of the Dissenters should be Sacrificed to
the Ceremonies: or, which is more to his purpose, their Persons Sacrificed to
those Touchy Deities, (as he calls them) of Custom and Vulgar Opinion.

Those sins, which men count small, are therefore great, because their
temptations are less pressing, and so being more easily avoidable, have less to
plead in their excuse, or Defense, But an Imposing spirit, always turns the
wrong end of the Perspectiveglass, which shrinks a Mountain into a Molehill,
and a Bulky-Minster, with all its Cathedral Apurtenances, into a Chapel of
Ease, where twenty Nobles per Annum will not Defray the Charges of a
Ceremonious Conformity.

All things are Little or Great, as they serve the present occasion: Little,
when their Imposing is vindicated; and Great, when the Neglect of them comes to
be punished. Little, or nothing, till the yoke is fastened on; and then
weighty, when once their Conscience is shakell'd with Canonical obedience.

The undoubted way therefore to settle a righteous and a durable peace, is to
take just Measures of things: Not to keep one Bushel, by which to m^e out
Impos^tions, and Another, by which to deal out Censures; neither on the account
of Peace to Reneger any of Gods Truths; nor by unnecessary Impositions to
disturb the Churches quiet.

And if men could be persuaded to set aside Passion, and those alluring baits
to Empire over souls, and calmly consider how mean (at the best) those things
are upon which they lay the vast weight of our Concord, they would see Reason,
not to perpetuate our Divisions, nor intail quarrels upon innocent posterity,
who are not yet imbroyled in our Contentions; upon the account of those things,
which the Church may well spare without any eclipse of her Glory; part with,
without Impeachment of her Wisdom; leave free, without prejudice to the
Worship, or just offense to any, to the unspeakable joy of all Cooler spirits,
besides the infinite satisfaction that would arise to our Brethren of the
Reformed Religion beyond the Seas.

There are three things, which the Enquirer has propounded to himself to Treat
of in this Chapter.

[1] That the Causes of Dissentions amongst us, are not like those upon which
we separated from the Roman Communion. We acknowledge it with all cheerfulness!
Yet a man may die of many other Diseases besides the Plague. We Rejoice that
the Church of England has such clear grounds to justify her departure: And we
wish we had fewer grounds to justify ours.

But here for the credit of his Discourse (wherein we are all equally concerned
with himself) I could have wished he had not prefaced it with so foul and gross
a slander: It is said by some, that there is as much cause for Secession from
this Church now, as there was from the Roman in the time of our Ancestors. I
only demand so much Justice from the Reader, as to suspend his belief till this
judicious Imputation be made good, and in the mean time return thus much in
Answer.

1. There may be a just Cause, where there is not an equal Cause of separation:
There may be a great latitude in the terms of Communion, and yet all
injustifiable, and there may be great variety in the Reasons of separation, and
yet all may be warrantable. Had the Popes Terms been much lower, they had been
much too high for our Ancestors to come up to: And though the Terms of this
Church are lower then those of Rome, yet they are something too high for
Dissenters, who humbly plead that they have just cause for a peaceable
Departure, since they cannot peaceably Abide in the Society.

. 2. Upon our Enquirers Principles, it had been as lawful for our Ancestors to
have continued in Communion with the Roman, as for Dissenters to conform to the
present demands of this Church. For let me have a clear Answer, why their
Private Wisdoms, ought not to be sacrificed to the Public Wisdom in Queen
Mary's Reign, as our private wisdom resign to the public, under our present
Circumstances? For in this Case, we consider not the lawfulness, or
unlawfulness of the Terms as they are in their Naked selves; but where the
final Decision shall rest, whether they be lawful or unlawful? Now the Enquirer
tells us, page 168. Its enough to warrant our obedience, that the thing is the
Command of the Superior, and not beyond the Sphere of his Authority. But who
can measure the Sphere of the Magistrates Authority, unless we could take the
just Diameter of it? Again page 178. The Result of all will be, that instead of
prescribing to the Magistrate what he shall determine, or disputing what he
has concluded on, we shall compose our minds, and order our circumstances for
the more easy, and cheerful compliance therewith. What Rivers of precious Blood
had this Doctrine saved, had it been broached in Q. Mary's days: That men must
not dispute what the Magistrate has concluded on: And though he thinks to heal
all this by saying page 166. That God has made the Magistrate a General
Commission, and made no exception of this kind, (meaning as far as
Circumstantials, and those things that God himself has not defined) yet this
will not salve the difficulty, because 1. Who shall judge what is a
Circumstantial, and what a Substantial; what an Integral part only, and what an
Essential part of Religion? Where shall we lodge the determination ultimately,
what God has defined and not defined? If the Magistrate! Then our Ancestors are
gone by the Common Law. If the private person, we are all in statu quo. 2. God
has no where disterminated Circumstantials, from Substantials in the
Magistrates Commission; for though our Enquirer has excepted the one, yet it is
by his private Authority, which binds not the Magistrate, His Commission is
Patent, and therefore it may be read. 13 Romans 1. Let every soul be subject to
the higher powers, etc. This Commission does no more except an Obedience, then
a Circumstance; he that will put in the one, may at pleasure insert the other,
and he that will except the one, may and will, except the other. So that I
conclude, or at least see no reason why I may not; that according to this
Enquirers sentiments, had providence allotted us our habitations under a Prince
of the Roman Communion, we might have practiced all his Injunctions, without
warrant to plead our Consciences in Bar: which Principle will bear a man's
charges through all the Turks Dominions, and make any man a free Citizen of
Malmsbury, when once Conscience is sacrificed to the Deity of Leviathan.

Every true Protestant will gladly read his Justification of this Churches
departure from Rome: And therefore though it be not much to the matter in hand,
I shall not grudge to go a little out of my way with him, for his good company
and profitable discourse.

1. We could not (says he) continue in the Roman Church upon any better
Conditions, then Nahash propounded to the men of Jabesh Gilead to put out our
Right eyes, that we might be fit for their blind Devotion. Whether the eye be
put out that it cannot; or hood-winckt, that it may not see, is no such
considerable difference; but we have the less need of a Private, if there be a
Public eye that can see for us all, and better discern the fit Terms of
Communion: And whether it be the right eye, or the left, or both, that our
Enquirer would pluck out of our heads I cannot tell: for when we have
considered with the best eyes we have whether it be our duty to withdraw from
the present establishment in some things, and the result of our most impartial
inquiries, concludes in the affirmative, yet we are Schismatics, and all that
is naught; if then we may not see with our own eyes, as good pluck them out.

They that fancy man to be but an Autamoton, a well contrived piece of
Mechanism, have certainly fitted him to this Hypothesis: For suppose him to be
like a Clock, which once put in motion, will jog on the round, and drudge
through the Horary circle, and perform you a twelve hours work, in twelve hours
time without attendance, or other charge than a little Oil; and you may then
set him to what hour you please. And he shall as freely strike twelve at
Sunset, as Midday.

2. We must not here have renounced our Reason; What if we had? Our own private
Reason is not worth so much as to contend with the public: And thanks be to
God, that our Governors are Counseled by their own Reasons; for had they been
guided by the Counsels and Interests of such Divines, we must have Renounced
ours too long ago.

3. That Church in lieu of the Scriptures gives them Traditions: Nay, do not
wrong the Grave Tridentine Fathers; it was but Pari pietatis affect^ veneramur.
The Church of England abhors indeed that Sacrilege, in her 34 Article.
Whosoever through his private judgment willingly and purposely does openly
break the Traditions and Ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant to
Gods word, ought to be rebuked openly: And I am confident the Roman Church will
allow us openly to break any of hers, when she shall confess them to be
repugnant to the word of God.

4. Instead of such things as were from the Beginning, it prescribes those
things that had their beginning from private Interest, and secular Advantages:
It has been a piece of policy of our Duellers to escape the Laws, to cross the
Channel, and fight it out upon Callice Sands: If our Enquirer will go with me
thither I would dispute it fairly with him, whether the Terms of Communion be
the same that were from the Beginning? If the Church of Rome be warrantably
deserred, because her matters stand not in the Primitive posture: They that can
make the plea, will expect the same privilege. The Learned Author of the
Irenicum p. 121. assures us, that it is contrary to the practice and moderation
then used, to deprive men of their Ministerial functions for not conforming in
Habit, Gestures, and the like: and he adds his pions wishes: That God would
vouchsafe to convince the Leaders of the Church of this Truth It will be less
material therefore, whether the things so ^ifly insisted on, had their
beginning from private Interests and secular Advantages, for if they were not
from the beginning, is it little to us where they had their rise.

The Canons of 1640. leave bowing toward the Altar indifferent, and prohibit
Censuring and Judging: Extend but the same Moderation to all other things as
far from the beginning as they, and of ^o greater Importance, or confine them
to Cathedrals as Organs once were, where they that have little else to do, are
at more leisure for such operous services; and we shall be secure as to Schism,
which the Enquirer will certainly yield to, since he equalizes that sin to the
most horrid crimes of Idolatry, Murder and Sacrilege.

5. They make seven Sacraments. And at our Equirers Rates may make sevenscore:
What is a Divine Sacrament, but an outward visible sign, of an inward and
spiritual grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby
we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof: And let him define a
humane Sacrament more appositely if he can. Then an outward visible sign of an
inward and spiritual grace ordained by man himself; as a means whereby we
receive the same grace. And wherein does a Mystical Ceremony come short of this
Description, whose declared end is, To stir up the dull mind of man to the
remenbramce of his duly to God, by some notable and special signification,
whereby he may be edified. Nor is there any thing wanting but the Royal assent,
the Divine stamp of Authority to make it a Sacrament as accomplished at all
points as those which are declared Generally necessary to salvation. And if the
Papalins erroneously judge their five ordained of God, and we confess ours are
not so; all the difference is this; That they are mistaken, and act
proportionably to their mistake, and we see better, and yet act
disproportionably: But the truth is, many of their most Learned Writers freely
own their five Sacraments to be no more then Ecclesiastical Traditions and
Mystical Ceremonies; such as the Sign of the Cross, though to set them off to
the eye, they honor them with the August Title of Sacraments: Thus Petrus a
Soto. Omnes illae Observationes sunt Traditiones Apostolicae, quarum
principium, Author and origo, in Sacris Scripturis inveniri non potest.
Cujusmodi sunt, Oblatio sacrificii Altaris, unctio Chrismatis, in vocatio
Sanctorum, Orationes pro defunctis, totum Sacramentum Confirmationis, ordinis
Matrimonii, Paenitentiae, ^nctionis extremae, Merita Operum, necessitas
satisfactionis, enumeratio peceatorum facienda sacerdoti. We are to account all
those Observations. Apostolical Traditions, whose Beginning, Author and
Origin, are not found in the Holy Scriptures: Such as are the Oblation of the
sacrifice of the Altar, the Anointing with Chrisme, Invocation of Saints,
Prayers for the Dead: The whole Sacrament of Confirmation, of Orders, of
Matrimony, of Penitance, of extreme unction; the merits of Good Works, the
necessity of satisfaction, and Auricular confession.

6. They have taken away one of the ten Commandments, and have Arts of
evacuating all the rest: And why may they not evacuate the second, as well as
our Author the fourth Commandment? All were equally promulgated in Mount Sinai,
all have the same Signature of Divine Authority, and he that can make Schism
equal to Idolatry, may when he sees his time, throw off the second as he has
done the fourth for a piece of Judaical Superstition.

7. They have brought in Pageantry instead of Piety and Devotion, effaced the
true lineaments of Christianity, and instead thereof, recommended and obtruded
upon the world the dictates of Ambition, the Artifices of gain. He may safely
talk his pleasure at this distance; though it would not be so prudent to preach
this Doctrine where the Popes great Horse sets his foot: All the use I shall
make of it is this little: That if the introduction of Pageantry instead of
Piety and Devotion be a good warrant to justify our Separation from Rome; Let
them judge (who have to do with it) whether it were Felony to remove a man's
Quarters ten miles from some Cathedrals.

8. Lastly (says he) these things could not be submitted to without grievous
sin, and manifest danger of Damnation: No! now observe how the Romanist will
belabour him with his own Cudgel: p. 122. Its the custom of those that have a
mind to quarrel, to aggravate, and heighten the Causes of discontent, to the
end that the ensuing mischief, may not be imputed to the frowardness of their
temper, but to the greatness of the provocation. And passion is such a
magnifying glass, as is able to extend a Molehill to a Mountain; If men would
be persuaded to lay aside their passions, and calmly consider the nature of
those things that they divided from the Catholic Church upon, they would be so
far from seeing Reason to perpetuate the Schism, that they would on the
contrary be seized with wonder and indignation that they have been imposed upon
so far as to take those things for great deformities, which upon mature
Consideration are really nothing worse then Moles, which may be upon the most
beautiful face: But the Reader will easily see that these are nothing but some
ill gathered shreds out of your Formul^, Oratoriae, or Clarks Transitions,
which will fit Protestant or Papist, and indeed any Schoolboy that has a
Theme, or Declamation to compose.

That the Causes of separation from the Church of Rome were pregnant, every way
clear and evident, we do therefore agree: And that the Reasons of separation
from the Church of England are not so great, but then neither is the separation
so great; for as we agree in the fundamental Articles of Religion, so we may
quickly agree in all the rest, when some of a more fiery temper will let their
Mother Alone to exercise to all her Children such an Indulgence as is agreeable
to their various Measures of light in lesser concerns. But (says our Author)
It Is quite otherwise in the Church of England. For.

1. No man here parts with his faith upon Conformity, But I am afraid they must
part with it, or they will hardly be accepted. Their faith is, that the Lord
Christ is the only Lawgiver of his Church; that the Scriptures are the
adequate, and Commensurate Rule of all Religious Worship, and if they do not
part with thus much of their faith, they must live in a Contradiction to it;
but perhaps he may understand their faith better then they themselves.

2. No man is bound to give away his Reason for Quietness sake: Then I know who
was mistaken p. 64. who tells us. That since the peace of the Church often
depends upon such points as Salvation does not, and since in many of those
every man is not a Competent judge, but must either be in danger of being
deceived himself, and of troubling others, or of necessity must trust some body
else wiser then himself, she recommends in such a case, as the safer way for
such private persons to comply with public determinations. And we may assure
our selves of our Enquirers good nature in this particular; who condemns
Virgilius for asserting the Antipodes, though it were demonstrably true, and
the contrary impossible. And then I am afraid we must sacrifice our Reason to
Peace, and rather subscribe like Brutes, then run the risque of being perscuted
like Men.

3. A man may be as holy, and good as he will. The goodness and holiness of a
Christian lies very much in using Holy Means for Holy Ends: Gods Holy
Ordinances, in order to Holiness in the Habit and Complexion of the Soul: He
that may not use the means of Holiness when he will, may not be as Holy as he
will: but as Holy as he can without them: He that will use all the means of God
in order to that great end, it may possibly cost him more then he would
willingly lose for any cause but that of righteousness: Methought it was an odd
sight the other day to see a Grave Divine in his Canonical Habit, marching With a
Brace of Informers piping hot on either Hand, the one like the Gizzard, the
other the Liver stuck under the wings of his Sacerdotal Habiliments, from one
of his Rectories to the other, to give Disturbance to a Company of poor
Innocent people that would have been a little more holy if they might; when
this is reformed. I Will believe that the more of Holiness appears, the better
Churchmen we are reputed.

4. This Church keeps none of her Children in an uncomfortable estate of
darkness; for we must know that there is a twofold estate of darkness, a
comfortable, and an uncomfortable estate: Now the Comfortable estate of
darkness, lies in trusting others, submitting our private to the public
wisdom; this is that blessed state whereinto he would wish his best friends:
But the unconfortable state is, that Remedy which is Practiced in Spain and
Italy for the Cure of Church Divisions. An excellent Remedy it is, but it comes
too late to do any good here: The difference between them was observed before,
either to be born blind, or made blind, to have no Conscience, or prohibited to
exercise it; to have no eyes, or not to use them; and in my private opinion
there is no great comfort in either of them.

5. She debars none of her Members of the comfort and privileges of Christ's
Institutions. Some that have struggled with a doubting Conscience, have
attested the contrary; but however she may possibly debar some of those
privileges and comforts, that would have been her Members, because they dare
not give the price, she rates those privileges and comforts at.

6. She recommends the same Faith, the same Siriptures, that the Protestants
are agreed in: Yes! but then she recommends those Ceremonies to boot, in which
Protestants neither are nor ever will be agreed in.

We do therefore seriously triumph that the Church of England with the
Protestants, are also fully and perfectly agreed that they have not only the
same God and Christ, but the same Object of Worship too. (though I know not
wherein God and the object of worship differ) the same way of Devotion in a
known Tongue, the same Sacraments, the same Rule of Life, which are all the
great things wherein the Consciences of men are concerned, To which I shall
need to say no more; but that we in the General profess our owning of all
these, and yet our differences be very considerable, but let our Consciences be
concerned about no other; no other Sacraments, no other Rule of Life, no other
Devotion, and what is necessary to reduce all these into practice, and I can
assure him, Dissenters will flock a pace into the bosom of the Church.

He promises us now that he will faithfully and briefly recite the matters in
difference. And I confess for brevity, he has performed his promise well
enough, but for his fidelity, the Dissentets sadly complain of him: I shall
therefore crave the liberty to use a little more prolixity, and I shall
endeavor to compensate it with much more fidelity, to reciting the material
points wherein we differ.

As 1. Whether a Minister ordained according to the appointment of the Gospel
to the exercise of the whole Ministerial work, may without sin consent, that a
main part of his Office be statedly and totally taken out of his hands, and his
work Cantoned at the will of another?

2. Whether any Church has power from Christ to appoint in, and over it self,
or Members, any Officers specially distinct from those Christ has ordained.

3. Whether any Church has authority from Christ to institute any other
Ordinances of fixed and constant use in the Church then Christ has instituted?

. 4. Whether it be an apparent invasion of, and open reproach to the Regal
Office of Christ, for any Society of his to institute either new Officers or
new Offices, for the Govorning and Administering that Society, which the head
has not allowed.

. 5. Whether it be not the duty of every particular Church to conform all the
worship, and administration of Religion to the Laws of their Institution? and
that whatever is not so Conformed, be not a Corruption, which ought to be
Reformed by those Laws?

. 6. Whether if a Church shall peremtorily refuse to remove such Officers,
Offices, Ordinances, superadded to the Evangelical Law: A person that shall
separate from its Communion in those things wherein it refuses to reform, may
without breach of charity be called a Schismatic?

. 7. Whether a Christian may act against the superseding Dictate of his
Conscience, and may give it up to be ruled by an Imaginary public, Conscience?

. 8. Whether, seeing we have the unerring word of God to guide us to be mislead
by our Leaders is a good Countersecurity against the Judgment of God?

. 9. Whether it be lawful to break the least of Scripture Commandments to
purchase our Quiet with men, or secure our own Repose in the world?

. 10. Whether the command of my Superior will justify me in Murdering the
Soul of my weak Brother, when I may avoid giving the scandal in things
indifferent?

. 11. Whether can the command of a Superior make that no sin, but a duty: but
without that command, had been no duty, but sin?

. 12. Whether a Minister of the Gospel may submit to have his Prayers and
Sermons Composed for him by others? And whether he be a Minister at all who is
not able in some measure to discharge both to Edification?

. 13. Whether a Christian may without sin wholly and perpetually suffer his
Christian Liberty to be determined one way, though under future Circumstances,
it may be the command or God for a season to determine it the other way?

. 14. Whether a Christian Willing to subscribe to all that Christ has
propounded to him to believe, and to engage solemnly to do all that Christ
requires him to do, and not contradicting such engagement by Conversation,
arguing him of praevalent Hypocrisy, but having given good proof before men of
his Holiness, ought to be denied Christian Communion?

. 15. Whether upon such tendries made, and their refusal; only because he will
not submit to new Terms of Communion not approved by the Word of God, he shall
adjoyn himself to some other particular Church, where the Doctrine of
Christianity is purely Preached, the Sacraments duly Administered, and the
Conditions of enjoying all these, and other the Ordinances of Christ,
honorable and easy; such Departure from the one, and Conjunction with the
other, be that Schism noted in the Scripture?

. 16. Whether any Church has power to advance indifferent things above their
indifferent Natures, and make them Holy in their use, and relation,
appropriated to Gods immediate Worship, and impose them as the Terms of
exercising the Ministerial Office?

. 17. Whether any Church has power to institute new dedicating, and imitiating
signs and symbols, whereby persons are declared and professed to be visible
Cristians?

. 18. Whether being clearly convinced by the Word of God that there are
Corruptions in a particular Church whereof I am a Member; I ought not to
endeavor in my place and Station lawfully to reform them: And if a prevailing
number in that Church shall not only refuse to reform, but require of me to
renounce all such lawful endeavors, upon pain and peril of casting out of
Communion; I may not wave the society of the corrupt Majority, and adhere to
the more sober and moderate party who will reform themselves?

[2] His second task is to prove that something must be foregone for peace. The
design of this loose Discourse may de reduced to this Argument. Small matters
though truths, or duties, are to be sacrificed to peace: But the things that
Dissenters stick and boggle at, are such small matters, therefore they ought to
be sacrificed to peace. To which I only say at present; That I modestly deny
both his Premises, and do hope he will as modestly deny the Conclusion. And
perhaps some Saucy Fellow or other will take up the Argument, and give it one
turn. Small matters that are indifferences ought to be sacrificed to peace, but
the things imposed upon Dissenters (in the judgment of the Imposers) are small
indifferent things, therefore they ought to be sacrificed to peace, or thus.
Those things which we account little, we ought not make necessary to peace and
union, (...) the things which are in difference, are in our own account little,
therefore we ought not to make them necessary to peace and union.

Something then we would give for peace, and more then we can modestly speak
of: If it were to be had for Money, we should not think that Gold could buy
Peace too dear, though Truth may.

But may we humbly enquire of the Enquirer, whether he have this Peace to sell?
And at what rates it may be purchased? I have Carefully, not to say Curiously
perused his whole Discourse; and I must confess to the Reader, that I am so far
from understanding how the Market goes, that I suspect he knows not his own
Mind. Page 131. He tells us: We must be at some cost to purchase it, and part
with something for it. Well! but what is that something? Will Petitions,
Supplications, Prayers, Humbling our selves at his Footstool procure us Peace?
No! That something, is nothing: Men are not so mad, as to part with such a rich
Commodity as Peace for an old song of Petitions. What is it then? Oh! page 130.
He told us from Erasmus, That Peace was not too dear at the price of some
Truth. Very good! Will then telling half a dozen round Lies procure us our
Peace? or the renouncing half a score Scripture-truths. or so? Oh but we are
commanded to buy the Truth; not sell it: Net to do evil that good may come. And
besides that Peace will never wear well, nor last long that is purchased with
the loss of Truth. To war with God, or skirmish the Scripture, is no approved
method to secure Peace amongst our selves. Well then, page ^32. He tells us, We
must subdue our passions and castigate our heats: And I think we have had
pretty good Coolers; then we must take in our sails, lighten the ship, cast
overboard the Fardles of our private fancies and opinions: And we are Content
to cast overboard any thing that is purely our own; only if any of the Rich
Lading of Truth should be packt up in those Fardles, we humbly pray that may be
spared: If our own private personal Concerns were only called for, he should
find the Non-conformists as one man; saying, sin autem Jonas ille ego sim,
projicite me, in Mare ut tempestas desaeviat: Pray throw us into the Sea, only
do not throw any concern of Christ, nor Reformation after us: Well! then he
would have us offer something to those touchy Deities of Custom and Vulgar
Opinion. But really these are a Couple of such Insatiable Idols, it were
cheaper to starve them, then feed them; we may Maintain Bell, and the Dragon at
as easy rates: What is it then we must part with for peace? At last it comes
out with much ado; Loath to confess till just turning off the Ladder, for these
are his Last words under this head, page 137. In a word that we part with all
that which is no essential point of our Religion, for Charity which is. I am
heartily sorry that Peace is not to be had upon easier terms! But especially
that Charity, a Lady of so much Debonairete, that seeks not her own, much less
to rob another, that (...) not to look so Big, and stand upon Terms; should
inflame the Reckoning: It is not, it cannot be Charity, I know her Temper too
well; that requires Conscience, or Truth should be sacrificed upon her Altar: A
true friend she is to Truth, and no less to Peace, and will wait on her usque
ad Aras and no further. No! It Is the Tyrian Idol Meloch that old Canibal and
bloodsucker, that delights in Humane Carnage; For thus we read in Q. Curtius,
that when they were in a great straight. Sacrum quod quidem Diis minime Cordi
esse Crediderim, jam multis saeculis intermissum, repetendi quidem Autores
erant. Which we may accommodate in the Translation thus, Some there were that
persuaded the State to Revive an old and obsolete Statute, which since the time
of Ancient Persecutions had lain D^rmant, and to sacrifice Freemen to the
Common safety; but for my part, though you count me a Heathen Writer; I can
never believe, according to those notions I have of the Gods, that such
Cruelties were ever acceptable to their Deities. I would have Peace upon any
terms that are Reasonable, but to part with all that in Religion, which he
shall say is no essential part of it, is a very hard Chapter. We may chop off a
man's Legs, Arms, put out his Eyes, cut off his Nose, and yet though thus
miserably dismembered and mangled in his Integrals; his essential parts, Body
and Soul remain: Thus he may cut off even what he pleases of Religion, all
Worship, all Sacraments, all Discipline, and leave us but Faith, Hope and
Charity, there is as much as is essential to our Salvation, and then dispose of
the rest.

To this, or some other, or no purporse at all he quotes us Greg. Nazianzen.
Who asks us this Question: (...); What Is far more beautiful then our own
Reason? And he Answers: (...). Nay I will add, the most profitable too. We were
made to believe page 126. That no man (in England) is bound to give away his
Reason for quietness sake: But now four pages further, Peace is far more
beautiful and useful then our own Reason: How shall we reconcile these cross
Capers? Why, Qui been distinguit, been respondet. Then he was commending the
Moderation of the Church of England in opposition to Rome. How that Imperious
Lady that sits on the seven hills, Hectors the World out of their Reason, and
common Sense; and then Reason was more precious then Peace; but now he is
arguing the Non-conformists into obedience, and then Peace is more precious
then Reason.

To the same purpose he gives us that excellent counsel of the Apostle. 12 Romans
18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men.
Admirable advice it is, God grant us grace to take it. And truly the
Non-conformists can live peaceably with all the World, if they might be let
alone, but its not in their power to prescribe Terms to others, but to receive
them. Leges a victoribus dari, a victis Accipi, said Caesar: If then reasonable
Terms be offered us, we will accept, and love them: If unreasonable, we will
refuse, and love them. If we be taken into the circle of their Charity, we will
love them; if we be excluded, yet still we love them: Amabo and si Nolis, Amabo
and si Nolim ipse. We will love whether they will accept our love, and thank us
for it or no: Nay we will love them whether our own exasperating sufferings
will persuade us, or no; that is, we will follow them with a Christian
affection, in spite of their teeths, and of our own. But this (...), to live,
converse peaceably, perhaps may be Impossible, and the Apostle we see will not
tie us up to Impossibles: Now sinful Conditions create a Moral impossibility;
for id tantum possumus quod jure possumus.

I confess it cost me a Smile when I read his improvement of the Apostles
exhortation. Surely (says he) he did not mean we should only accept of Peace,
when its offered us for nothing, or be quiet till we can pick a quarrel, but
that we should be at some cost to purchase it, and part with something for it:
The old something still! Why, we are willing to part with all our outward
Concerns, we will give skin upon skin, will neither Gods Terms, nor the Devils
please him? Only we would not part with our Consciences instructed from the
Scriptures, the Soveraingty of Christ, the Perfection of the Written Word; and
is all this Nothing?

But still he is at it again -- We must deny our selves something upon that
account. Why, we will take an Oath in the presence of Almighty God to lead
quiet and peaceable Lives as become good Subjects, in all godliness and
honesty; Will that serve to purchase our Peace? No! It must be something else,
which before he acquaints us with, he will first prove the necessity of it, and
thus he Reasons.

There are hardly (says he page 1. 1.) any two persons perfectly of the same
apprehensions, or stature of understanding in the whole World. So much
difference there is in men's Constitutions, such diversity of Education, such
variety of Interests and Customs, and from hence so many prejudices and various
Conceptions of things, that he that resolves to yield to no body, can Agree
with no body. What now is to be done in this perplexed Case? Must we take our
Constitutions in pieces? I doubt we shall never put them right together again;
or must we have no Peace till all the propensities and inclinations, rooted and
riveted in our Beings, Natures Temperaments, besides that second Nature growing
out of Custom, be stormed? The Terms of Peace will be next to desperate this
way. What then, must the prevailing party commit a Rape upon the intellectuals
of the depressed Minority, and Marry them afterward to make them amends: Yet
still there is a Tower called Assent and Consent, can never be forced by
assault What then, must the lesser number openly profess themselves Convinced,
and make Recantations before they have cause for it? Alas this is but to
Proselyte a few Hypocrites, who are not worth the whistling! Or must we tarry
till we come to Heaven, where we shall be of one mind? Oh our Enquirer is not
satisfied in that point to Plerophory, some thin^ so indeed; but he wisely
keeps his faith to himself, What course must we then steer? Why we must
castigate our heats, take in our sails, lighten the ship, and offer sacrifice
to the touchy Deities of received Custom and Vulgar Opinion, with all the fine
stuff you heard before: But surely there is an easier, cheaper, more honorable
and Christian way then all these put together: To bear with one another, to
leave judging, censuring, despising, persecuting; to leave men to those
Sentiments which they have contracted from insuperable weakness, or less happy
Education, whilst they are good men, good subjects, good Christians, sound in
the Faith, and Worship God no worse then the Scripture commands them. And he
that cannot Indulge his brother sound in the Fundamentals, and walking together
with his brethren so far as he has attained, let him prate of peace till his
Tongue aches, it is evident he would not purchase Peace with Shoobuckles.

The Apostle has recommended this expedient to us by his own example, 1 Cor. 9.
20, 21. which the Enquirer could see to quote, and not to understand. Unto the
Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; To them that were without
the Law as without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to
Christ) that I might gain them that are without the Law; To the weak became I
as weak that I might gain the weak, I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some. It seems the Blessed A postle had not yet learnt
to snickle the private Conscience, with his public Authority.

That which he quotes from Greg. Naz is indeed more considerable to his design:
Who affirms how St. Basil dissembled the Coesseutiality of the Holy Chost, and
delivered himself in Ambiguous Terms on that point, least he should offend and
loose the weak. The Reader will conclude by these instances, that though the
Enquirers designly open to condemn the Dissenters, yet his Mediums do strongly
plead their Cause: We are illustrated with an Apostle, with a famous Bishop,
both eminent for their Condescentions to the weak, such as laid not the stress
of the Churches Peace upon their own Wills, or A postolical power, or
Ecclesiastical Authority, nor defined too severely Controverted points; and yet
when he comes to the Application, the duty of yelding is pressed upon the
Dissenters: Whose coming up in a hundred points were perfectly insignificant,
unless they could nick the very (...) of Canon-Conformity. I would ask the
Enquirer whether the Dissenters ever pleaded to be gracified in so weighty a
point as the Coessentiality of the Holy Spirit? Or whether Ambiguity, or a
handsome equivocation there, must be one of those things we must give for
Peace; If neither of these, he might have spared Bafil, if not for our sake,
yet for his own. And out of all these excellent Materials we expected he should
have composed a Speech to the Reverend Bishops.

My Lords! I have humbly set before your discerning judgments the great
example, of the Great St. Basil, and the greater instance of the famous Dr: of
the Gentiles, persons, whose Authority in the Church and wisdom to manage that
Authority, was (without disparagement) equal to the same Qualifications in your
Lordships; And yet their hearts so humble, when their places were so high,
their Condescentions greater then their Exaltations, carries somewhat in it of
that Divinity which bespeaks your Imitation. They would become all things to
all men, though sin to none; They were ambitious to wi^ the weak by Meekness,
and not to wound the weak by Majesty. The way of Peace lies plain before you,
st^p to them in things Indifferent, who cannot rise to you in what they call
sinful, your yielding to the weak will be your strength. And whilst you gain
tender Consciences to the Church, you will gain Immortal honor to your selves.
Let it be the glory of your lives, that you have made up our Breaches, and not
the Epitaph of your Tombs; That the way of Peace you have not known.

He comes now to the Grand example indeed, that of our Blessed Savior, which
if it be but faithfully alleged, and Congruously applied, must silence all
dispute, and conquer the must restif reluctance, Let us then hear how Christ's
example leads us to Conform.

1. Christ complied with the Rites and Customs he found; What, right or wrong?
It Is true! he complied with those he found, because he found such Rites and
Customs as were warranted by the Law. He was Circumcised. True, It became him
to fulfill all Righteousness. He did eat the Passover. Very true! He was made
under the Law. He wore their Garments, spoke their Language. No doubt of it; He
was a Jew by Birth, and approved himself a Minister of the Circumcision for the
truth of God.

2. He condescended to the very humors of that stubborn people. True! Not by
Imitating them; not assuming the person of a Jewish Zealot, but mildly
reproving their irregularities; He came not in the blustering Whirlwind, nor in
the terrible Earthquake, but in the still small voice of Evangelical Meekness.
He came not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; but
rebuked his mistaken Disciples that they understood not the spirit of the
Gospel, nor what a temper it called for, that they must needs fetch fire from
Heaven, to Consume the truly Schismatical Samaritans; when they should rather
have Castigated their own heats, and calmed their own passions, which were
kindled from a worse fire: I expect still how he will accommodate this
Condescension of our Blessed Savior to his purpose; for either the Dissenters
must be those stubborn people, and then if the Clergy will imitate their Lord
and Master, they must condescend to their very Humors, or else Dissenters must
in imitation of Christ condescend to the Clergy, and then it supposes them to
be the stubborn and inflexible party. Besides Condescension in Inferiors to
Superiors, will be very improper Language.

3. He used their phrase in his Discourse. And the Non-conformists speak as
proper English as their Wit serves them, that they cannot Adorn their
conceptions, or cloth their thoughts in thunder (...) ping Phraseology, may,
perhaps be their Misery, but certainly not their Sin.

4. He observed their Feasts. We Question it not; He came to do his Fathers
will, and amongst other particulars, that also of observing what ever Ordinance
was of Divine Institution: But the Render must know, here is a secret Argument
couch't in these words against Nonconformity, which I will ingenuously own,
and it is this: The Jews had instituted a Feast in Memory of the Dedication of
the Temple. Now this Festival had not the character of Divine Institution; and
yet this Feast our Savior solemnized, and who then can be so refractory as not
to observe the Holy Days, and consequently all other Humane Constitutions,
which bear no direct Repugnancy to the Law of God? I shall neither assert at
present that this Festival had Divine Warrant, n^r deny that it was properly of
a Religious Nature, but this I return, That it appears not that our Savior
performed any Act, or spoke any Word, that may be interpreted, or Construed an
approbation of that practice. All that appears is from 10 I^. 22, 23. And it
was at Jerusalem the Feast of the Dedication, and it was Winter, and Jesus
walked in Solomon's porch: How shall we draw in Christ's conformity from these
words? It was Winter; Ergo Jesus approved the Feast. He walked in Solomon's
poreh: Ergo, he condescended to that usage! The business was no more then this:
Christ went up and down doing good, and seeking all occasions for that great
end of his coming into the World: Where most Fishes were, there he threw his
Net; where the greatest Confluence of People were gathered, there he preached:
He took them where he could find them; they would not come to him, he would go
to them; whatever was the Lawfulness of that Feast, or the occasion of their
assembly, Christ could make a Holy advantage of it, to preach the Gospel for
their Salvation.

5 He made his own Institutions of Baptism and the Lords Supper as Consonant to
their Customs as 'twas possible. A notable instance it was of his
Condescension, if it was but true; but I am afraid we shall not be so happy as
to see clear evidence of it; which is therefore to be lamented, because our
Enquirer will miss an Advantage of charging Dissenters with Iudaizing in the
Sacraments. But I will promise him thus much? when Non-conformists have a
Commission from Heaven to Institute Sacraments, they shall, if I can prevail,
make them as Consonant to all honest Customs as it is possible; but till then I
hope he will not be displeased that we regulate all our Customs by Christ's
Commands, and not warp his Commands to our Customs.

6. He would not disturb them with Novelty, but ingratiate^ himself and his
Doctrine by these complyances. I have but one answer to these Objections. Let
him be imitated. Let all that profess the name of Christ, so far evidence the
sincerity of their profession, as not to torment men's Consciences with New
fangles, nor vex an Age (wearied with contending, and willing to be quiet) with
Novel inventions: Let all Junior ^ervances be reduced to the sacred Rule and
Rubric, and then we shall all conform and join cheerfully in the Antiphonie;
As it was in the Beginning, so it is now, and ever shall be, World without end.

7. When a certain Tribute was demanded of him, he first proves he was not
oblidged to pay it; yet least he should offend them, determines to pay it, and
works a Miracle to enable Peter to pay it. An unanswerable Argument that
Non-conformists are not exempted from Ta^es and Subsidies: But what is their
Coin to their Conscience? It may seem a piece of unpardonable boldness to say
that Dissenters go beyond this pattern: And yet 1. they plead no Immunity from
Assessments. Nor 2. pay their Levies merely to ^id offense, but out of sense of
their duty, Nor 3, can they raise Money so easy as by Miracle, they are glad
to work hard for it; and yet they endeavor to get their Silver ready against
it be called for; and if their Persens, or Purses may serve their Prince, they
know nothing too precious for his service, that under the Auspices of his
Gracious Government, they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness
and Honesty.

And now let the Enquirer cast up his Accounts, and see what he has gained
Declaro, by all these great examples? The Apostle who was strong in the Faith,
parted with something of his Liberty, to please and gain the weak; therefore
the weak must part with their Consciences, wherein they have no liberty, to
gratify the strong: Jesus Christ, who was the Lord of Worship, accommodated
his Ordinances to the Jewish Customs, therefore the Non-conformists who have no
power over worship, may accommodate their practices in Worship to the present
Customs St. Basil concealed his judgment in a great Truth Therefore
Non-conformists may subscribe what they judge a falsehood.

From the public instances our Enquirer at last Appeals to our Consciences.
Let me Appeal (says he) to the Consciences of men, is it ^t plain from hence,
that although I be persuaded that such a certain Rite is less commendable in it
self, yet if it appear to be an Instrument of Accommodation, that it is
therefore in that Case best on that Account? These Retrogade Appeals from the
public Judgment to the private Conscience are wholly irregular; yet since he
has appealed to Conscience, to Conscience he shall go; whose determination in
the case, if it may be heard speak, is this; That it is plain from those
Instances, that if any rite in it self indifferent, shall prove an Instrument
of Distraction, and Division, it is just upon that account to abolish it, but
his Appeal was not drawn Clerk-like: for the competition, and contest is not
amongst us, between ^ne Mys^ical Ceremony, and another, but between
Ceremonies, and no Ceremonies; If the Controversy were about a mere
circumstance of time, or place, or the Natural clothing of a Religious Action;
As whether the public worship shall Commence at Nine, or ten a clock, or
whether it shall be celebrated in a house of Timber or stone, in which
Determination the Wors^ippers may perhaps suffer some (...), ^ut the worship it
self no prejudice, seeing we must worship our God at some time, and some place,
we can have no concern for stiffness or abstinacy; but when the Controversy
shall be about such Rites, which being neither in general commanded, nor in
their individuals expressed, do enter into the worship it self, as an Integral
part of that Devotion which we present to the divine Majesty, we say such Rites
are sinful, on this side the Command of a Church, and can be no fit Instruments
of Accommodation.

After many an Impertinent paragraph, The Enquirer starts a New Question,
which, though I never once dreamed of it, shall have that attendance it
deserves. If I am persuaded that such an opinion is more true, then that which
is publicly owned, (so long (...) the (...) doctrine of Christianity is not in
dispute) may I (...) rather conceal if, then dis^urb the Church? The case is I
confess before* mean (...), and the best assistance I can contribute to it is
Resolution, is to recommend him to the Apostle. 14. To. 22. Have the Faith;
have it to thy self before God! upon which Text our Enquirer descants notably.
1. By faith in the Text (says he) the Apostle means not the Doctrine of
Christianity. For then the Meaning should be, That he that understands the
great Doctrine of Christianity should conceal it: well, but what hurt in a
concealment? St. Basil was just now applauded, for dissembling the
Coessentiality of the H. Spirit: which, if the Athana^ Creed say true, is one
of the great Doctrines, of Christianity, necessary to be believed for
salvation. 2. By Faith (says he) is not meant the Habit of saving Faith: we
Agree to it! And are glad he can find such a thing as a Habit of saving Faith.
3. By Faith is meant only a persuasion of the ^awfulness of such a thing in it
self indifferent. I shall not contradict, yet let me say. 1. That though it be
a Confessed Truth. that (...) (...) interdum licet, yet it is as true,
pr^scribere falsum* ^unquam licet: Though I may conceal a Truth sometimes, I
may never assert a falsehood. I may forbear to say there are Antipodes, yet may
I not say, or subscribe, or swear there are none, and yet these are none of the
essentials of our Religion. Negative precepts bind us semper, and ad semper;
that is, there can be no case put wherein, no time assigned when it may be
Lawful to deny or renounce the smallest Truth, or violate the least of Gods
commands by my practice. 2. Though I may conceal my judgment, or suspend my
practice, in some of these lesser matters, yet when a sweet concurrence of
inviting Circumstances shall call for my asserting that truth, or pract^sing
that duty, I am then to assert the one, and practice the other. In some cases I
may wave an Explicit Profession, or open practice, when such forbearance shall
be compensated with a greater Good, when a little Time shall pay the Truth, and
Gods Glory, Interest, and make amends, for the lucrum Cessans, and damnum
emergens, the Spiritual loss sustained, or Spiritual advantage delayed 3.
Though I may conceal, or suspend as aforesaid, yet I ought not to give away my
Christian liberty, nor commit any Act, or Acts, that may de^ my future claim,
or be pleaded in Bar to my right. 4. When ^he Consciences of Christians are
notoriously hazarded by my silence, or forbearance, when I am in danger of
betraying my Brother to Error, or hardening Another in his, I have need of
much wisdom and prudence how to speak and act, but speak, and Act I ought; for
it is a most monstrous cheat, to urge the Manner of a duty, against the Duty it
self; As that because I ought to Act prudently, that therefore I ought to sit
still. 5. I am much dissatisfied how it should follow from hence, what he makes
his conclusion: That we may change any Rite or Ceremony that we have a great
kindness for, for one more grateful to others: Nay, if Any Ceremony I have in
my worship not Commanded by Christ, may do him a kindness, I have no such
kindness for it as to disoblige him, nor shall he need to send me back one of
his beloved ones in Exchange, I shall never feel the want of it. But now the
Reader must be entreated to use his eyes: The Assertion was that it is Lawful
to Conceal my opinion (when the main Doctrine of Christianity is not in
dispute) rathet then disturb the peace of the Church: from whence he would
wisely infer, therefore we may practice Ceremonies, which I am either fully
satisfied are sinful, or not fully satisfied that they are Lawful: for this is
the upshot: -- That we may comply with the Laws in being, so they be not
palpably Contrary to the Scriptures or Common Reason; It very amazing to me,
that I cannot conceal what I think true, unless I must assert what I judge
false: nor bite in my sentiments about Another unlawful practice, but I must
practice with him: I may suppress my judgment that such a thing is sinful, and
yet not dare to deliver my judgment that it is Lawful. He that Commanded me not
to judge my brother, did not command me to Imitate him.

It must not be overlook't, what an Emphasis he lays upon this word Palpably,
we may comply with the Laws, so they be not Palpably contrary to the
Scriptures. And p. 11. It must be An Apparent breach of the divine law, that
gives just cause of separation. And p. 118. Conditions of Communion that are
not Expressly sinful, and such wherein there is not a Plain necessity, and
Certainty of sin in Compliance, are justified. Sinful Terms, will not justify
separation, unless they be Apparently, Expressly so. Nor will a sinful Command
warrant my non-obedience, unless it be Palpably such. It must be some gross
impiety, which like the Egyptian darkness may be felt: Thus if I be prohibited
to partake of the Lords Supper, oftener then once in three, four or seven years,
I must pocket up the wrong, because here is no palpable, apparent, express
violation of the law of God. The Law says indeed, As often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup: but has not determined how often. As one of your
Roman Casuists determines, that we are not bound actually to love God above
once in three years; And Another thinks, once in a Man's life will serve the
turn, provided we do not downright Hate him: because (...) Command of Loving
God, is an affirmative praecept, which binds indeed semper, but not ad semper.
And if all the Rabble Rout of Popish Ceremonies were Commanded, and five times
as many more, yet these will not justify non-obedience, because (forsooth) they
are not expressly forbidden, by Name, nor palpably contrary to any one Text of
Scripture.

And to conclude, the Reader shall now know at a word the Lowest price of
Peace. That we part with all that, which is no essential point of our Religion,
for Charity, which is. This is the Lowest penny, take it, or Leave it, try the
world, and mend your selves, where you can. But 1. It Is palpably ridiculous, to
oppose Charity to any point, or part of Religion: As if charity, which is
Commanded by the principles of our Religion, should cross those principles:
Charity Commands a Religious person to stoop to all in his private concerns,
but requires not that Any Principle of Religion should stoop to it. 2. It Is
weakly supposed, that it is the Concern of Charity, that we be of one uniform
practice in the Minutes of Religion, when her highest, and noblest exercise is
to Embrace those that differ from us in sinless practices. For I cannot yet
understand, what Interest Evangelical Love has to reduce us to an uniformity in
Rites, and Ceremonies; And do know that Protestants who differ in the lesser
points of Religion, as to principle, and practice, do yet maintain a more
entire and cordial love amongst themselves, then the Papists who are cudgelled
by the Iron rod of the Inquisition into a precise Indentity, in their little
fopperies.

Did we never hear of two friends that could really love each other with the
most endeared affections, though their clothes were not made by the same
Tailor! nor trimmed up with the same Ceremonies of Ribbonds, and Lace; Let the
worshippers of Mahomet quarrel about their Green, and Red Turbants, yet
Christian Kingdoms can hold firm peace, and Inviolate Amity, without Abolishing
their respective Country Customs: The Irish in one of our Kings Reigns could
not be persuaded nor forced to leave their odd way of Plowing, and threshing
out their grain, and yet that prudent Prince never sent Ta^ amongst them with
his Iron ^ail to thresh them into a Compliance with more Decent, and useful
manners, 3. This Distinction of the points of Religion into Accidental, or
Circumstantial, Integral, and essential, (or however else they please to
Marshal it) had need be well, warranted, sufficiently clearly, carefully
limited, and distinctly butted, and bounded; that we may Exactly see where the
Circumstantials end, and the Integrals begin, and where the Integrals expire,
and the essentials Commence, or we may soon be distinguished out of all our
Religion: for under the cover^ of such arbitrary distinctions Rome has already
rooted out much of Religion within her Quarters.

She confesses that Christ did institute both the Eating of the Bread, and the
Drinking of the Cup; but withal affirms, that He that eats the flesh of Christ,
receives the Bl^ (...) per concomitantiam. Drinking is not Essential to the
Sacrament, and therefore she has upon prudential grounds, (as she thinks)
appropriated that Moity to the Priests, who need it most, and love it best: And
in the judgment of Grotius, Both Bread, and wine may be spared, as he
Leardnedly Determines upon that Question. An semper communicandum per Symbola?
And it is but suitable to what he endeavors to evince (as our Enquirer cites
him page 163) That the Magistrate Exceeds not his Commission when he
interposes, for the Determination of the Circumstantials of Religion. And
seeing bread and wine in his judgment are not essential to that Ordinance; By
his own, and our Authors principles, the Magistrate may (for some time at
least) prohibit both: for if the Magistrate has a power from God to Determine
the Circumstantials, he must be supposed, to be Judge what are so, and thus we
may have all our Religions Justitutions distinguished, and determined away in a
Moment. For though at present whilst we are under the care of faithful
Governors, we are secure of the essentials; yet we have granted A principle in
this Generation, which may utterly Eradicate all positive and instituted
worship in the Next; And we hold all the Ordinances of Christ upon precarious
Terms; that is, we are fiduciaries of that grand Depositum, till some men shall
please to call for it, and then like the Traditores of old, must resign and
betray the concerns of the Gospel.

[3] He is now entering upon his Third Labor; which is to prove; That the
Things in Difference are of such a Nature, as may be fit to become a
peace offering, and sacrificed to the Magistrate, the Laws, and the Church. For
the proof of which he will give us these five following Remarkes.

(1) That the things now scrupled in this Church are such as were heretofore
submitted to, by the most Leading-men of those that now depart from it: To
which I shall very briefly return these few particulars. 1. That the
Non-conformists are not led by Men, further then as they have Authority in the
Name of Christ to Lead them. The Leaders or Pastors disclaim all other conduct,
then by Gospel direction; their power is Ministerial, not Despotical, And their
people disclaim all such Leaders, as would Lord it over their faith, and take
away the Judgment of Discretion over their own Acts. It Is a very uncomely fight
to behold a Drove of Rational Creatures with their Consciences Tayled to one ^e
horse, and so conducted to a Fair, there to he sold for peace, and Expediency.
2. With equal Reason the Dissenters will plead, That the worship which they now
use, is the very same that was lately used, and practiced by some of the most
Leadingmen Amongst the Conformists; And is it not a wonder that whether men go
backwards or forwards, yet both shall form an Argument for Conformity. If they
have sometimes been Non-conformists, and are now reclaimed, that shall conclude
for Conformity, because they must be supposed to have their eyes Anointed with
some excellent Collyrium, and to see better; If they were once Conformists, and
become at last Dissenters, yet that will conclude full as well for Conformity,
because they once saw better: such shuffling arguments would with equal Truth
serve the occasions of the Dissenters too. Many of the Conformists were once
Non conformists, and therefore we are no worse now, then they were then; and
Many of the Non-conformists were once Conformists, and therefore having tried
the difference are more competent Judges which way of worship is nearest the
Rule. And though both these ways of Reasoning are none of the best, yet if
there be any Advantage, the latter carries it: because there can be no such
Arguments from worldly Interest the one way, which may possibly have a stroke
the of other; few are Ambitious to be starved, and as few that are so
irreconciliable to preferments. 3. Not former Apprehensions, but present Light
into the mind of God from his word, ought to be our Immediate, and next
Director in our worship of him: Men may change, as times and external Accidents
change, but the Rule of Religion is unchangeable, and abides for ever.

(2) Some Non-conformists daily come over to the Church, and those none of the
Meanes^ for Ability, or piety: but let them brag of any one if they can find
him, that has since the resettlement of the Church apostatized to them. The
Dissenters send back the Challenge, let them brag of any one if they can find
him that has Apostatized to them. But yet I shall say a little more.

. 1. It Is no wonder to hear of few conversions to a persecuted Profession. It
must be a deep Impression of Duty to God, and a violent respect to the Reward
of Another World, that will prevail with flesh, and Blood to set it is face
against the blustering wind of Opposition, and ^owe against the impetuous
Current of General Example, Men are not easily induced to close in with that
worship, which will not only prejudice, but Ruin their Temporal Concerns. It Is
ordinary to see secular advantages to Command the Minds of many, but no turning
to A Reproached Reformation, but what arises from clear and irresistible
convictions. All the Avene us to preferment, all the Passes to a Livelihood are
so strictly guarded, that men of parts whose Educations have promised them the
outward Rewards of Ingenuity, and learning, are sometimes necessitated to sowze
over head and ears into Compliance at first Dash; All Arguments are Drowned in
the Noise of a Croaking belly, and Hungry stomachs swallow first, and leave it
to the strength of Nature to Concoct all as well as it can*

Nay, from the Good old woman at the Towns-end, that teaches the
Criss-cross-rowe to the Bellfray Schoolmaster, and so upwards, all the places
of Education are tinctured with Conformity; Every p^isny is taught first to
swim with Bladders, that at last he may venture alone; first to Act without
knowledge, and then with it, or Against it, like the Crotonian Milo, who first
carried the sucking calff, till by gradual essays he could Carry it when a
Bull. Thus Traps of temptation must needs take, when they are baited at both
ends, great Necessities and great Preferments.

. 2. This Argument is borrowed, or stolen from the Papists, who use and urge
it every day against the Protestants; I shall propound and Answer it in the
words of Monsieur de la Motte. In his late Motives to his conversion: p. 108.
109. D'o^ vient done (disent ils) qu'il y a si peu de persons qui quitent la
Religion Roman? and que, de ceux qui l'ont quitee pour embrasser la
Protestante, on en voit une grando party, qui y retonrnent, and qui font,
comme on dit, leur Recantation? Whence comes it (say the Romanists) that so few
quit the Roman Religion? and that of those who have forsaken it, to embrace
that of the Protestant, we see many that Return back, and as we say make their
Recantation? To which he gives this Answer. Ie pourrois ^lleguer mill Raisons
particuliers pour lesquelles, plusiturs illustres Protestans ont (...) Religion
en France, quin'est plus a la mode, (dit on) ^n ce Pais-la, and ^nt embrasse la
Roman, je dis seulement en general, ce qu'il est facile de remarquer dans les
particulieres, que ^'est l'interest, qui les meant and les retient, qui les fait
changer, and quiles empeche de rechanger. I could give a thousand particular
Reasons, for which some emin^nt Protestants have ^uited their Religion in
France, which, say they, is Now no longer the mode in our Country; and have
Embraced the Romain Faith: But I only say this in general, which is very easy
to Observe in the particulars, That it is mere Interest that Allures them
first, and then fixes them; That makes them change, and then hinders them from
a Rechange. The pension of a thousand Crowns (as he goes on) which they promise
to a Minister, in Case he will renounce his calling, is a most violent
temptation.

. 3. I could tell the Enquirer of those that have deserted their station in the
Church of England, and have given their Reasons for it, and embraced a
persecuted Reformation: I could tell him of many young Scholars eminent for
piety and learning, who have rather chosen a retired estate and mean Condition,
then those allurements, which would make many a mouth water at them. But let
every man stand or fall to his own Master; I am not qualified to judge either
way, but this I will say, that whosoever shall Reason the one way or other,
will find his Argument Inconclusive, and I have known so much in my small
Observation, and known some men too well, then either to be much Confirmed in
my judgment by their presence, or staggered by their Absence.

(3) There are men of as clear understanding, as good life, and as Comfortable
consciences, in the society of this Church, as are any There else to be found.
And if I should say, there are Persons of as clear understanding, as good life,
end as Comfortable consciences in the society of the Non-conformists, as are
any where else to be found, I should discover a vanity equal to that of the
Enquirer. I cannot be of every man's Religion, that is of a much clearer
understanding then my self, unless I resolve to be of twenty Contradictory
Religions at once: Nor can I judge it my duty to Imitate every one of a holy
life, further then in his Holiness: Nor of every man's way that pretends to a
Comfortable Conscience in his way, because I see some fitch in Comfort to their
Consciences from the greatest provocations, or grossest delusions; Besides it is
no part of the clearness of men's understandings, to be wiser then the
Scriptures, or to study Reasons, why they ought to destroy all that are not of
the same Intellectual stature with themselves. Nor does it add to their
Holiness, that they can persecute others whose lives are Holy; Nor to the solid
Comsort of their Consciences, that they endeavor to weaken the Comfort of
other men's; and I will further add, that since my own Conscience can only
directly witness to my self, it can never be allowed Credence with Another, if
I deny it its proper work, and Office in Another, But we have met with this
Braggadochian Pyrgopolinias before, whether the Reader is referred, if at least
he shall judge so inconsiderable a Trifle to merit further Consideration.

(4) The things objected against this Church are but at most disputable
Matters, because all wise and good men are not Agreed upon them, but that which
is sub judice, and yet under dispute, cannot be called evil, till the dispute
is ended, and the decision made against it: To which I crave leave to Answer.
1. That then some of the greatest and most important points in Religion must be
called disputable, seeing all wise men, and some good men are not Agreed upon
them. 2. If the matters he still sub judice, and cannot be called evil till the
dispute be ended; why are the Non-conformists Executed before condemnation? for
I hope he arrogates no such partial Tribunal to himself, that the things in
controversy, shall be reputed undecided when he would justify the one, and yet
decided when he would Condemn the other. 3. We say the things are already
decided by Scripture long ago, if that may be Judge, and if any other Judge be
set up, the Condemned party will appeal thither as the Highest Court of
Judgment in matters relating to Conscience and the Immediate worship of God,
where alone they ought to be Judged.

(5) The things scrupled in this Church are such as the like may be found, and
Complained of in any Church of the whole world, at least since the Apostles
times. To which I say, 1. That I have been too much beaten to the Game, then to
be Overborn by the Enquirers Daring Confidence, and do smoothly deny the Matter
of Fact. Many particular Churches may be found at this day, where Mystical
Ceremonies are not found, much less made the Terms of Communion. But he has two
wide Creep holes at which he will escape. 1. That we choose wath National
Church we will: It seems then A particular Church, and a National Church are
Terms that Measure each other. And thus if we instance in the Ancient
Albigenses, Waldenses, or the present French Churches, he may reject the issue,
because they are not National Churches. And all the Churches for three hundred
years after Christ, because they were not National. 2. He will undertake this
task, If he may have the History and knowledge of that Church, whatever it be
or was since the Apostles times, as we have of this. I Commend his discretion,
(...) knows it difficult to get the Church History of other National Churches,
so full as we have of our own.

2. If the Churches in the Apostles times had none of these things now
scrupled, we shall rather choose, and such choice is our Duty, to Conform to
their patterns then any junior and more green-headed Constitutions. They are
the Apostolical times and Churches, of whose constitutions we have infallible
Records which we propound for our Exemplars, and he will be tried by Any
Others, if we will bate him them, for which we thank him. I am now expecting a
serious Proposition, and he sends us this offer: That since there is no Grand
Master of Religion concerned in the Controversies between us, nor any violation
of the Laws of God in our Complying with the Laws of this Society, and since
Mahomet must either go to the Mountain, or the Mountain must come to Mahomet,
i. e. one side or other must yield; we will be persuaded to think it
reasonable, that the subject should submit to the Governor, and opinion give
place to ancient Custom, and Novelty to the Laws in being. This is his friendly
Motion, and one so Modest, that we would be persuaded to think it reasonable,
If he had given us Reasonable arguments to be persuaded; which that he has not
I think is Evident from what has been already said, with these further
Considerations.

. 1. That his motion is grounded on a false suggestion, That there is no grand
matter of Religion concerned in the Controversy, nor any Law of God violated
by our Compliance: for the Perfection of the Scriptures as the Rule of Faith,
worship, and Church Government, is a Grand matter of Religion, and greatly
concerned in this Dispute. The sovereignty of Christ over his Church, His
complete discharge of all his Offices, His Kingly Office in Making Laws, his
Prophetical in revealing the whole mind of God, is no small matter of Religion,
and greatly concerned also in this dispute: which Lawgiver, by his Express
Law, and Royal Edict has Commanded all his true Ministers, 28. Math. 19. 20. To
Disciple all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; Tra^hing them to Observe whatsoever he has Commanded them; Adding a
gracious promise of his special asssisting presence in this work, That he would
be with them always unto the end of the world: we think that the Terms of
enjoying all the Ordinances of Christ, is but Observing whatsoever Christ has
Commanded: which Law is apparently, expr^sly, palpably violated (to use his own
expressions) when any thing else or less or more is made the Condition of our
admittance into the Kingdom of Christ.

. 2. I know no Reason why any party should be the Immovable Mountain, that is
too stiff in the hams to Come to Christ; I have ever judged Christ him self to
be that Mountain, to which Mahomet and all Pretenders ought to move. It was
Noted as a piece of arrogant Moroseness in Austin the Monk, that he would stir
no more then a Mountain to meet the British Christians half way in an Amicable
Association: But if the Church will needs be the (...), yet let her remember
that Christ is set upon that Holy hill, and if she will not Move in Deference
to his Authority, He that touches the Mountains and they smoke, and makes the
Hills to tremble, can by his Almighty power send such an Earthquake in her
bowels, as may cause her to yield to Reason.

. 3. Though Opinion, and Custom may fight it out for me; yet let the proudest
Ancient Custom bow down to the institutions of Christ. It has ever been as a
Common, so a successful Peliey to clap hoary Periwigs upon juvenile
innovations, to conciliate some Reverence to their Antique Looks: Error has
often a more wrinkled face then, Truth, but Truth alway's Carries the Graver
aspect. They that Imp their pin-feather'd inventions which plumes borrowed from
Time's wings, do not Teach them to fly, but flutter, Antiquity is like Romulus
his Assylum, where all pursued Corruptions take sanctuary; It Is the grand
Borrough, and safe Retreat of superstition, when fetretted out of her
Lurking-holes of Counterseit Reason. He can say very little for his opinion,
that cannot plead Antiquity, Custom, and such like Mormo's: Thus the Aquarian
Heretics pleaded Custom to use water mingled with wine, in the Eucharist,
whose folly Cyprian thus Censures. Victi ratione, opponunt consuetudinem; quasi
Consuetudo Major esset veritate.Being beaten at the weapon of Reason, they
fetch out the old Rusty sword of Custom; As if such aBilbao sword durst try its
edge against the tried scimitar of Truth: such a roat does Tertullian give
these childish pretenses. Consuetudo ab aliqua ignorantia, vel simplicitate
initiam sortita, in usum per successionem Corroboratur; and it a adversus
veritatem vindicatur, sed Dominus Noster Jesus Christus, veritatem se, non
Consue^udinem cognominavit: Haereses non tam Novitas, quam veritas revineit,
quodcunque adversus veritatem sapit, erit haeresis, etiam vetus consuetudo, A
Custom of Base and dunghill Extract, yet gaining some Repute by Long usage, and
prescribing for it is gentility time out of mind, grows saucy, and Malapert
against Truth it self: But our Lord Jesus Christ called himself by the Title of
Truth, not of Custom; The clearest conviction of Heresy is not by the leaden
Lesbian Rule of Practice, but by the Golden Rule of the Scriptures. Error, is
Error still, and will be so, of plebeian Bre^d and Ignoble parentage, though
it has purchased a coat of Arms, scrapes acquaintance with some Ancient
families, and would make it out, that it came in with the Conqueror.

The Gibeonites Acted very subtlely, when they came to Io^na, with Old sacks
upon their Asses, and wine-bottles old, and reut, and bound up, and ^ld shoes,
and clonted upon their feet, and all their provision dry, and moldy as if they
had come from far, when all this while they were but their Next Neighbors.
It Is a pretty sight doubtless to see the State which the great Czar of Muscovy
uses upon public Festivals, and Entertainments; The great Chamber all beset
with grave Personages Adorned with Ermines, and Gold from head to foot, dazzling
the weak eyes of vulgar spectators, and yet perhaps you shall find some of
these Knezzes next day in their Blue Aprons, who shall think it no Empeachment
of their late Glories to sell you a penny worth of Pepper; such a Masque we
have presented to us of old Customs, all gorgeously attired like the
Antediluvian Patriarchs, and when we come to examine them, they are little
better then (to use our Authors expressions) The Dictates of Ambition, the
Artifices of gain, and a colluvies of almost all the superstitions, errors,
and Corruptions, of former Ages.

. 4. Since there must be a yielding in order to peace, then surely they have
all the Right, and Reason on their sides to have the Honor of the
Condescension. Who Consess that the Matters in difference are Indifferent in
themselves. such as where in no grand Matter of Religion is concerned; rather
then they who ate bound up by immovable persuasions, that they are sinful. 2.
They who are most Remote from the primitive simplicity, and not they who have
no higher Ambition, then to perform all things which, and as Christ has
Commanded. 3. They who have made the Additions, which Cause the Divisions; and
not they who only take up their Religion, as near as they can, as they found it
delivered, and recommended to them, by the unerring word of God.

4. They who have enough to spare, and may part with some excrescences, and
never touch the Quid of Religion, rather then they who own a Naked Religion
without any Additaments, and if any such be found Amongst them, they are
Content to surrender them up as a Sacrifice to peace.

5. They who by their Authority are Qualified to make a through Reformation,
and such Abatements in supernumerary observations, such fillings up of the
Chasmes, and vacuities, as may not only Retrieve peace at Home, but procure a
General union with all the Reformed Churches abroad, to the strengthening of the
Protestant Religion; weakening the hands of the Common Enemy; rather then those
poor people, whose Circumstances are such that they cannot propose the Terms of
peace to others, and what Alterations they shall make in themselves, will be
insignificant to an universal settlement.

6. They who have already given some specimens of their Condescensions to the
Romanists, by Removing some exasperating passages, and it may be hoped, and
expected that they will take a few steps toward a Compliance with dissenting
Protestants. For as the Author of the Irenicum observes well. p. 132. That
which was laid as a bait for them (the Papists) was never intended as a Hook
for those of our own Profession. And therefore to conclude this Chapter, I will
take the freedom to Quote that Celebrated Son of the Church for a Theological
Notion, whom he has already quoted (...) Philosophical one. Dial. 5. p. 399.
speaking of the Papacy as the Kingdom of Antichrists, he has those Notable
words. Which we knowing so experimentally, not to be Compassed by Needless
Symbolizing with them, in any thing; I conceive our best policy is, Studiously
to Imitate them in nothing; but for All indifferent things to think the worse
of them for their using them. As no person of Honor would willingly go in the
known garb of Any Lewd, and infamous person; whatsoever we court them in, they
do but turn it to our scorn, and Contempt, and are the more hardened in their
wickedness; wherefore seeing that Needless Symbolizing with them, does them no
Good but Hurt, we should Account our selves in all things indifferent,
perfectly free, to satisfy, and please in the most universal manner we can
those of our own party; nor Caring what opinions, or Customs, or outward
formalities, the Romanists, or others have, or may have had from the first
Degeneracy of the Church, which we ought to Account the more hid^ously soiled
by the Romanists; using them; but supporting our selves upon plain Scripture,
and solid Reason, to use, and profess such things, at will be most. Agreeable to
us All, and make most for the safety, and welfare of the Kingdom of Christ; for
this undoubtedly. O Philopolis, is the most firm, and true Interest of Any
Protestant Church, or state whatsoever.

CHAP. IV.
The vanity of the Enquirers Confidence noted; in boasting, that they who find
fault with the Churches Constitution, will never be able to find out, or agree
upon a better: his Reasonings about this matter examined.

IT was a piece of the old Roman val^ur, to kill themselves, for fear of being
Killed; and it is a Considerable piece of the New Roman piety, not to stir, for
fear of going out of the way, to Resolve against Reformation, upon some dangers
which are fancied may attend Reformation: That Church always apprehending, or
pretending to apprehend dreadful inconveniences in all changes, though
apparently for the better.

Before we can possibly know, whether. A better way may be found out, we must
first be Agreed what is a Good way. Now All Goodness Consists in the due
Conformity of a thing to it is Rule and Idaea by which it ought to be measured;
and it is fitness to reach that end to which it is a Means: And therefore the
betterness of Any thing must be judged of by it is nearer Approach to that Rule,
and it is greater proportionableness to the attainment of it is design: If then
we could find out A worship more Agreeable to the Rule of worship, or a
Constitution more apt to reach the great intendments of Holiness and Peace,
such a worship, such a Constitution will justify it self to be a better, then
any of it is Competitors which shall Deviate from that Rule, or more uncertainly
attain the Desired End.

(1) The first part of our task then will be to find out our Rule, which when
we have done, we have nothing remaining but to apply that Rule to those Models
which we would erect, or having erected, we would examine their Regularity. And
as they shall be found to approach nearer, or depart farther from that Rule, we
may Confidently pronounce they are therefore by so much The better, or the
worse. Now the only Rule of Reformation, in our judgment, is the Infallible
word of God: which we therefore judge sufficient and adaequat, because they
give this Testimony to their own Perfection: And seeing we have now to do with
those who own the Scriptures to assert nothing but Truth, it will be evidence
enough that they are such a Rule if they do but Assert that they are so.

It is indeed no new thing to hear them charged as Lame and defective, such as
must be pieced and eked out either with Immediate Revelations, or Humane
Traditions, to render them a Complete and perfect standard of our Faith, and
acceptable obedience. To which we only oppose the Testimony of the Apostle, 2.
Tim. 3. 16. 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for Doctrine, for reproof, for Correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.
Concerning which sacred Rule, I will use our Authors Confidence with (I think)
better warrant; That they who find fault with this Rule will never be able to
find out, or Agree upon a Better; whereof the Endless mazes, the perplexed
labyrinths into which they have cast themselves, who despising, and forsaking
this only Canon, have delighted to find out bypath, is very clear, but very
sad demonstration; for when they have tried Traditions, or gaped for
revelations, or depended on the Churches Authortiy, and yet found no
satisfaction, they think to secure themselves, and gratify theMagistrate with a
New power who has already such burdens upon his shoulders, that we have more
need incessantly to solicit the throne of grace on his behalf for wisdom,
Counsel, strength to manage, and bear them, then fondly to think to do him a
kindness, by Imposing upon him a greater work which all others are weary of.

But this one Text which I have mentioned, may abundantly satisfy us that there
can be nothing requisite to equise, and furnish out A Christian, A Minister, A
Church for Duty, and obedience, but what is summarily therein ascribed to the
written word.

. 1. That the Scriptures are of unquestionable Authority to Determine all those
Controversies whereof they haveCognizance; because they are (...), divinely
inspired, which no person, no Church, no Convention of men, can with any
Colorable pretext affirm of their Dictates, Canons, Decretals, or
Constitutions: And that amongst many other Reasons, because they were not
indicted in heat, or passion; were not Contrived to advance one party, or to
depress, and crush another, but were the Result of infinite wisdom, impartially
respecting Truth, fuithfully acquaniting us with the mind, and will ofGod,
without Adhering to any faction.

. 2. That there can be no concern of any Church, or Officer in the Church, or
member of theChurch, but the Scripture speaks fully to it. As, 1. If a Church
will approve her self to be the pillar of Truth, and expose to all her Members
the Doctrine of the Gospel, the Scripture is, (...), profitable for
Instruction, or 2. has she occasion to Convince the Cavilling world, and stop
the Months of gainsayers: The Scripture is (...). It Lays down the Truth, and
thereby discovers error, heresy, false doctrine, all Corruption, in worship,
and manner; It gives us what is straight, and thereby enables us to judge what
is Crooked; or 3. Are there any Tares sprung up in the field of the Church,
sown by the Enemy whilst Men Slept, (and men will sleep) it is profitable also
(...), for the Correction, rectifying, and redintegration of whatever is
warped, and declined from its Original. It supplies, and fills up the wide
chasmes of defectives, and pares of all excrescences, and prunes of
superfluities, or. 4. Must Christians be trained up under Gospel discipline,
and order, that they may grow up in knowledge, in every grace, in mutual Love,
it is useful (...), No paedagogy, no Constitution, no discipline to be compared
with it.

. 3. That it is a Rule which must direct All the builders in Gods house in
whatsoever Quality, under whatsoever character they appear; It Is profitable for
the Man of God, And indeed it only becomes The Man of sin, he that is the
(...), or Lawless person. who has a curb for every man's Conscience, but will
not endure a snaffle upon his own to despise this Rule, and cry up another.

. 4. The Absolute profection, and compleatness of this Rule is also Asserted:
It Is able to make the Man of God perfect, throwly furnish to all good works.

Notwithstanding this Perfection of the Scripture as a Rule: it is always
supposed, that every one in his private, or more public capacity be Able to
use, and Apply the Rule. As the square, or Rule of the Architect, however exact
in it self, yet presupposes him to have eyes to see, and brains to Apply it to
his work; so the Scripture as a Law teaches Duty, and whatever of well-pleasing
obedience we can perform to God, yet supposes us at least to be
RationalCreatures, that can apply that Law to our own particular Actions.
Whence these two things must necessarily follow. 1. That it was not only
Needless, but Impossible, that the Scripture should enumerate, or determine
upon the particular Natural Circumstances, of general time, place, person,
when, where, who should worship God, every day, hour, and minute to the End of
the world: for so the whole world would not have afforded sufficient stowage
for Rubricks, nor have been able to contain the volumns that must have been
written: for as the End, and use of a Rule is not to each the Artificer when he
shall begin to work, but how he may do it like a Workman, whenever he begins;
so neither was the Scripture designed for a clock to tell us at what hour of
the day we should commence the public service of God, but that when ever we
begin, or end, we manage all according to this Rule. 2. That when the Scripture
has prescribed us all the parts of worship, instituted the Administrators of
worship, given ^les how to separate them to that Office, and laid down general
rules for the Regulating those Natural circumstances, which could not
particularly be determined, as that they be done to Edification, decently and
in order; And has withal commanded us to attend to this Rule, and no other, it
has then Discharged the Office of a Rule, and as a Rule is Complete and perfect.

(2) Besides our Retrospect to our Rule, we must also look forward to the End,
and Design of all Riligion, and when that is once well fixed, we shall have
Another great Advantage to judge what worship is Better, and what is worse; Now
the great End of all Religion, and specially of Religious worship is the
glorifying of God, the pleasing of God; And therefore whatever shall pretend to
that Glorious Title, and Dignity of being an Act of Religion, a part of
Religion, and yet has no real Tendency to the Advancement of his Glory, (which
it can never have without a due regard to the Rule) ought to be Expunged out of
the Catalogue of Lawful Acts, or parts of worship; And is so much the more
abominable both to God, and Man: To God; because it offers him a Sacrifice not
subservient to his Praise; and to Man; because it deludes him with a pretense
of recommending his person, and service to God, and yet leaves and exposes both
to Gods abhorrence.

From what has been said, I might plead my self Competently qualified to
gratify the Importunity of the Enquirer; and answer the Question, whether A
Better frame of things might not possibly have been found out? If whatsoever
Agrees with the Rule is good, then what is discrepant from the Rule is Evil; If
what makes a nearer approach to the Rule is better, then what departs further
of, is worse; but I look upon these kind of Questions as a vapouring party sent
out to draw the unwary, within the Clutches of an Ambuscado.

Whatever Constitution shall impeach the only true Rule of shortness and
deficiency, is less good then that which implies no such shortness or
deficiency; But there are some Constitutions on the world, which impeach the
only true Rule of shortness and deficiency, and Therefore they are less good
then those which impeach not the Rule of such Deficiency, whatever
Constitutions are made, supposed useful for decency, which are not Comprehended
under the Rule, do impeach that Rule of Deficiency; but there are some
Constitutions made, supposed useful for decency, which are not comprehended
under the Rule; and therefore there are some Constitutions which impeach the
Rule of De^ncy. Whatever is Comprehended under a Rule, must at least be
necessary by way of Disjunction; but there are some Constitutions in the World
which are not Necessary, so much as by way of Disjunction; therefore they are
not Comprehended under the Rule. There is not the smallest or most minute
Circumstance which can cleave to any Religious Act, or wherewith we can
Lawfully cloth Gods Worship, but it is by the Command of Christ made necessary
at least disjunctively. But there are some Constitutions which are not made
necessary disjunctively, and therefore they are such as wherewith we cannot
Lawfully cloth Religion, or the Worship of God. We are Commanded by Christ to
Baptize; now though it was not possible that it should be determined how often,
in what places, at what hours, with what Number of persons the Ordinance
should be administered in Every Age and Country from its first institution, to
the End of the World; yet its' determined that they to whom of right it belongs
to baptize at one hour or other, in one place or other, and so time and place
are Determined by way of disjunction: but there are some things which it is not
necessary to do, the one or the other to the Complete fulfilling, and decent
performance of the precept, and therefore are not commanded by way of
disjunction.

It would therefore be no such difficult labor to find out a better way, for
all the difficulty would lie in reforming Abuses, removing Corruptions, and
reducing Christ's Ordinances to their primitive institutions: Hoc enim adversus
omnes haereses valet: Id esse verum quodcunque Prius: id esse adulterum,
quodcunque posterius. This is (says Tertullian) the great Mawle of all
heresies, (and I will add, against all Corruptions) that whatsoever was first
is True, whatsoever was introduced afterward, is a Corruption.

But though perhaps, the Dissenters may possibly find out what is Better, yet
they will never Agree amongst themselves; which is an old Politic put-off for
Reformation: The Levity of which Objection is easily discovered for.

. 1. We are all Agreed, that the Scriptures are the only Rule of worship, and
they that are thus far Agreed are in a fair way toward perfect unity so far as
it is attainable in this state of Imperfection: for though they may miss in the
Application, through the weakness of their judgment; yet being secure that
their Rule is good, and sincerely endeavoring to come up to it, and reform by
it, they cannot be fatally wide, nor mortally differ: All that are Agreed in
their rule, have this singular Advantage, that they can debate their
differences amicably upon common principles, whereas they who differ in the
Rule must needs differ in all the Rest; they that divide in the Center, must
needs divide infinitely in their motions toward the Circumference, and they
that differ in the foundation, must necessarily disagree in the superstructures.

. 2. All that Agree in the Rule have prepared minds immediately to Cassier,
whatever they shall once discover to be repugnant to that Rule: and will easily
part with any mistake as it shall be made out to them; whereas they who set up
false Rules of worship, and yet suppose them to be true, are as tenacious of
whatever they find suitable to those erroneous Measures they have taken, as if
they were the most sacred Concerns of Religion.

. 3. They that own the same perfect, and infallible Rule, are thereby kept
within such bounds of sound judgment, warrantable obedience, and Christian
Moderation, that they can maintain Communion with each other, and both of them
with the same one God, one Lord, one Spirit, in the Ordinances of the Gospel,
though still differing in lesser matters: whereas they who set up new Rules of
worship; exclude all others from their Communion, but such as submit to their
Novel Canons, and Constitutions, imposed as the Terms of that Communion.

. 4. They who embrace the word of God for their Rule, do keep alive the fire of
Evangelical Love toward each other, notwithstanding the little diversities
that are found amongst them; when they who advance their own Pleasures for the
Rule. and Reason of obedience, are engaged in a Zealous persecution of all
those who comply not with their Concepts, as is Evident in the Church of Rome
at this day. It will be delightful no doubt to the Reader, to be Refresht with
the Enquirers Rhetoric, who has been tired with my duller discourse, and
therefore I shall gratify him with his Reasonings.

It Is Reasonable (says he) we should be able to Agree upon, and produce a
better Model, least in stead of having a New Church, we have (...) Church at
All: yes, highly reasonable it is; For -- (Let him that reads now endeavor to
understand the strength of his four Arguments.) 1. Such a Society as a Church
can never be conserved without some Rites or other. 2. Neither any Society can
continue, nor any public Worship be performed, if all Ceremonies, and
Circumstances, such as of time, place, persons, and the like, be left
indefinite, and undetermined. 3. If there must be some determination of
Circumstantials, it must be made either by God or man; 4. If there must be some
Determination of Circumstances, or no Society, and God has made no such
Determination, what remains but that Men must? And then who fitter then our
Governors? And what these four Learned arguments contribute to the proving his
assertion: That Dissenters will never be able to find or agree upon a better
Constitution, I hope the Learned do perceive, for my own part such is my
dullness. I cannot discern it: but let us Examine the Assertions as they lie in
order.

[1] It can never be thought by wise men, that such a Society as a Church can
be Cons^rved without some Rites, or other: [Rites, Ceremonies, Circumstances]
are the Terms under which all the collusion Lurks: when he would flatter us
into the humor to yield him a point, or two, then he speaks of nothing but
Circumstances: when he would Amuse us with an obscure Term, then we hear of
Nothing but Rites, and when he would kill us with a Mortal Conclusion, then out
comes Ceremonies; but I answer:

. 1. If a Church cannot be conserved without some Rites, then let the Imposed
Terms of Communion be only of such Rites, without which the Church cannot be
conserved, and we will contend no longer: If any Rite be so necessary to the
being of a Church, that its Constitution must moulder away into dust, without
it, we are content that Rule be made a Term of Communion:

. 2. From hence then it will evidently appear that mystical Ceremonies, such as
the cross in Baptism, the Surplice, ought not to be imposed as the Terms of
Communion, because that without such Rites of humane appointment, the Society
of the Church may be conserved: I would fain know how the Church was Conserved
in the Early, purer times of Christ, and his Apostles? They had not recourse to
the Ladies Closet opened, They understood nothing of the Modern curious Arts of
Conserving, candying, and preserving Religion in Ceremonious Syrrups; and yet
Religion kept sweet, and Good. They were some of his Holinesses Ladies of
Honor that first taught the World, out of a miraculous good will, and tender
pity to the Church, to conserve the two Sacraments of Christ's institution, in
five more of their own invention: because our Savior had not prescribed enough
to Conserve the Church from Dissolution.

. 3. This seems to be a little too high preferment for humane Ceremonies, to
make them Conserving Causes of the Church; At Rome they have proved Defiling
Causes; in other places Causes of Offense, scandal, and Division; they have
burdened some, and debauched others, and Raised persecution against the rest:
but they were never yet Conservators of the Churches purity, or peace; surely
the parts of a Church are very sorrily put together, that has no other Cement,
to unite them; and the frame and contexture there of exceeding brittle, that
must dissolve upon the Removeal of a Ceremony.

. 4. If by Rites, he understands nothing more then mere Natural Circumstances
we grant that no Church can be Conserved, no public worship Celebrated without
the Observation, and Determination of some such Rites, that is in plain English
no Church can worship God, except they agree to worship him somewhere, which is
a Discovery well worthy of all this Periphrasis, and tedious Circumlocution,
for who ever once thought in a Dream, that A Body, could exist, and yet possess
no place? or an Action be spun out by Men for an hour, or so, and yet not be
measured with time? It must be some strange vertigo therefore that whitles the
brains of these Non-conformists, that they will endure the utmost extremities,
rather then renounce, and abjure such Cross nonsense, That God must be
Worshiped, and yet may be worshiped no where: That a Sermon may be Extended to
an hours length, and yet preached in an Indivisible Instant: some or other must
needs be out (...) their wits.

God (says he) cannot be Worshiped by men without all Circumstance: By men? No
nor by Angels! They have their Ubi, and definitive place; nor can they traverse
the Poles in a moment; though they are so swift winged, as to dispatch it in
imperceptible Time: So that this Argument will enforce the Cherubims to Conform
to the Ceremonies, as well as the poor Dissenters, And well did he say, It can
never be thought by wise men, -- For he must be a Natural fool, or Idiot that
thinks otherwise; And to make sure work, he will confound us quite with two
most unmerciful Reasons, 1. Reason, F^rasmuch (says he) as no petty
Corporation, or Company can. Nay I will strengthen his Reason for once; Not
only no petty, but none of one great Trading Corporation, those Nurseries of
Schism, and nesis of Nonconformity can be conserved with u^ some Rites or
others: They have their pageants, (and goodly things they are, and Contribute
wonderfully to their Cons^rvation,) but yet to deal freely, and plainly with
our Enquirer; Though I allow his Conclusion, I cannot swallow his Medium.
Arguments taken from my Lord Majors show will never enforce Religious mystical
Ceremonies, Bodies politic may be beholden to some little Artifices to
conciliate admiration, if not Adoration from the thickskin'd rulgar, who see no
further then the scarlet, and furr; But Religion needs non^ of these tricks,
and devises of wit, to set her off. She is never more Glorious then when she
shines with her own Naked, and Native Luster: she Adornes her Attire, but
borrows no Ornament from her clothing. She is none of these Empty Quelque
chooses, who wanting intrinsic worth to recommend him to society, thinks to
strike the Spectators with Reverence to his Pantaleons, and waving Plume: such
was the answer of Luther to Vergerius: That it was the great fault, and folly
of Rome to establish the Church with aGovernment taken from Humane Reason, as
if it were some temporal state.

2 Reason: Because men have bodies, and are bound to glorify God with their
bodies as well as souls. I am sometimes ready to say in passion of an Age
cheated with such silly Arguments, Qui decipi vult, decipiatur: He that has a
mind to be gulled, much good may it do him! That we have bodies, will only
i^fer that all Natural Circumstances, which necessarily adhare to a body, must
be determined; but not at all, that we worship God by Mystical Ceremonies, for
that I may worship God acceptably without them, I can demonstrate. Because
Christ did so: but that we may worship him acceptably with, or by the
Ceremonies he has not yet offered us demonstration. I never yet understood that
the Dissenters did worship God in statu separato, which if they could 'twould
notably disappooint the Informers, who could never swear their presence at a
Conventicle, because they never saw the Complexions of their souls.

[(...)] It Is as plain (says he, that neither any society can Continue, nor any
public worship be performed, if all Ceremonies, and Circumstances, such as of
time, place, persons, and the like, be left indefinite, and undetermined. All
the style in this proposition lies in this, that he has wisely foisted in,
Ceremonies amongst Circumstances: And to prevent all fraud, and Legerdemain,
Let him use a little of that Candor, he borrowed of his Reader not long since;
and tell us uprightly, whether He takes Ceremonies and Circumstances for Terms
of the same impor? t And if so; then whether he will degrade the word Ceremony,
from its usual Repute, to signify no more then a Natural Circumstance: or
Advance the Term Circumstance to signify Mystical Ceremonies: for if by
Circumstance, he understands Ceremony, in the common, and received Acceptance
of the word, the Proposition is false: That no society can be Conserved without
some Circumstances; that no public worship can be performed without some
Circumstances; that is without unscriptural symbolical Ceremonies: And all this
discourse will not reach the hundredth part of a proof of it: for its the
easiest thing in the World to worship God without the sign of the Cross: or any
such like circumstances, and there are thousands that have made the experiment:
but if by Ceremonies he intend no more then bare natural Circumstances: The
whole proposition is granted him, but then the misery is, it will do him no
service, contribute nothing to his design.

The Reader may beat a loss perhaps as well as my self about the determinate
sense of his words, and it is convenient we should be so at present, matters are
not yet Ripe for discovery; I know his cause requires, his Conclusion needs
Ceremonies, but his premises are modest, his instances only pretend to
Circumstances, such (says he) as of Time, place, person, and the like: Which
must be a little Examined.

(1) Time. That Time is a natural Circumstance, inseparably adharing to, or if
you will, say accompanying, every Action sacred or civil, wants not the
Authority of the seven wise men of Greece to Confirm it: that is sometime in
General, yet time in special, that is Religious time, is no such Circumstance:
No Action can be done without time to do it in, yet Actions may be done without
such time, as shall render them either morally better, or worse: that is, such
as add any moral goodness, or evil to the actions: If then he take Time, in the
former sense, it is then very true, that no public worship can be performed
without the determination of time: It must be determined by some or other when
the public worship shall begin, as whether at eight, nine, or ten of the
clock, otherwise it cannot be attended on by the whole Church. But if Time be
taken in the latter sense, for such time as shall render the worship more
Asceptable to God, because performed in such time, there is no necessity man
should determine it, both because all the skill he has, can add no such Respect
to Time, and because God has already determined for so much of that time, as
his wisdom has judged necessary.

There are three Considerations of Time which may deserve our thoughts in this
Case.

1. The Quamdiu. Or the quota pars temporis: how long the Action shall continue.

2. The Quoties, how often the Action shall recurr, as whether in an Annual,
diurnal, horary, or septenary Revolution. (let that word please, or displease.)

3. The Quando, or Epoch, from what point of time the Action shall start, or
bear date. When therefore he says, (...) worship can be performed, unless this
Circumstance of time be defined, and determined: I would know to, which of
these considerations of Time, his Assertion does Relate? for it is Certain that
in every of these Respects, Time either is, or must be determined, by God or
man.

. 1. Then for the Quamdiu of Solemn time, we affirm that God has sanctified to
his service and commanded us to keep holy one day in seven: but how much of
this time shall be Allotted to private, and personal devotions, how much
bestowed upon domestic, and family duties, how much assigned to public
service, is not precisely determined by God; yet thus far he has determined by
the Light of Nature, and common Reason, that if A day must be Expended in, and
divided between these three kinds of Devotions, that each ought to have such a
proportion assigned to it, as the weight, and dignity of the work requires;
still apportioning the whole time amongst them, excepting so much as he has
reserved for the incident duties of necessity, and Charity, which Exception he
has put in to all affirmative precepts.

. 2. For the Quoties, how often this solemn sacred time shall return: we affirm
that God has sufficiently determined it, nor can we be affrighted out of our
senses, with the Empty clamours of Judaism, Sabbatarianism, or whatever other
noyses, irreligion, and profaneness can muster up: There is no necessity
therefore that Any Church should determine upon any other Revolution of sacred
time, and if she shall make the Adventure she will apparently sin, for she must
either make the Revolution narrower, and so sin against the Churches Liberty,
by prescribing too frequent a Return; or wider, and to sin against the Churches
Edification by too Seldom a Return of the public worship.

. 3. For the Quando: when this solemn, and sacred time shall comm^nce; He that
has determined, when the day of Labor has determined thereby, when the day of
Rest shall begin, As in the one he Commands us, to do All our work; so on the
other He commands us, to do All his; which is therefore the More ours: Because
it is wholly his: But for the Quando of the public worship, As God has not
determined it, so it is necessary, some or other must: But still what is all this
to Ceremonies?

Now the Great Question here will be, who ought to make this determination? And
in my weak judgment. They who are upon the place, who know best the particular
circumstances, out of which the Expediency of such Determination must A rise;
they who (...) ^e conveniences, and inconveniences of determining this way or
the other, are the most competent Judges in this Case: Suppose the Question
were, whether we ought to meet together for public worship at nine, or ten of
the clock? what could a convocation say to this? or what general Law could be
made for all the particular Churches in a thousand miles Circuit? If we look
upon the Country Villages, they have the ox, and ass to water, and feed,
their cattle to attend in the field, for whom God has made provision, that they
shall rest, and not serve upon his day: If you look on the petty, or greater
Corporations, they have no calves in the stall, no flocks in the field, their
shops are shut in, their affairs reduced to a Narrower Compass, and therefore
may commence sooner then the Country V^lages.

Suppose, nevertheless, that some will needs Determine this affair; That all
Churches under whatsoever Circumstances, expedient, or inexpedient, right, or
wrong, with all their particular members, shall upon pain of excommuniation
assemble for public worship, strictly at nine of the clock, upon pretense of
uniformity, and that all may unite and associate their devotions, as it were at
once beleaguering heaven, and wrestling for a blessing; I cannot but think what
distractions, confusions it would raise in men's hearts, and consciences; what
squabbles, what quarrels it would create in the viceinage; For my neighbors
Dyal, I observe, goes a full quarter of an hour before mine, and he sets his
clock by his own Dyal; and then rises in the Morning by his own clock: If for
no other Reason, yet because he can hear his clock strike, better then his
Dyal, so that here is an endless controversy like to arise between us, whether
his clock, or mine shall deserve Excommunication; Now to part or prevent this
fray, there is a certain infallible Officer erected, called a Sexton, or
Sacristan, one that will take his cath, his Clock goes true, whatever Sir, Sun
says to the contrary, and he shall decide this Brawle, when he chimes all-in;
so that in the upshot, this great Question, the Church troubles her self with,
must be resolved into this Momentous Canon. That all Churches shall begin their
public Worship, when my Goffe whatchicallum pleases. And thus much for the
Circumstance of Time.

(2) Place. This is indeed a Circumstance, and considered in general, an
inseparable Circumstance of a Body; so that it haunts us wherever we go like a
familiar, and pursues us more earnestly then our shodow; and therefore as to
public worship there must be some Determination of Common place, where a
Church shall assemble for the ordinary worship of God. But if place be
considered as Riligious, that is, as such a place, as renders the worship more
acceptable to God, we say, It Is not in the power of Man to Determine of any
such Religious, or holy place, because he can make none so.

And yet though he cannot determine the place as Religious, he may determine it
as convenient, and perhaps (...); And besides, since the Magistrate is
concerned to keep an eye upon all assemblies whatsoever, that the public peace
committed directly to his charge, may be preserved, and not violated by
seditious Meetings, he may therefore command all the Churches under his
jurisdiction to convene in such open places where his Officers may come, and
make inspection into their demeanours, and behaviors, and the Churches are
bound in order to this end, to submit to his determinations, in Conscience to
God: for if the Place (or time) be inconvenient, yet that is only some prejudice
to the worshippers, but no pollution of the worship it self; and the primitive
Christians no doubt would cheerfully, and thankfully have struggled with many
incommodities, provided the freedom of worship at any time or place might be
secured to them.

But if more open places will certainly expose them to ruin, they may Lawfully
keep their foot out of the snare; for as Master Hales says well. In times of
Manifest corruption, wherein Religious assembling is dangerous: Private
Meetings however besides public order, are not only Lawful, but of necessity
and duty, else how shall we excuse the Meetings of our selves in Q. Mary's days?

(3) For Persons: they also will fall under the same distinction. The
Circumstance of the Person in general, as whether his Name be N. or M. is of
little, or no consideration in the case; but for persons in special, as marked
out for public service, that is very material. And we affirm that Christ has
already determined upon that point; The Qualification, calling, setting apart
of such a one to his Office, with the Nature and end of his Office, together
with his whole emploiment, work and duty toward the Church, are all
determined, and none has power that I know of to dispense with those
determinations. The Materials out of which a Church is to be formed, the ends
of that embodying, by what bonds and ligaments they are united, the duty of
Pastors, Teachers, and all Church Governors prescribed, by what Laws they
shall govern, and how far the members are to give obedience, are all so far
limited, that the Church has nothing to do but to submit to the Commands of her
Lord, and if she be a true Spouse of Christ, she will submit exercising all
prudence in applying general Rules to particular persons, and emergent cases.

(4) But his last word [And the like] will do him more service, and us more
mischief then all the rest: for how to bring in the Cross, Surplice, and other
Mystical, Symbolical Ceremonies, under time, place, or person, was very
difficult; but this Et catera [And the like] will do the feat; and at this
back-dore thousands of Ceremonies, such as Holy Oil, Spittle, Cream, Salt,
Ephata's, and the like, may be introduced. But what now if these Ceremonies be
not The Like, but other-like? why, then is all this pompous discourse blown up!
A moral Circumstance is not the like with a Natural; That which adds neither
moral good, nor evil to the worship, is not the like, with one that does so:
That which is Commanded with the duty, is not the like with that which is not
so. That without which the Worship cannot be performed, is not the like, with
that which is not requisite to its performance. I conclude therefore, that And
the like conceals some mysterious point from us, which it is not as yet
convenient to discover to us; And keeping a wary Eye upon it, let us proceed to
his third assertion.

[3] If there must (says he) be some determination in Circumstantials, it must
be made either by God, or man: very true! If it must be done, it must be done,
there is no remedy. And for all Religious Circumstances such as may render the
Worship either more useful, and edifying to men, or more pleasing, and
acceptable to God, they are already determined by the Lord of worship; and
Kirk, or Keysar, have nothing to do herein, at least he has not proved that
they have: for those other Circumstances, which are necessary to reduce the
Ordinances of Christ into Act and Exercise, it is no very great matter who
determines them, if they have but power, and abuse not their power.

God has determined in general that we worship him, and has prescribed all the
ordinances by which we ought to worship him, and therefore we must come to a
determination when, and where we will worship him: He has determined more
specially that the Churches worship him solemnly upon his own day, and the
Churches must come to a fixed resolution, when they will begin that worship: he
has determined we shall Baptize with water, and therefore if we will execute
that Command, we must use some water or other: but he has not determined that
we shall make any Figure, either of Triangle, square, cross, or Circle, and
therefore none can determine in particular where God has not determined in the
general: He has determined that I must worship him decently, and therefore that
I worship him in some garments, for Nakedness is contrary to Natural Decency;
but he has not Commanded me in general, that I worship him in holy garments,
and therefore none can determine holy garments in worship. Again, he has
determined the Officers of the Church, and wherefore such and such persons,
duly qualified according to his rules, must be chosen to execute the Offices;
but he has not empowred the Church to Erect new Officers, and new Offices, and
therefore such an attempt is beyond the Churches commission.

But now (says he) God has made no such determination. Ay! but we say, and must
say it a hundred times over, if the contrary be a hundred times asserted
without proof, That God has already determined all Religious Circumstances,
which we call Ceremonies, all Ordinances of worship to exhibit, seal, convey
any Spiritual mercy, or supernatural grace: and for those natural Circumstances
which attend all Actions whether sacred or civil, they must be agreed on before
such actions can be performed in a Community; And if this be the game he flies
at, believe it he stoops to a very mean Quarrie.

The Reader is often vexed with an odd word, which frequently oceurs in The
Enquirer called Determination A Term both of a Mischievous, and a Lubricons
Nature, and it would be good service to the peace, to bind it to it is good
behavior. To Determine, signifyes to settle or fix to one side, that which has
hung in the aequipoise of Neutrality; when those things which have played in a
pendulous posture between good or evil, use or non-use, come to be settled one
way or other, they are Determined: Now the Question is, whether any have power
to Determine things in themselves indiffirent, that they shall be no longer
indifferent in their use; To which all that I shall need say as to the present
occasion, will be comprehended in these following particulars.

1. That where two Circumstances of the same kind offer themselves, if the one
or the other be necessary to the discharge of some necessary duty, there is a
power lodged somewhere, to determine whether of these two shall carry it;
otherwise a Necessary duty must be eternally suspended, it is ends ^ustrated,
and it self hang (...) Petentia, for ever, without ever being brought in to Act.

2. Where two, or more Circumstances offer themselves, none of which are
necessary to the discharge of the duty, there is no power lodged in any to
determine for any of them: for if one unnecessary Circumstance (which is every
way unnecessary) may be determined by power from God, ten thousand such may be
determined, and then our misery will be this, that though our burden be
intolerable, yet we can have no cause to complain, but with Issachar must
patiently ^ouch down under it:

3. If Circumstances besides their Natural Adhesion to an Act, have any
Morality ascribed to them, as if they rendered an act of Religion either better
or worse, none is vested with power to impose them, nor any with a Liberty to
use them. Because we ought not to make Gods Worship worse; and we are sure we
cannot make it better then he has made it.

4. In those cases where God has vested any with a power of determination, it
ought to be made clear that they who pretend to the power, have a commission to
show for it; because liberty is a thing so precious that none ought to be
deprived of it without good Reason: and this is the Task which our Enquirer
will in the last place undertake for us

[4] If Circumstantials (says he) must be determined or no Society; And God
has made no such determination, what remains but that man must? And then who
fitter then our Governors, who best understand the Civil Policy, and what will
suit therewith, and with the Customs, and inclinations of the people under
their Charge. In which notable Thesis two things call for examination, his
^ssertion, and the Reason of it.

. 1. His assertion: That none is fitter to Determine Circum^antials then our
Governors. Where. 1. We must suppose that he understands Civil Governors, or
else his Reason will bear no proportion to his assertion. 2. Let it be
observed, that it is no ^eat, or however no killing matter to the
Non-conformists, (...) their Cause, who it is that Determines mere
Circumstan^als, for they are things of a higher Nature then these, about which
the Controversy is, if some men's Interest would (...) them see it. 3. Seeing
that the Determination of such ^eer Circumstances, in some cases is matter of
mere trouble; in some cases impossible for the Civil Magistrate to determine
them, I am confident they will not be displeased, if Reason discharg^s them of
so useless a burden.

As time, in General, is a Circumstance concreated with every Humane Action, so
with every command, and obligation to duty, there is a Concreated Command, and
obligation to determine of some time, wherein to discharge that duty. And hence
it must unavoidably follow, That to whomsoever God has immediately and directly
given a Command to worship his Great and holy Name, to them he has immediately
and directly, at the same time, ipso facto, given a Concurrent Command, to
determine of all those circumstances which are necessary to the executing of
that Command. Thus if God has obliged every Individual person to Pray, he has
therewith commanded him to single cut, and set apart some time wherein to put
up his supplications to God. Thus also, If God has directly, and immediately
Commanded every particular Church to worship him jointly and publicly, he has
also by virtue of that Command enjoined them to agree upon a time to celebrate
and solemnize that worship; Now this Command is so straightly bound upon the
Consciences of all Churches, that though none should determine for them, nay
though all should Determine against them, yet are they under it is authority,
and must come to an issue about it, unless they will draw the guilt of the
neglect of worshipping God upon their souls, with that wrath which is due to so
great contempt of the Divine Law.

Now that every particular Church has a direct Command to worship God, and by
consequence to determine of those circumstances which are necessary to the
worship, is evident from this one Consideration, that they all did so in
obedience to the authority of Christ in his word, whilst all Civil Governors
were so far from Determining the Circumstances, that they determined against
the substance.

The Gracious God has now made some of the Kings of the earth Nursing-fathers
to his Churches, but yet we cannot believe, that the Churches power is less
under her Fathers; then it was o^der those Bloody Persecutors: And if this
power be lodged in the Civil Magistrate, and he have no rule to Direct him
about the when, and where, what a miserable case would the Churches be in, if
he should never determine these Circumstances, without which the Churches can
never worship God: For thus proceeds his Argument. No public worship can be
Performed without the Determination of some Circumstances (as time for one, and
place for another) But God has determined none of these Circumstances,
therefore unless some other Determination be made, besides what God has made,
no public worship can be performed: Again, If some other determination must be
made besides what God has made, then it must be made by man, but some other
determination must be made besides what God has made, therefore it must be
made by man: Again, If a determination of circumstantials must be made by Man,
then by the Civil Magistrate. But a determination must be made by man,
therefore by the Civil Magistrate, from whence it will be easy to Argue: That
if a Magistrate will not determine of those circumstances which are necessary
to the public Worship of God, there can be no public worship; but when the
Magistrate is an enemy to the Christian Religion, he will never determine of
those circumstances which are necessary to the public Worship of God,
Therefore when the Magistrate proves an enemy to the Christian Religion, there
can be no public Worship of God: Nay there ought to be none: And it will hold
against the Protestants worship where the Magistrate is a severe Romanist.

Now though it be true that the Command to Worship God publicly, be directly
and immediately given to the Church, yet seeing every Church is in the
Commonwealth as a part of it, and that every soul therein ought to be subject
to the higher powers, and because the peace of a Nation is not a little
concerned in the prudent or disorderly management of public assemblies, and
seeing that the chief Magistrate is the Vicegerent, and great Minister of God
to preserve the peace, that this lower world may not be too like a Hell,
therefore has he a very great concern herein. Ne quid Re^ublica detrimenti
capiat: And therefore if any Church shall choose such unseasonable times, or
places, as may give just occasion of jealousy that some mischief is hatching
against the Government, he may prohibit them that suspected place, time, or
other jealous Circumstance, and command them to elect some more convenient, and
in offensive ones. That so Religion may be cleared, the Magistrates heart
(...), the pe^ secured: only it seems reasonable to assert. 1. That the
Magistrates power herein is but Indirect and in order to peace, and that the
Christian Church had such power to determine all such circumstances before ever
Magistrates owned Christianity. 2. That the Magistrates power seems not to
extend to determine between Contradictories but disparates, that is, that he
has no power to determine whether the Church shall Worship, or not worship: but
that of two times, or places, or ^her Natural Circumstances, the one carrying
some appearance of suspicion, the other none, he has therein a just power, 3.
That where no private person might determine of such a Circumstance in his
personal devotions, nor a particular Church has any power to determine for
themselves in their public worship, there it seems the Magistrates power
reaches not, because he might then make that a persons, or a Churches duty by
his Authority, which without his Command had been their sin:

1 If then the Question be; who is fittest to determine those Circumstances
which are Necessarily to be determined? the Answer is ready; They are fittest
to determine to whom the Command is Directly given, and who must answer it to
God, if for want of such Determination the Worship of God be laid aside, and
neglected.

2, If the Question be put, who is fittest to determine of those Circumstances
in public assemblies, which relate to the public peace? The answer is clear:
He to whom the Conservation of the public peace is Committed, is accountable
to God, if through his default it be violated.

3. If the Question were once more moved: what if the Magistrate should forbid
a Church to Worship God at all? The answer is obvious, though the Duty be hard.
He that has made it a duty to suffer quietly and patiently, has promised
suffering grace, that they may suffer comfortably and courageously, taking up
the cross willingly, bearing it ^omely, and following their Master faithfully.

4. But if the Question were put (as it ought to be, if it answers the
Enquirers designs) who is fittest to determine of Ceremonies, which are not any
way necessary to the discharge of the duty, such new Ordinances whereof God has
not spoken one word, either in general, or particular? It will be hard to say
who is the fittest, because none is fit: That is though many may be meet to
determine of meet Natural Circumstances, and they the fittest to whom the
Command to perform the duty is directly given, yet none is empowred to make new
worship or new parts of worship, or to add any thing to the Commands of Christ.

. 2. The Reason of his assertion follows. They best understand the Civil
Policy, and what will s^t with it, and with the Customs, and inclinations of
the people.

This Divinity, that Religion is to be modelled according to Civil Policy, the
Costoms, and inclinati^ of the people, was certainly borrowed from Apollo's
Oracle: (...) (...) Idol was therein (...) to his own interest, who used this
one principle to root out (...) True Religion, wherever he bore sway,

Where Haman had learned it I know not, but I am sure he h^ it at his fingers
ends. 3. Esth. 8. And Haman said unto the King. There is a people dispersed and
scattered abroad among the people in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and
their Laws are Diverse from all peoples, neither keep they the Kings Laws:
Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them.

Thus Aristotle in his Adulatory discourse to Alexander the Great, tells him
that when Apollo was asked concerning the Worship of the Gods, he answered:
(...). That all the Oracles enjoined men to Sacrifice, according to the own
Country Customs. Thus Socrates in Xenophon: (...). You see that the Delphian
God, when any one asked him. How he might worship the Gods with Acceptance?
answered; According to the Law of the City, or Commonwealth. And Seneca
professes, that in matters of Religion he considered not: Qua diis Grata, sed
qua Legibus justa: Not so much what was acceptable to the Gods, as what was
warranted by the Laws of the Land. But I hardly forbear smiling, when I read
how the Delphic Devil was put to his Trumps, about this Question: Tully tells
us. Lib. 2. de Legibus. Cum Athenienses Apollinem Pythium Consulerent, quas
potissimum Religiones tenerent; oraculum editum est, ^as quae essent in More
Majorum. When the Athenians consulted Apollo, what forms of Religion chiefly
they should embrace: The Grave Oracle answers, Those which had the Authority of
their Ancestors Custom, and usage. But here the Ambassadors cross't him, and
told his worship; Morem Majorum saepe esse mutatum: The Custom of their
Ancestors had been often changed. Alas they had reformed, and reformed again,
and again, over and over, and could arrive at no settlement for want of a Rule,
and therefore they demand:, Quem morem potissimum sequerentur e variis? Which
of all those various Customs and Rites they should observe? The Devil, who is
never wholly at a loss for an Answer, gave them this: Optimum! pray pick out the
best you can find: though never a barrel had better herrings. But to his Reason
I say.

1. That he has now wholly given away the Churches Authority, which has made
such a Noise in these last Ages, and all her power in determining things
indifferent is surrendered upon discretion. It Is very suspicious that they have
no assurance of the Consistency of their Notions, when they know not where to
fix this power of instituting, and imposing Ceremonies: one Age talked of
nothing, but (...), but we hear no more of that but privately among friends:
Another time the Church was ^ght in to vouch for them, but it will not do
there; At (...) (...) Thomas Erastus taught us to throw them upon the Civil
Magistrate; Grotius has made use of the Notion, and for his sake we cry it up
at home, but Another Chapter will offer us further occasion to discourse that
matter.

2. That the Magistrate understands the Civil Policy best, is very true, but no
warrant for the imposing of Ceremonies: for what is the Civil Government
prejudiced, If I worship God according to his own Rules? or what propriety of
the subject destroyed; what prarogative of the Prince impaired; or what
privilege of Parliament invaded by a Ministers baptising according to Christ's
naked institution, without the Cross?

3. It Is one of the greatest disservices the Enquirer can do to Religion, to
make it truckle to the Humors, and customs of the people: p. 59. he tells us,
the vulgar are altogether for extremes; and blames Calvin for Complying with
the Humor of the vulgar. And yet now all oth' sudden the Magistrate must
determine, because he knows best what suits with the inclinations of the
people: though indeed one main end of the Christian Reli^ion was to oppose
those radicated Customs, and Idle Humors received by Tradition from their
Fathers.

I am now obliged to look a little backwards, and consider his attempts to
prove, that God has not Determined Circumstances: wherein if he had pleased to
have understood others, all this had been spared, unless perhaps he understood
not himself.

A long story he tells us of Temple and Synagogue worship. How punctual God was
in his directions about the former, how more laxe in those about the latter.
And his Reason is: Because there was nothing Symbolical, but Natural Religion,
which the Nations they had of God, and the Common sense of Mankind was
sufficient to guide them in. Which discourse of his well improved, would give a
notable shake to the groundwork of this whole Chapter: for all the Religion of
Christians is either instituted, or Natural, If it be instituted, it depends
wholly on the will of ^od, to make it known to us, and to make it our duty: and
therefore so much of it as is of this Nature, will plead the privilege of the
Temple, Man has nothing to do with it. If it be Natural, then the Notions we
have of God, and Common sense are sufficient to guide every particular Church
in it, nor shall they need any Dictatorship to supply the defects. As Christ
has cleared up to us the Moral Law; so he has prescribed us a Ceremonial Law:
And as it would be a bold affront to the Divine Majesty to pretend to add one
Commandment to the former, so is it no less an usurpation upon the Legislative
power of Christ to superadd one institution to the latter. He that may make
three or four Humane Sacraments, may with equal pretext make eleven or twelve
Humane Moral Commandments.

There is a Command. 12. Deuteronomy. 32. What thing soever* I command you, observe to
do it, thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. And under whatever
dispensation we are we areunder the restraint of this prohibition: This is
granted by all in the general, only the Question is what Constitution or
Institution will amount to an Addition to Gods Commandment? To which I answer.
1. Negatively: It can be no Addition to a Commandment, to determine of such
Natural Circumstances, which are necessary to the executing the particular
duties commanded either by a Ceremonial, or Moral precept, God has commanded me
to Relieve the widow, and the Fatherless, with part of that which his bounty
has graciously given me: he has not determined on what day, or what hour of the
day, or in what particular place, or to what persons by Name I shall extend my
charity, and therefore every person to whom the Command is given (and it is
given to every man to whom God has given ability) must determine these, and
other Circumstances, without which it is impossible that Law should enure, and
take effect. Thus has he commanded some to Baptize with water, but he has not
told us, whether that water shall be brought from a River or Spring; and
therefore he that is commanded to baptize, is thereby Commanded to determine,
and he is necessitated to it, if he will discharge his Duty: nor can such
determinations be Interpreted any Addition to the Law, because they are
included in the Law, unless we will suppose the Law-Nugatory, and to be vacated
by every forward Caviller. 2. Affirmatively: whoever shall inst^ute any
Ceremony, which is not necessarily required to the performance of any of Gods
Commands, such as is not comprehended in any general Law of Christ, must
necessarily be adjudged to have added another Law or institution to the
Institutions and Laws of Christ.

To illustrate this, I shall use a very familiar Instance; I will suppose a
standing General Law in a Nation, That no person (except the Legislatour) shall
add to the Laws of the Land. I will suppose also a particular Law promulgated
by the Legislatour: That every subject shall sweep his door once a week with a
Beesom: Now to sweep my door with a Beesom of Birch, or Broom, cannot possibly
be any Addition to that Law, because it is necessarily required to the putting
of the Law in practice, that I do it with the one, or the other, and therefore
they are both comprehended virtually in the Law by way of dis^unction, that is
either with this, or that, or some other. Again, to sweep my door on the third
day of the week, and at the ninth hour of the day, can (...) no Addition to the
Law, because I am commanded to do (...), upon some day in the week, and at some
hour of the day, and the Law not having defined the precise day and hour, (...)
it indifferent to the Lawgiver, which I choose, but one or other I must choose,
unless I will obstinately disobey the Law.

But now, If I will not only sweep my door, but over-Officiously will needs
make a Cross over it, this is an Addition to the Law, being neither Compehended
under the Command of sweeping, nor necessarily required to the reducing the Law
into Act.

Let us suppose yet further, that the Mayor of some of our Enquirers Petty
corporations, with the Advice of his Brethren, shall put forth an Order or
Edict, that Non-obstant the Law De non Addend^, every person within the limits
of that Borough shall be obliged to Cross, as well as sweep his door, and that
unless he will Cross it, he shall not sweep, and that every man shall subscribe
to this Order and Edict, and whosoever shall contravene the same, shall be
disfranchised; This must needs be interpreted an Addition to the Law with a
witness; A most express and daring violation of it.

But now to mend the matter, we will suppose the Mayor with his Brethren shall
solemnly declare, that though they do Command Crossing as well as sweeping, yet
they do not here by intend, in any wise to make any Addition to that or any
other Law; such an Explanatory declaration would be of little Credit among the
more Considerate sort of men, as being contrary to the fact.

But Mr. Mayor will plead, that though he has added something for the greater
solemnity, and decency of the Action, yet he pretends not to make a Law for the
Nation, his is only an order of the Court for his own corporation, and
therefore he ought not to be charged with Adding a Law, to the Systeme of the
Laws; But his worship is hugely out, for the General prohibition, cautioned him
not only against Adding a Law to the Law, but against Adding any thing to the
Law:

The Reader has often observed our Distinction of Natural and Moral
Circumstances. Now a Natural Circumstance is such a one, as arising out of, or
adhaering to a Natural Action, adds no Goodness nor Evil to the Action: but a
moral Circumstance is such, as always renders the Action either better, or
worse: Thus Baptism is neither better nor worse, more, nor less pleasing to
God, whether it be administered at ten a clock, or eleven; but every Symbolical
Ceremony must either render the Ordinance to which it is added or with, which
it is used, more or less acceptable. Thus the sign of the Cross instituted to
signify a persons dedication to the Lord Christ as his faithful Soldier, must
either add to, or detract from the Moral Goodness of that Institution to which
it is annex't, or with which it is used: for either it makes it better: As
doing the same thing with Baptism. viz. dedicating a person to the service of
Christ, seeing a double tie, or obligation to any duty seems stronger then a
single one, or else it will render it worse, because it does that supertuo^sly,
which Christ's own Ceremony had before done sufficiently; and endeavors to
perform that ineffectually, which the institution of Christ had already
effectually performed: And because it being a part of instituted worship, and
yet wanting divine Institution; nor having any track, or footstep in the light
of Nature, it seems to Overdo, what was once well done.

Now since it must either prejudice, or Meliorate the worship, it may be
convenient to enquire, whether it may have a propitious, and benign; or a
Malignant influence upon it? And Dissenters are inclined to think the latter:
All the goodness of Instituted worship depends merely upon the Authority of the
Legislatour, either as he has instituted it, or empowred others to institute
it, or promised to accept it from us, and bless it to us: Now (say these
Dissenters) Christ has neither instituted this Dedicating Symbol, nor empowred
others to institute it, nor promised to accept it at our hands, nor Entailed
any blessing upon it, and therefore it must needs render the Worship less good,
because itself, (as used) is evil: And whether Christ has instituted it, or
warranted others to do it, or annexed any such promise to it, they are willing
to join issue with any of their Brethren who will soberly manage the Debate.

Some of them I have heard thus Argue: All worship not-Commanded, is forbidden;

But these Ceremonies are worship not-Commanded; therefore they are forbidden.

. 1. The Major Proposition I thus prove, first from the Concession of the
Learned Dr. H. Hammond, a great and strenuous Patron of Ceremonies, who in his
Treatise of Superstition, and will worship against Master D. C. ^teely owns it.
That all uncommanded worship is forbidden. Secondly, I prove it by this Reason.
They who may institute New Worship, may destroy the old Worship. For Cujus est
instituere, ejus est destituere: the same Authority that can make a Law, can
Repeal a Law; But no man can destroy the old worship, therefore none can
institute new worship. Lastly, I prove it from the Authority of God, who
destroyed Nadab, and Abihu, 10. Lev. 1. and renders this Reason of it, because
they offered strange fire before the Lord, which he Commanded them not: I know
it is answered by Master Booker, and others, That the strange fire was not only
not-Commanded, but forbidden: To which I reply, suppose that to be true; yet
God only insists upon this that it was not-Commanded: It is pleaded further,
that God was strict, and punctual in his commands to the Jewish Church; but he
has indulged us a greater Latitude under the Gospel: But the reply is easy:
That our Liberty under the Gospel lies not in an exorbitant power to frame New
Ceremouies, or new worship, but in our discharge from the ser^itude of the old:
Not that we may Create more, but that he has loaded us with fewer particulars
of instituted worship: It Is then very evident: That all worship not-Commanded
is forbidden.

. 2. The Minor I thus prove: viz. That Symbolical Coremonies are worship
not-Commanded. That which is a part of worship, (...) worship, but the
Ceremonies are a part of worship and not Commanded, therefore they are worship
not-Commanded. (...) will seruple to grant the Major: The parts must needs
partake of the Nature of the whole: The M^r I thus evince, from the Enquirers
Concession in his Introduction: where he reckons it amongst the Glories of the
first times of Resormation, That the Liturgy, and public Prayers were counted
a principal part of Gods worship. That which is made a part, of a principal
part of Gods worship, and yet uncommanded, is a part of Worship not-Commanded,
but such are the Ceremonies, therefore they are a part of Worship
not-Commanded. The former proposition depends upon a known, and received
Maxim: Quod est pars partis est pars (...): the second proposition is our
Enquirers own assertion; The Liturgy is a principal part of worship, the
Ceremonies are a part of the Liturgy, therefore the Ceremonies are a part of a
principal part of Worship: And if the Enquirer stick at any thing here; I will
make him this fair offer, Let him undertake to prove the Ceremonies Commanded:
and I will undertake to prov^them Worship,

There are only some excellencies in this Chapter, which like the Sporades lie
dispersed up, and down his discourse, whose cohaerence not obliging them to any
fixed Residency, I shall for a conclusion, in this place consider them.

(1) His first great assertion is, p. 147. That Christ uever went about the
Composure of Laws, either of Civil, or Ecclesiastical Policy, We shall not need
to concern our selves about Christ's Civil Laws, seeing he professes his Kingdom
was not of this world. 'tWas not a Worldly Kingdom, administered according to
the Maxims of State, and Mysteris of Policy which had obtained here below;
That it should be Spiritual: The Laws and Constitutions, the Officers, and
Ministers thereof of Divine Original, managed for spiritual Ends, by spiritual
means; the Rewards spiritual and eternal, the punishments inflicted upon the
disobedient all spiritual, so the Apostle. 2. Cor. 10. 4. The Weapons of our
warsare are not Carnal, but mighty through God. v. 5. And having in readiness
to Revenge all disobedience: It Is true also, that when once we have tinctured
our brains with false Notions of Ecclesiastical Policy, whereof we find no
footsteps in Scripture, we shall be ready to affirm as much of those Laws which
he has prescribed concerning the Administration of his spiritual Kingdom: but
this we think clear. 1. That Christ has instituted as many Laws, as such a
Church as he established shall need, And perhaps he was not concerned to write
Decretals. Extravagants, Glosses, Canons, Bulls, to fit all the Governments
that the wit of man should afterward excogitate. 2. He has by Himself, and his
Apostles described all the Officers which he judged sufficient to conduct his
Disciples in ways of Holy obedience through the temptations of this world to
eternal life, 3. He has also instituted as man Ordinances and Sacraments as may
serve to guide and direct them as Christians, and let any one Name one that is
wanting to that end, if they be able. 4. From the Nature of those Officers
which he has appointed, the species, Nature, Kind, of his Ecclesiastical
Government is abundantly manifested. 5. He has given express charge that It be
not so with his Officers, as it is with the Kings of the Gentiles who exercise
Lordship over them, ^2. Luke 25. 6. Nor has he Commissioned any Governors to
make any Laws directly for his Church, as a Church, binding the Conscience of
his Disciples. 7. The Sacraments which he has ordained, the express Rules he
has given for Pastors or Bishops, with all other Officers, are evidence
sufficient that he has made some Laws of Ecclesiastical nature: and that he has
been defective therein, becomes not Christians to Assert.

(2) The Apostles (says he, ibid.) gave certain directions suited to the
Conditions of the times and places, and people respectively; but never composed
a standing Ritual for all aftertimes: Which will be put beyond all dispute by
this one Observation, That several things instituted by the Apostles in the
primitive Churches, and given in Command in their sacred writings were intended
to be obliging only so long as Circumstances should stand as then they did, and
no longer. Where we have two things that challenge Consideration.

1. His Doctrine. That the Apostles game Certain Directions suited to the
Conditions of the times, places, and persons respectively, but never composed a
standing Ritual: To which I say, 1. If by a standing Ritual he mean a Portuis,
a Liturgy, a Mass Book, a Ceremonious Rubric, The Rules of the Pie, or the
like, it is very true, and that which the Non-conformists do gladly accept the
Confession of: but if by a standing Ritual he understand fixed Laws, suited to
the Condition of the Church in all Ages, under all the various dispensations of
Gods providen^s, we deny it, and expect his proof,

. 2. His evidence is this. This (...) observation will put (...) beyond all
dispute. It Is a happy observation, and deserves a Hecatombe for its invention,
that will silence all dispute in this matter: but what is it? That several
things instituted by the Apostles in the primitive Churches, and given in
Command in their sacred writings, their Epistles were intended, and so
Construed only to be obliging so long as Circumstances should stand as they
did, and no longer. To which I answer. 1. That there were indeed some temporary
Ordinances, such as were to expire with the Reason and occasion of their
institution: but then there was also sufficient evidence that it was the will
of God that they should expire, and cease: such was that Command of Anointing
with Oil. 5. Jam. 14. which was sealed, and attested by an extraordinary
concurrence of Gods power; witnessed to by miraculous effects. But God having
now Broken that seal, withdrawn the concurrence of his power, we need no other
evidence that it was only proper for the first planting of Christianity and is
now long ago out of date. 2. His one observation comes infinitely short of
putting this question out of dispute with any wise man: for what if several
institutions were temporary, will it follow that none were perpetual? what if
some were suited only to those times, shall we thence conclude there were not
enough suited to all aftertimes? There were extraordinary Apostles, are there
therefore no ordinary Pastors and Teachers? Or must a Nation be at all this
vast charge to maintain Humane Creatures? what if some Rites were momentany?
Are there not Sacraments, in the right use where of Christ has promised to be
with his Ministers to the end of the world? such wherein we are to show forth
the Lords death till he come? It Is as easy to say all this of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, that they were calculated only for the Meridian of those days,
(and some are not ashamed to say it) as of any other order, or constitution of
Christ by his Apostles, whose temporary nature is not expressed, or evidently
employed in the temporary Reason, upon which it was built. 3. The Epistles of
the Apostle to the Corinthians as a Church, shows what ought to be the order
and Government of every Church: The occasion of writing those Epistles might
be, and was peculiar to them, and so was the occasion of writing all the rest,
but the Design is Common to All. Nor ought any one to dare to Distinguish
betwixt temporary, and perpetual institutions, where the Scripture has not
furnished us with sufficient ground for such Distinction.

4. As there never was a more pernicious and destructive design managed by the
Prince of darkness, then the Rejecting the Scriptures as the only Rule of
Faith, worship, and all Religious obedience, so the Mediums where by it is
carried on, is the very same with that of this Enquirer: There are an absurd
Generation amongst ^s in this Nation, to whom if you Quote the Apostles
Authority in his Epistle to the Corinthians. For the standing and perpetual use
of the Lords Supper, will give you just such another Answer. W^ do you think
(...) dwell (...) C^th? what is (...) E^le to the Corinthians to us? wh^ are
English men! and so it seems unconcerned.

Thus the Papists justify their half Communion: Serenus Cressy. Chap. 12. p.
137. in Answer to Dr. Pierce, his Primitive Rule of Reformation: we acknowledge
(says he) Our Savior instituted this mystery in both Kinds* That the Apostles
received it in both Kinds. That St. Paul sp^aks as well of Drinking, etc. But
the General Tradition of the Church, (at least from his Beginning) will not
permit us to yield, that the Receiving in Both Kinds was esteemed as necessary
to the essence of the Communion; or In^grity of the participation of Christ's
Body and Blood:

But let us see what service his select Instances will do him to prove his
Doctrine. Of this Nature (says the Enquirer) were the Feasts of Love, the Holy
Kiss, the order of Deaconesses. To which I return. 1. The Feasts of Love, and
the Holy Kiss were not as all Institutions of the Apostles. All that the
Apostle determined about them was, that supposing in their Civil Congresses,
and converses they salute each other, they should be sure to avoid all levity,
wantonness, all Appearance of evil, for Religion teaches us not only to worship
God, but to Regulate our Civil Actions in subordination to the great ends of
Holiness, the adorning of the Gospel, and thereby the glorifyin^ of our God,
and Savior, I say the same concerning the Feasts of Love. The Apostle made it
no Ordinance, either temporary, or perpetual, but finding that such a civil
Custom had obtained amongst them, introduced, we charitably believe, for the
maintaining of Amity amongst them, and seeing it sadly to degenerate amongst
the Corinthians, He cautions them against gluttony, drunkenness, all excess,
and riot, to which such Feasts, through the power of corruption in some, and
the Remainders of corruption in the best, were obnoxious: which is evident
from. 1 Cor. 11. 21. One is hungry, another is drunken. The Apostle Paul. 1 Timothy 2. 8. Commands that Men pray every where Lifting up Holy hands: Can any
rational Creature Imagine, that he has thereby made it a duty, as often as we
pray to elevate our hands? That was none of his design to that Age, or the
present: But under a Ceremonial phrase he wraps up an Evangelical duty. As if
he had said. Be sure you cleanse your hearts; And if you do lift up your hands,
let them be no umbrage for unholy souls.

2. Concerning Deaconesses, I can find no such Order, or Constitution of the
Apostles. It Is true they used in their Travels, and other occasions the
services, and assistances of Holy women, who cheerfully administered to their
Necessities, and are thence called (...), and said (...). But how childish is
it to conclude an order or Institution from so slippery a thing as an
Etymology? The Angels are called (...): ministering Spirits. 1. Heb. 14. ^ill
any from hence infer, that they read the Liturgy? Magistrates are (...) (...),
and (...), 13. R^m. 4. 6. And ^et it^ no part of their O^ t^ (...) (...) (...)
St. (...) was by some Ecclesiastical Writers, dignified with the Title of
(...). Whence some conclude he was a Liturgy-maker. And thus our willing
Enquirer, to serve a turn, must needs have those Good women that did (...), by
all means to have been ordained to the Office of She-Deacons.

These words (...), and (...), as Bellarmine notes, signify no more in their
general import, then Qu^libet public^ munere sungi: to perform any public
service for the Common benefit, whether sacred, or Civil: But when they are
applied to any Religious work or service, then by accident they have a sacred
signification ^tampt upon them: And therefore the same Cardinal from those
words 13. Act. 2. (...). As they ministered to the Lord: Has sound out a Mass,
completely rigged out for service: Others will discover from thence a Liturgy,
though the duller sort of people ean espy no more then the worship of God,
which may very well consist without either: 1. In a word: The Duty's of
saluting with an Holy Kiss: The ordering of all our (...), or Feasts of love to
Gods Glory; The ministering in our respective places to the necessities of the
Saints, are as much in force as ever, unless Holiness be grown out of fashion,
so that this one Observation will hardly put the Question beyond all Dispute:
let him try a second.

(3) If it be true, as he says, that the Christian Religion ^as to throw down
all Enclosures, to unite the world under one Head, and make of all Nations one
people, and therefore must be left with freedom as to Circumstantials: Then it
seems they design some depopulating enclosures, and to disunite the world
again, who set up such distinguishing Ceremonies, as divide those of the same
Nation, the same Religion, both at home and abroad.

(4) His confidence, that It is evident, that it is unreasonable to expect that
every Ceremony made use of by Christians should be found prescribed in the
Scripture or proved thence, does not at all move me; I am accustomed to
encounter feeble proofs, seconded with gigantick confidences: I think it is
reasonable that they who pretend to Imitate Christ, should follow his example
in this also. 5. John. 30. I can of my self do nothing, as I hear, I judge: And
that they who act under his Authority, should produce his Commission, or at
least not expect so ready a Compliance with those Ceremonies, which they
confess not to be proved from Scripture. In the mean time from Circumstances in
the promises, to Ceremonies in the conclusion; from some Circumstances to all,
from Natural to Moral, is a leap too great for any one to take that valued the
breaking of his Neck, more then the Breaking of his East.

His fine story of Pacuvi^s is lamentably impertinent, for the Question there
was, who should be the Senator: allowing the Senate: approving the Order, but
quarrelling the persons: but Dissenters greatest Dispute is about the Office,
whether jur^ (...) or no? They Question not whether Cross, or Cream suit best
with Baptism? but whether any such Ceremonies ought to be used with it, or
Added to it: They do not set op two or three new devices as Candidates for
preferment, but plead that all of that Kind be removed. And if all the scuffle
were which of them should be used, which repudiated, the Non-conformists would
not bet a penny on either of their Heads.

CHAP. V.
A thorough Examination of that Principle, whereon the Enquirer lays too great
stress: That God lays very little stress upon Circumstantials in Religion.

THe Historian observes of the Ligurians, a kind of Banditti, that skulk't
here, and there, and always played least in sight, that major erat aliquanto
labor, Invenire, quam vincere. They were an enemy harder to be found out, then
being once discovered, to be rowted: upon which account this Enquirer may pass
for an Antagonist more troublesome then formidable; and yet therefore
formidable, because troublesome.

He Professes himself as ready to lay down his life for the preservation of
unity, as in testimony against flat Idolatry: and next to, if not before them,
he seems willing to dye a thousand deaths, rather then ever state a Question.

God lays very little stress upon Circumstantials: That may be true! And God
lays very great stress upon Circumstantials; That may be as true also! But when
He lays very little, and when very great stress upon them, let others blow the
coal for him, he will save his breath for better purposes.

The Question would receive a very quick dispatch, if we his poor Plebeian
Readers were worthy to know what he intends by Circumstantials; but seeing we
are none of his great Cronies, and Confidents that may be admitted into his
Cabinet-Consels, we must be content with the Andabatarian Feneers, to Cuff it
out blindfolds.

If he were under any Obligation to use such Mediums, and Instances, as were
proportionable to his conclusion, we might conjecture that by Circumstantials
he means some Divine instiutions: But seeing he has imposed upon himself no
such severe discipline, I know none has that power over him, as to compel him
to their Laws of Discourse and Disputation.

God lays very little stress upon Circumstantials, undetermined by himself; but
there imposers lay the main stress; And God lays very great stress upon
Circumstantials by himself once determined, but there, (I thank you), our
Enquirer lays very little. And there is Reason enough, and to spare, why God
should lay great weight upon the smallest matters which he has commanded, but
not half enough why Men should lay such a stress upon their Pleasures, as to
venture the Churches Peace upon them, unless it could be made out, that they
had Authority from God to do it warrantably, an Infallible Spirit, to do it
exactly, and infinite Charity, to guide that Authority, without which, to
entrust any Creature with such a Power over Circumstantials, were but to put a
sword into it is hand, that would kill some, wound many, and at last Destroy
himself.

It is indeed a Noble Design which he pursues, viz. To Beget in Men better
Notions of God, and better Measures of Religion; for hitherto Men have sancied
God to be very rigid, and severe about small sins; but our Enquirer will ease
the minds of Men of their scrupulosities, and discharge conscience from any
Regard of the Authority of God in his positive Laws, and institutions. A work
infinitely grateful, and eternally obliging this profane, and Atheistical
Generation, who had rather keep ten of their own, then one of Gods Ceremonies.

And with such Sophistry did the Archenemy prevail upon the less wary Minds of
our first Parents. Ye shall not surely dye! The Command is merely Positive, no
eternal Reason of evil in the thing; And God Lays little, very little stress
upon Circumstantials, secure but the main, Let there be no Schism between you,
and never trouble your selves about these institutions which are but secunda
intentionis; And he is seconded notably by the Enquirer; p. 161. All Ceremonial
Appendages, (and such were the Trees of Life, and Knowledge, in Paradise:
Circumcision, and the Passover, under the Law; Baptism, and the Lords Supper,
under the Gospel) are perfectly subordinate, and ought to yield to the designs
of Peace, Charity, and edification. And yet these poor deluded ones found to
their cost, that He who represented God As a Captious Deity (as the Enquirer
with great seriousness words it) proved himself A Captious Devil, and that it
had been more their Intetest to have Credited Gods most severe threatenings,
then Satan's most sugared promisos.

But if it be true, That God lays so very little stress upon his own, we need
not Question but Men will lay at least as little upon their institutions; If
God be so indifferent, and remiss, we hope we shall not find them rigorous; for
seeing Magistrates are called Gods, such as hear some considerable part of his
Image, and borrow of his Authority, they will no doubt represent that God to
us, truly as he is, A God of Mercy, grace and pity; and not watch Advantages
against their Creatures; but so long as the Main of subjection is provided for,
and the substance of their Institutions observed, Alterations may be made in
lesser matters without their offense.

That the Servant is sometimes more severe then the Master, we are taught from
Gehazie's sin, and may we never learn it from his Leprosy. 2. Kin: 5. 20, My
Master has spared Naaman this Syrian, but as the Lord Lives I will run after
him, and take somewhat of him. And there was another Servant in the parable,
who laid a great stress upon a few Deniers, when his Lord laid less upon many
Talents; And would have plucked out his fellow servants throat for a sorry
Circumstance, when he had the face to beg Indulgence in the substance. And we
are sufficiently lesson'd that it is better to address the Lord himself, then
the Steward; ever since the Syrophenician met with such churlish treatment from
the Disciples, and so gracious a Reception from our B. Savior: such are some
of our Church men, who Lie baiting at and worrying of the Magistrate night and
day, to exact the rigor of Conformity and the penal Statutes, as if all
Religion were utterly lost, unless their Circumstantials were preserved, Sacred
and inviolable, whatever become of Gods Circumstantials.

The Title of this Chapter Modestly asserts only thus much, that God lays very
little stress upon Circumstantials: But the continued Tenor of his discourse
labors to make it out, that he lays very little upon some of his own precepts,
the True and clear stating therefore of Circumstantials in the Question, would
be above half way toward its Answer.

Under the Mosaical Law God commanded that they should offer to him the (...)
juge Sacrificium, or the Daily Burntoffering: and in this case the Color of
the Beast, (provided it was otherwise rightly qualified) was a mere
Circumstance. Such as God laid no stress upon, and that Man had proved himself
an Ardetious, superstitious Busy-body that should curiously adhaere to any one
Color: but for the Heighfer, whose ashes were to make the water of separation,
there the color was no Circumstance, but made by Gods Command a substantial
part of the service: To be Rod, was as much as to be a Heighfer; for when
circumstances have once passed the Royal Assent, and are stamped with a Divine
seal, they become substantials in instituted Worship.

The Question then ought to have been, whether God have any regard to his own
positive Laws; or whether he be so indifferent about his own institutions, that
he lays little stress upon our obedience to them? But this had been too broad
English, a little too uncivil for any that would carry fair correspondence with
the Scriptures: and therefore let it be mollified, and stand as it does:
Whether God lay very little stress upon Circumstantials in Religion?

In deciding this Question, he had done very ingenuously, and fairly to have
told us, from whence we are to take the measures of that stress, and weight,
which God lays upon these things; which because it was not for his Interest,
yet may be much for the Readers, I shall endeavor to clear up these two
things, first, from whence we ought not; and secondly, from whence we ought to
fetch these measures.

[1] From whence we ought not to take the measures of the stress which God lays
on them?

(1) Then we ought not to judge that God has little regard to any of his
Commands, because the Matter of them abstracted from his Authority, is little;
for we must not conceive that Christ sets little by Baptism, because the
Element is plain fair water; or little by that other Sacrament, because the
Materials thereof are common Bread, and Wine: nor to set them of, must we
varnish them with pompous Pageantry, as if any thing were necessary to Buoy up
their Repute, or beget an awful Reverence to his Institutions, besides his
Authority, For 1. Though the things in themselves be small, yet his Authority
is great. As God appears great in creating little things, his power conspicuous
in employing little instruments to Archieve great effects, so is his Authority
very glorious in enjoining small observances: 2. Though the Things be small,
yet God can bless them to great purposes. 2. King. 5. 11. Naaman was in a great
Huff, that the Prophet should prescribe so plain, and mean a way for his
Recovery: he expected some Majestic procedure in the Cure, that the Prophet
should come out, and stand, and call on the Name of the Lord, and strike his
hand over the place. This had been something like! but to send him away
ingloriously, with all that train, and bid him Go wash in Jordan seven times,
was not to be endured by a Person of his rank. and quality. Are not Abana, and
Pharpar, the Rivers of Damascus better then the waters of Israel? may I not
wash in them, and be clean? And he went away in a Rage! But we are to judge
that to be best, which best reaches the End; Healing Jordan, then ineffectual
Pharpar. 3. If the things be small, then the grace, and mercy conveyed by them,
may be had at cheaper rates; And shall it be objected to Gods Ordinances, as
their Reproach, which is their real Glory? Baptismal water may be had a
thousand times cheaper, then the Popes Holy water, shall that be it is crime,
when it is a thousand times more useful?

(2) Nor are we to judge that God lays little stress upon his institutes,
because he does not immediately avenge the contempt and neglect of them upon
the Violaters. And yet such is the unworthiness of Reprieved sinners, that they
have formed one of their strongest Arguments for the Continuance of Corruptions
in Gods worship, because he breaks not out upon them with present Destructions.
8. Eccles. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil:
whereas, 1. Such an Argument would equally conclude that God lays very little
stress upon Murder, Idolatry, Sacriledg, nay Schism itself. 2. God will find a
time soon enough to reckon with all those who bolster up themselves in these
presumptions, and take an unworthy occasion to be therefore Bad, because God is
so Good: All the threatenings that are upon Record, will certainly find out, and
lay hold on the Despisers of his sacred institutions; And who to Accommodate
their Doctrines to the Genius of the age, and humor the People with a Religion
agreeable to their Customs, must remember. 5. Math. 29. whosoever shall break
one of the least of Christ's Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called
lease in the Kingdom of Heaven. 3. God has not left himself without a witness
that he is a Jealous God, in the matters of instituted worship: for though
Nadad, and Abihu might plead that it was a small matter, a mere trifle what
fire they used, so long as they kept close to the substance of the Command; yet
God let them know, that he that offers strange fire to the Lord, may be
consumed with strange fire from the Lord: And under the state of the Gospel, he
has given such evidence of his displeasur^ herein, as may justly Alarm us out
of our security. 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many are weak, and sick among
you, and many sleep.

(3) We are not to conceive that God lays very little stress upon his
institutions, because we see a profane, and contemptuous generation of men lay
little weight on them, except it be a Load of Reproach, and contumely: for this
were to measure God by the world; as those profane wretches did. 50. Ps. 21.
These things have thou done, and I kept silence, and thou thoughtest, that I
was altogether such a one as thy self

As we must not think that God appretiates, whatever men set a high value upon;
so neither are we to judge that he disesteems any thing because it is grown out
of fashion, and thereby exposed to contempt by the Atheistical wits of
Mercenary writers. Our Savior has told us; 16. Luke. 15. That what is highly
esteemed amongst Men, is Abomination in the sight of God. And on the other
side, what is of high account in the sight of God, may be depretiated by men.

If any of Christ's institutions seem necessary to be broken; it will be first
necessary to decry them as poor, low, inconsiderable Circumstantials, and then
to fill the peoples heads with a Noice, and din^, That Christ lays little
stress on them, and in order hereto to call them the Circumstantials, the
Accidentals, the minutes, the Punctilio's, and if need be, the Petty-Johns of
Religion, that Conscience may not kick at the contemning of them.

(4) Nor may we conclude that God lays little stress on his positive Laws,
because he is ready upon unfeigned repentance to pardon the violation of them,
for thus we might conclude also, that he laid little stress upon Murder, and
Adultery, in that ^oon as David had said: I have sinned against the Lord: the
Prophet delivers him a sealed pardon, The Lord has also put away thy sin, then
shall not Dye. 2. Sam. 12. 13.

(5) Nor yet ought we to form such conclusions, that God lays little stress
upon his positive precepts, because he lays a greater stress upon moral
precepts in themselves. As it would be an injury to conclude that any Church
lays little weight upon the observation of the Lords day, because when one of
its own instituted festivals, is coincident with that Day, the ordinary service
thereof gives place to the proper service of that festival; when all that can
possibly by the wit of man be inferred thence is but this, that the Church may
have a Less respect for the one, then the other: so would it be injurious to
conclude, That God has very little respect to his own institutions, because he
may suspend their exercise pro hic, and nunc, rather then the duties imperated
by a Moral precept: Mint, Anise, and Cumine, are inconsiderable things,
compared with the weightier matters of the Law, judgment, Mercy and Faith, and
yet our Savior tells them, 23. Math. 23. These ought ye to have done, and not
to have left the other undone.

(6) As absurd would it be to conclude, that God lays little stress upon
positives, because he disrespe^s the performance of a duty in Hypocrisy, for at
this rate we may conclude that he lays little upon preaching his word. 50 Ps.
1^. What have thou to do to declare my statutes? or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth? seeing thou hate instruction? And the Consequence is
as Natural, that God Regards not prayer, because he hears not the petition of
him that regards Iniquity in his heart, 66. Ps. 18. And that the prayer of him
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, is an Abomination, 28. Prove. 9.

(7) Nor may we gather that God makes little account of a positive precept,
because he sometimes sees Reason to indulge the omission of its practice for a
season. What weight he laid upon Circumcision is well known, that he threatened
excision to the Malechild that was uncircumcised at eight days old: And yet for
forty years in the wilderness the Act of circumcising was suspended: for the
Acts of an Affirmative moral praecept may be forborne for some time by our own
prudence, and much more and longer by divine warrant, and yet the precept
itself all the while stand firm in Gods regard, and in full force, power,
strength and virtue to us.

(8) We are not to conclude that God lays little stress upon an Institution,
because he sometimes commands an Act, which were it not for that particular and
special Command, would by virtue of a General Command, be a most horrid
impiety. Thus God laid a great stress upon Killing, much greater upon a fathers
Killing a child; and yet greater upon offering Humane Blood in sacrifice: And
yet he commanded Abraham to sacrifice his only Son, and by his Command made
that most acceptable, and rewardable service, which otherwise had been most
abominable to the Divine Majesty.

To borrow, and not to pay again, is one of the Characters of a wicked person.
37. Ps. 21. And yet God by his special Command authorized the Israelites to
borrow of the Egyptians Jewels of silver, and jewels of Gold: with no intent I
am persuaded to repay them either use or principal.

God is the sovereign, and Absolute Legislatour, who may suspend, rescind,
alter his own Laws at pleasure, and yet he has said such a stress upon the
meanest of them that no Man may, nor any man, but the Man of sin, dares presume
to dispense with them, much less to dispense against them.

(9) Nor are we to think that God lays little stress upon a Commandment,
because he little regards those observances, which superstition, folly,
Tradition, Custom, have ascribed to it, which were never comprehended in it:
yet such is the process of our Enquirers Arguments: He instances in some
superstitious Additament to the Command, which God never required, and thence
concludes very learnedly that God lays very little stress upon the Command; let
him therefore have leave to infer; God laid little weight upon the observation
of the Sabbath day, because the supperstitious Jews were halter'd with an
erroneous opinion, that they were bound tamely to sit still, and offer their
Naked throats to their enemies Naked swords upon that day, which folly indeed
God little regarded.

[2] Whence then ought we to take the measures of that stress God lays upon his
institutions?

(1) The true measure of that respect which God has for a Commandment, is to be
taken by us, from the Authority of God: If the thing be small, yet we are to
regard his authority in it, for this God regards: And therefore he has backed
of old both the positive, and the Moral precepts with this; I am the Lord; and
the greatest Instances of his Royal Praerogative are given us in those
Mandates, which have only his soveranig pleasure to recommend them to our
observance.

(2) The measure of that regard God has to an institution, is to be taken from
the greatness of that glory which we give him in our obedience. The great trial
of our sincerity, and subjection to God lies in giving Deference to his will as
the Rule, and Reason of our obedience: and then do we recognize his Absolute
power to dispose of us when his will, whatever be the Reason of it, is the
Reason of our Compliance. Thus Abraham gave God the greatest testimony of
inward Honor, when he praepared himself to sacrifice his only Son, upon his
only Command.

(3) We may take the measure also of the weight of a Command from its designed
usefulness to his great ends: for seeing, the smallest, and seemingly weakest
of his injunctions are attended with his blessing upon the Holy, and due use
thereof, we are thence to instruct our selves in the weight and worth of it.

The Enquirer tells us from Maimonides, that there were some things in the
Jewish Law, that were primae intentionis, such as God required for themselves,
as being intrinsically good: others that were secundae intentionis, only
required for the sake of, and in order to the former: Now his own judgment
herein he acquaints us with, in these words. The first kind that were
essentially good, were absolutely necessary: and could never be otherwise, such
we call Moral duties: the latter kind were of so indifferent a Nature, as the
they might not only not have been commanded, but also insome cases having been
Commanded, they may not be a duty: but either he, or his Mr. Maimonides are
quite out. For. 1. The Acts of Affirmative moral praecepts may in some cases
become no duties, the Command it self abiding in it is full force; yet none will
say that God lays little stress upon the Acts of affirmative Moral precepts:
Thus the Acts of affirmative positive precepts may become no duty, yet none can
say, that God lays little stress upon the Acts of obedience to a positive
precept. 2. If this will prove that God lays little stress upon positives,
because they are required only for the sake of, and in order to the former:
Then it will evince that God lays little stress upon all the means which he has
appointed for his great ends: for the means, as they are, means are only
valuable for the sake of, and in order to the end.

(4) What stress God lays upon his positive precepts, we may judge from those
severitiis which God has threatened against, and sometimes executed upon the
Violaters of them. It was for the violation of a Ceremonial Law: the eating of
the Tree of knowledge of good, and evil, that God ejected Adam out of Paradise:
It was for the neglect of a Ceremonial affirmative Command that the Lord sought
to kill Moses 4. Ex. 24. And yet he had this to plead, that he was upon a
journey, and about Gods Errand. It was matter of mere institution, that was the
Israelites security against the Destroying Angel: 12, Exodus: viz. The sprinkling
the blood of the Paschal Lamb upon the lintle, and posts of the door: That many
do escape Gods vengeance at present, notwithstanding their not obeying what God
has instituted; and insti^uting what God has not commanded, will prove the
admirableness of Gods forbearance, toward them who turn this grace into
Lasciviousness, and embolden themselv's to sin from his patience, but not in
the least, that he lays little stress upon his own precepts, whereof he will
find a time to satisfy the Sons of men, from whence.

. 1. It follows, That he argues himself a pitiful Sophister who concludes the
least Command may be broken, because God turns not men to hell as often as it is
broken.

. 2. He proves himself a notorious Hyprocite, that from either Gods grace in
waiting or pardoning, shall encourage himself in sinning; And flatter his soul
that he may curse God and live, when the Devil was more modest to suggest:
curse God and dye.

. 3. Whosoever shall openly preach this Doctrine, that God lays little stress
upon the Circumstantials of Religion, has opened a floodgate to let in a Deluge
of profaneness upon the world: for seeing no Command of God is small, in respect
of the Authority of the Lawgiver, which is the formal Reason of our obedience
(...) that Law, so no Command of God will be Great, but that Command paramount,
de non-separand^; And then if every command that is less then another, may be
said to have little stress laid on it; seeing there is such a Gradation in the
weightiness, this is in order to that, and that for another; there will but
few, perhaps but one, of which it may not be said, God lays very little stress
on them.

. 4. Although the Acts of positive Commands may give place to the Acts of Moral
precepts, when both cannot consist, yet when ever we can possibly perform both,
we can omit neither without sin.

. 5 To forbear the practice of an affirmative precept, when Circumstances do
not conspire, is no violation of such a precept: Though no evil may at any time
be done, yet some good may at some time be forborne.

. 6. In all Laws of this sort there are several Casus reservati, cases kept in
Gods own hands, which cases when they are put, the Controvention of that
precept (...), is no violation of it (...): that is some things seem to
enterfeire with the Letter of the Law, which are allowed in the equitable
construction of it; Thus God Commanded the Jews to do no servile work on the
Sabbath, and yet in case of assaults from Enemies they migt Lawfully fight
without violation of the Law, (...) Profanation of the day.

From what has been said, the Reader may be furnished with an Answer to those
little attempts of the Enquirer, endeavoring to extort from us these two
things; first; that God laid very little stress upon Circumstantials in the Old
Testament. Secondly, That he lays less weight upon them under the New.

[1] That God laid very little stress upon Circumstantials under the O. T. he
proves.

. 1. By the instance of the Jews: Who have now generally received that Maxim,
Periculum vitae dissolvit Sabbatam, (though they were a great while before they
understood it and sondly smarted for their Ignorance.) To which I shall need to
say no more, then 1. This Instance was as ackwardly applied as can be imagined:
He would prove that things Commanded may become no duty: and he instances in
that which never was Commanded. He undertakes to prove that God lays very
little stress upon a positive Command, and he brings an instance, that God lays
very little stress upon their Superstitions. 2. I would seriously enquire of
this serious Enquirer, whether God did really allow them the liberty of self
preservation, and Defense upon that day? If he did; then it was their own
superstitions ignorance, and foolish fancy, that debarre'd them the use of
their liberty: If not; then whenever they defended themselv's they sinned; for
sin is the Transgression of a Law. And then let the Question be new Modelled:
whether God lay any stress upon sin? 3. If ever the Jews had such light into
that Maxim, as to Interpret it thus: The danger of life dissolves the Sabbath,
that is, disannuls the Command, their light was gross darkness: And they ran
from Superstition, to Profaneness; the common Reel of those who to avoid one
extreme, run into the opposite. The true intent of the Maxim being no more
then this: That self-defence on the Sabbath seemed to be a violation of the
Holy Rest of the day, but really was none: It being Casus reservatus, an
Exception, not from the Law, but in the Law; thus our Savior. 12. Math. 5.
Have you not read in the Law, that the Priests in the Temple profane the
Sabbath, and are Blameless? Now it cannot be, that a real profanation of Gods
Ordinance should be free from all Blame: but the meaning is, That the Priests
by virtue of their Office were obliged to do such Acts of bodily Labor on that
Day, which in their general Nature were servile works; And as they had an
appearance of profanation in them, so they had really been so, had not the
special Command, of sacrificing on that day, secured them from the contracting
of guilt by such bodily Labor: wherein there was no violation of any
obligation, but only Minor, and Debilior obligatio, cessit majori, and
fortiori: And for this he is laden down with Authorities in our Synops.
Critic. in Loc. Polluunt: non vere, sed improprie, and quo ad speciem so
Maldonate. Violasse Dicuntur, quia ea fecerint, quae nisi cultus Dei excusaret
facere non lieuisset, opera nempe genere suo servilia; cujusmodi sunt
sacrificia mactare: so Menochius: And Grotius fastens the Interpretation with
this Reason:,. Quia licet Polluant (...), contra legis tamen (...) nihil
admittunt.

. 2. But his fullest instance is out of Master Seldom: That in case of sickness
a Jew might not only eat such meats as were otherwise forbidden, but (say they)
for the Recovery of his Health, or avoydance of any great danger, he might
break any Prec^pt, save only those three great ones against Idolatry. Murder,
and Incest. The answer to which is very obvious. 1. For the eating of meats for
the recovery of health, which otherwise were forbidden. That word [otherwise]
supposes them Lawful in this case, though not in other cases.

And is it not a learned proof, that God lays little stress upon the violation
of a Law, because he lays little upon that which is none? An exception in the
Law implies no violation of the Law. 2. That they might break any other precept
after except one of those three great ones. Master Seldom says not only he
says, the Jews lay so: who were very favorable Casuists sometimes for their
own ease, and convenience: This was indeed a profane Gloss of the Looser
Rabbines, but no ways warranted by the Lawgiver: It seems they might swear
soundly, to recover their health, for that might open their pipes, if they were
Asthmatical: or Commit Adultery, ad purgandos Renes, as the Popish Gloss has
it: And I once heard a Catholic Doctor Advise his Patient in another case to
be Drunk once a Month, though for some it must be once a week, or 'twill not
do: or they might lie, or steal to procure a sovereign Remedy, for these are
none of the three great ones, either Idolatry, Murder, or Incest: And by this
Rule if Schism would any way have contributed to the Avoidance of any great
danger, they might have separated without sin.

But these Instances he confesses come not home to his purpose; which I agree
to, but withal tell him, they come as home, as any of the rest, which now we
must undergo the penance to hear.

. 1. His first instance that comes home to his purpose, is in the Passover And
the sum of his Reasonings from thence is thus much. This was a great
Sacrament instituted by God himself upon weighty Reasons. (perhaps to awe Men's
childish minds into a greater Reverence of the Deity) Made a statute for ever
throughout their generations, and the soul that observed it not was to be cut
of from among his people, 12. Exodus 11. And the most minute Circumstances are
defined, amongst other that they should eat it, with slaves in their hands,
shoes on their feet, and their loins girt. By which expression is plainly
intimated (and accordingly they understood and practiced) that they should eat
it, in the posture of standing; yet when they were come into the Land of
Canaan, they ate it sitting, (...) lying, according to the usual Custom of
feasting in those Countries. And this change continued till the times of our
Savior without any reproof from God; And our Savior himself conformes to them
herein, and in the same posture eats the Passover with his Disciples: I shall
only offer these few things in answer. 1. That there appears nothing in the
institution of acommand to eat the passover standing; that which carries the
greatest face of probability is, that God enjoined them to have their slaves in
their hands, and their shoes on their feet, that they might be ready for a
march, at Gods signal, and word of Command: which they might have, and yet sit
at the Passover, unless it be such an impossible thing to s^t with our shoes
on; or that they could not hold their staves in their hands, as well sitting,
as standing. 2. That the Jews understood, and practiced accordingly, is a
precarious, groundless, and self contradicting fiction: for what practice of
theirs could possibly evidence that they understood the words to enjoin
standing, when he confesses, that when they were come into the Land of Canaan,
they are it ^tting or lying? unless he dreams of some such practice in the
Wilderness, when there was no Passover. 3. Suppose a Command for standing; yet
it might be only pro hac vice; whilst that posture might be symbolical of their
hasty departure out of Egypt: and that sitting should ever after enure, when
providence should allot them more settled Habitations; A posture more
accommodated to express the fixed condition of the Church in the Promised Land.
4. If God commanded them to eat the Passover standing throughout their
generations, without any exception in the Canon of the institution, without any
dispensation from the Institutor himself, then they did most certainly
transgress, were guilty of sin; continued in, lived in, dyed in sin, through
all their generations, for sin is nothing else but a transgression of a Law;
and then our B. Savior himself had transgressed his Fathers Law which he came
to fulfill; And thus blasphemy must be added to folly, to make way for an
Argument that may secure the Imposition of Ceremonies. I shall therefore
conclude with more reason thus: Christ ate the Passover in a Table Gesture,
therefore God Allowed it, rather then thus, God forbad sitting, and yet Christ
sinned not, though he ate it sitting;

From hence I will thus Argue with our Enquirer: Either God commanded the Jews
to stand at the eating of the Passover in all ages, or not: If he did so
command them, no cunning will excuse them from sin, who ate it sitting: If he
did not so command; Then this instance comes home to his purpose, just as his
others did: for it can never prove, that God lays little stress upon Commanded
Circumstantials, because he laid so little upon uncommanded ones.

Positives may be altered, changed, or Abolished, by the Legislator, when, and
how far he pleases; but this will never prove that he lays little stress on
them whilst they are not changed, not Abolished: Nor will it prove that Man may
chop, and change, barter, and truck one of Gods least Circumstantials, because
the Lawgiver himself may do it: He that may alter one, may for ought I know,
alter them all, seeing they all bear the same Image, and Superscription of
Divine Authority; and he that has a commission to abolish one, I am confident
has as good a Commission to abolish all the rest, which none pretend to but the
Pope, George Fox, and this Enquirer.

. 2. His next instance which comes home to his purpose, is in David, who
distributed the Priests into Orders for the convenience of their ministration:
and besides that, he institututed Instrumental Music to be used in the worship
of God, without any Commission from God that Appears: But this instance is
further from home then any of the rest. For. 1. That one word of his [that
Appears] will destroy his whole Argument: For it was not simply necessary, that
it should Appear to us, at this distance of time, and under our present
dispensation, That every Prophet, or pious Reforming Prince, had a commission
in particular for every Alteration he then made in, or about Gods worship: for
seeing we know they had a standing Prohibition upon Record, not to Add to, or
take from Gods institutions: it is supposed that they were Armed with such a
Commission, and received particular instructions from the Divine will, though
the wisdom of God saw it not good to exemplify those Commissions, and
Instructions; It was enough that when God Authorized any such extraordinary
Commissioners to Regulate the concerns of his service, they produced their
sealed Letters Patents to that age, and people who were concerned to obey them,
2. David did not ordain Priests, and Levites, he created no new Order, or
Office, of his own head, and heart, all he did was this: seeing the whole
Number of the Priests must attend upon the Sacerdotal, as the whole Body of the
Levites upon the Levitical service, and yet all could not at once engage
therein without confusion and distraction, he casts them into regular Courses,
that in successive Revolutions they might all share in the work and duty, 3.
David was an Eminent Prophet, who received directions from God in affairs of
less moment, and as I cannot easily believe it, that God would call him to an
employment without sufficient advise how to manage it, so neither can I
conceive that so holy a Person would enterprise any thing of this Nature,
without such advise, when he might so easily have it from God: And that which
fully satisfies me herein, and may do as much for another, that is not highly
concerned to quarrel plain Scripture, is this. That when David had ordered the
Levites. 1. Chron. 23. 4. 5. 6. And the Priests. Chapter 24, And the Singers, Ch
25. And the Porters. Chapter 26, And the Captains and Prin^es of the Tribes, Chapter
27. And was come at last to give his Son Solomon particular directions about
the Temple. Chapter 28. the Scripture tells us. v. 12. 13. That David gave to
Solomon his Son, the Pattern of the Porch, and of the houses thereof, and the
Pattern of all that he had by the Spirit; Also for the Courses of the Priests,
and Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of the Lord: And
v. 19. All this (said David) the Lord made me understand in writing, by his
hand upon me, even all the works of this pattern.

And as David had special direction from the Lord thus to distribute the
Levites, Priests, Singers, Porters, for the Convenience of their ministration:
so was he to make particular Application to God, for the determination of the
most minute Circumstances: One would think that if there must be so many
Divisions of Priests, Levites, Porters, and Singers, it had been a most
inconfiderable Circumstance, which of these divisions should begin the Round,
or Circular combination, that they might winck, and choose; and yet David used
even in this punctilio a great, and solemn Ordinance of God, viz. The Lot,
wherein the Alseeing, and Alruling God Controuls the Contingency of the voluble
Creature, for when the Lot is cast into the Lap, the whole disposing thereof is
of the Lord. 16. Prove. 33. So that the very Porters, and Singers were chosen as
solemnly, and with respect to Gods determination, to the order of their
Courses, as Matthias was chosen to be an Apostle, and preferred to Barnabas by
the Decision of the true. 4. I will add, that it appears that this
Determination of David was not made Iure Regio. but Prophetico, and Divino.
Because when that Holy Prince Josiah set about Reformation, he Regulates the
Priests, and Levites according to the order of David. 2. Chron. 35. 2. He set
the Priests in their Charges -- v. 3. And he said unto the Levites, prepare
your selves by the houses of your Fathers after your Courses -- According to
the writing of David, King of Israel: Which was that writing, no doubt, which
he mentions 1. Chron. 28. 19. By which God made him understand all those
things: Now I would gladly learn what need this good, and pious Prince had to
have recourse to David's pattern, to David's writing, had he been acquainted with
our New Doctrine, that God lays very little stress upon Circumstantials in
Religion, and might have determined that small Matter Iure Regio:

And this is farther evident, in that Solomon, a Prince of great power, and
wisdom, yet was so punctual, and precise in this very thing, to order the
Courses of the Priests, and Levites, according to David's Rubric. 2. Chron. 8.
14. He appointed also according to the Order of David his Father, the Courses
of the Priests to their services: and the Levites to their Charges, to praise,
and Minister before the Lord, as the Duty of the Day required; for so had David
the Man of God commanded. Where we may observe first, that what David commanded
herein, was not as King, but as the Man of God, a Prophet, or one Commissioned
by God for that service: and secondly, that David could not bind his
Successors, by any Determination of his own, merely as a Prince, and therefore
their obligation to follow that pattern, did arise from the Authority of God.

5. Whereas our Enquirer has searched it seems, but can find no Commission for
instrumental Music. I have sued out a Melius Inquirendum, and he may read it
exemplified. 2. Chron. 29. 25. Hezekiah set the Levites in the house of the
Lord, with Cymbals, and Psalteries, and with Harpes, according to the
Commandment of David, and of God the Kings S^r, and Nathan the Prophet: for so
was the Commandment of the Lord by the Prophets: where we have a Commission
express. 1. From whom, The Lord: by whom, The Prophets: To whom, King David:
About what, Instrumental Music.

6. And lastly: supposing David had ordered all these particulars of his own
Head, yet will it not follow, that God lays little stress upon either the
omitting what he has commanded; or the Doing what he has prohibited; seeing he
supposes, that the things ordered, were neither Commanded nor prohibited: All
that with Modesty could be drawn from hence, would be no more then this little:
That a mere Circumstance undetermined by God, and yet necessary to be
Determined, to the executing what was determined, might be determined by a
Prophetical person: And even for this also He had an express, and punctual
warranty from the Lord.

. 3. A third instance is from Sacrifices: which (says he) though God had with
great solemnity instituted as the means of propitiating his Divine Majesty
toward sinful men, and had with great accuracy prescribed the Laws thereof,
yet he puts a great slight upon all of that Nature, as a thing he regarded not
in comparison of the substantial points of virtue, and obedience. We have hence
a great help to understand a little of our Authors mind, about those
Circumstantials in Religion, which he says God lays so little stress upon. And
Sacrifices, the means of propitiating the Divine Majesty toward sinful man,
are of that Number: And hence we may also satisfy our selves why Jesus Christ
has no more stress laid on him in some men's Divinity; for seeing He is the
Means of propitiating the Divine Majesty toward sinful Man, he may prove a
Circumstantial in Religion, and upon the Matter an insignificant, or at best
but a significant Ceremony. But for his Answer I shall say these things.

1. It is a falsehood very opprobrious to the great Lawgiver of the Church,
that he ever instituted, and yet slighted what he had instituted, whilst it
continued in for^e. It Is true indeed, God always slighted Hypocrites, who
offered those Sacrifices, and they became vain oblations, as to any benefit
they had from, or by them; but his own Ordinance he never slighted till Christ
the Grand Propitiation had answered all their ends, and pretensions.

2. God never slighted Sacrifices, in comparison of virtue and obedience, for
to offer Sacrifices aright, was virtue and obedience, but in opposition to
sincerity, to virtue, and obedience: just as he would have slighted the most
splendid outward Acts of virtue, and obedience without the Heart, which is the
life, and soul of all. To give Alms, to pray were, and are duties of moral
virtue, and obedience, and yet when the Pharisees performed both to be seen of
men, to hunt for popular applause. God not only slights, but abominates them;
not the Acts themselves, but the persons that performed them; not what they
performed, the outward work, but that they kept back the Heart: or if the
things yet not as commanded in specie: but as sinfully done in individu^. Thus
he that commanded All men to kiss the Son, slighted, and abhorred Judas his
Kiss, when made a cloak to hide his traitorous design to deliver up his Lord
and Master.

Sacrifices had a threefold use, 1. A typical use, as leading to Christ, and in
this respect God was so far from slighting them, that he laid the greatest
stress imaginable on them; 2. A Political use, to set the Transgressor of the
Law right in the Court of Justice, and to satisfy for the temporal punishment.
3. A moral use might be accidentally made of them too, they served well to
represent some moral virtue, or duty. And I will not deny that God might slight
this symbolical use of them, 1. Because that use had no institution, and we
never find that God had any esteem of Symbols that were not of his own
appointment, 2. Because no Ceremony, or Symbol, could represent the Moral duty,
or virtue to that advantage, which the precept it self, with those
encouragements and rewards propounded by God himself, were able to do.

Yet he will prove from Scripture that God slighted Sacrifices. 50. Ps. 8. I
will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices; v. 14. Offer to God the Sacrifice of
righteousness, as if he had said, let me have the latter, and I shall not much
complain for defect of the former. This is his gloss, this his proof; wherein I
only blame two things.

(1) The falsehood of it: The words may be interpreted as spoken either by way
of concession, or commination. 1. By way of concession. I will not reprove thee
for thy Sacrifices. q. d. Quantum ad externa Sacrificia satis estis occupati:
says a learned Person. I have no cause to rebuke you on that account, for you
do your duty, you are very deligent in them: God slights not Sacrifice, but he
requires a better Sacrifice, that of righteousness: 2. By way of Commination.
And there is no greater argument of Gods Displeasure then when he threatens to
leave a people without reproof for their Neglect of duty: Thus. 4. Hos. 17.
Ephraim is joined to Idols let him alone. God's not reproving for omission of a
duty, or commission of a sin, is a sorry Reason that God lays little stress
either upon the duty, or the sin: Thus again. 14. Acts. 16. God is said to have
suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways. Gods keeping silence at, and
non-reproof of sin, when once it shall be interpreted an indulgence of sin, his
future rebuke in Thunder, and Lightning shall convince mistaken Sinners of the
folly of their comment upon the Text of Gods forbearance. And this seems the
true sense of the place we are upon. For, v. 21. God uses parrallel language;
These things have thou done, and I kept silence, but I will reproove thee.

(2) I blame his gloss of blasphemy: He puts words in to Gods mouth which are
the abhorrence of his soul. Let me have these latter, and I shall not much
complain for defect of the former. Strange Doctrine this! What? God not
Complain for want of obedience to his Commands? He told us in the beginning,
that God was not a Captions Deity: And now he would prove him one: He tells us
that God Instituted Sacrifices with great solemnity, as the means of
propitiating his Divine Majesty: and now he introduces God of another mind: let
them use the means, or not for averting his displeasure, God will not much
complain:

. 4. Another Instance is that mentioned. Math. 12. Whereupon the occasion of
the Disciples rubbing the ears of cor^ on the Sabbath day: and Christ's
justifying their fact from the example of David, who ate the shewbread, in a
case of extremity. Christ tells the superstitious Pharisees, I will have mercy,
and not Sacrifice: But this will not do his work: For. 1. The plucking of the
ears of corn, in a case of extremity, was not forbidden by the Law; so Grotius:
Neque negat Christus, opus esse famulam, sed ex circumstantiis ostendit, factum
hoc Discipulorum, Legis sententia non comprehendi; est ergo Question, (...),
status scripti, and voluntatis: Christ denies not that it was a servile work,
but from the due Consideration of circumstances he proves, that this fact of
his Disciples was not included in the meaning of the Law: So that the Question
is between the Letter, and the Equitable construction of the Law: 2. The same
Answer to the other instance of David's eating the shewbread? A nnon Legistis?
si legistis, hoc licitum esse didicissetis: si non legistis; pudent vos
ignaviae vestra. Have you not read? (says Christ) If you have read it, you must
needs have learned that this fact is Lawful: If you have not read it: you may
be ashamed of sloathfulness, David ejusque Comites pars necessitate pressi,
qua^ nunc premuntur Discipuli mei, secerunt contra (...), Legis De Panibus:
neque tamen secisse censentur contra (...). Sequitur ergo nec Discipulos meos
quicquam hoc facto adversus legis sententiam committere. i. e. David and his
Companions, being urged with the same Exigence wherewith my Disciples are now
urged, Acted against the Letter of the Law concerning the shewbread; yet are
they not to be thought to have transgressed the true intent, and meaning
thereof; It follows therefore that my Disciples by their fact have not violated
the intendment of the Law. 3. That our Savior tells them he will have mercy,
and not Sacrifice, has no difficulty in it, because. 1. Negatives are often put
for Comparatives: I will have mercy, and not Sacrifice, is no more then I will
have mercy rather then Sacrifice, when I cannot have them both. There Is no
Question but if an Act of Mercy, and an Act of instituted worship. should stand
in Competition, all Circumstances concurring: the Act of instituted Worship
ought to give place; we will suppose a Congregation assembled for the public
Worship of God, and at the same time a fire breaks out, the Church is not only
Allowed, but obliged to omit the public worship at present, and to employ
their endeavors toward the quenching of the fire: And he will render himself
somewhat more then rediculous that would infer from hence, that God lays little
stress upon public Worship: or that God lays less stress upon the Churches
Worshipping him in public, then upon the preserving of a House: but only that
the work of mercy must be now performed, or the season is lost for ever:
whereas the Worship of God may be reassumed. So that all the business is, That
a circumstance of undetermined time is of less weight in Gods Account, then an
Act of Mercy, or Charity. 1. Cor. 1. The Apostle tells them: That Christ sent
him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: that is not so much to baptize,
as to preach: which yet will never enforce, that Christ lays little stress upon
the Ordinance of Baptism: our B. Savior. 4. Luke. 26. acquaints his Disciples.
That he that Hates not Father, and Mother, cannot be his Disciple And yet it is
true too, that he that Hates his Father or Mother cannot be his Disciple: But
by hating* is meant only less loving; He that loves not Father and Mother less
then me cannot be my Disciple: Now let the Reader judge, how absurd it would
sound in his ears, to hear such Doctrine: That God lays very little stress upon
our filial affection, and duty to Parents; A Doctrine worth it is weight in gold
to such a Jew, that would plead Carban against Commandment, and evacuate the
precept of God, by his own Traditions.

And sometimes that duty which God lays the greater stress upon, may give place
pro hie, and nunc, to that which he lays less weight upon: a Father commands
his Son to discharge such a service, as he is addressing himself to his duty he
finds his enemies Ox, or Ass ready to perish; in this case I conceive the Son
ought to suspend the execution of his Fathers command to save the life of a
beast: And yet the Debt of Justice which I owe my Father is greater then the
Debe of Charity which I owe an Enemy: And thus much of his Old Testament
instances.

[2] He proceeds now to those in the New, which must prove that God lays little
stress upon Circumstantials under the Gospel: which he will first prove by this
Argument.

If this (says he) was the case, and condition of things under the old
Testament, where God seemed so punctual in his prescriptions. so rigorous in
his Animadversions, and where: he danger of ^rring Capitally from the design of
those institutions, by the least Deviation from the line of Divine Revelations
was so great; then certainly in the New Testament where the Divine wisdom has
expressed far less concern for such little points, may the minds of men be
secure from such superstitions fears wherein we must fairly examine. 1. the
Antecedent, 2. the Consequence, 3. the Reason of the Consequence.

(1) The Antecedent, that God laid little stress upon Circumstantials, that is
(as his instances bear witness) had little regard for his positive praecepts
under the Old Testament: Now how false this is, in any sense, which being true
would subserve his main design, I think is pretty well cleared by this time;
but the Enquirer like a good natured Man, searing his Answerer should be so
silly as not discover his weakness, has our of a prudent forecast refuted all
his own Instances. For he tells us. 1. That God seemed to be punctual in his
prescriptions; 2. rigorous in his Animadversions. 3. That the danger of ^rring
capitally was great. 4. Implies that the least deviation from the line of
Revelation, was an error: Now if all this be to lay a little stress upon them,
I despair of ever knowing what it is to lay a great: when Clergymen are punctual
in their praescriptions, telling us when we must how, and when stand, when
kneel, and when sit, when look this way, when another, when speak, when hold
our tongue; when they are so rigorous in their Animadversions, that to slip, or
trip, to stumble, or grumble at compliance, shall be an Admonition thrice with
a breath, and a dreadful excommunication at the end of all, when it shall be
criminal if not capital to deviate from the line of Humane Determination,
Dissenters are humbly bold to call this a laying very great stress upon
Ceremonies.

(2) His consequence is, then certainly in the N. T. the minds of men may be
secure from superstitious fears. Oh without peradventure! To see how strangely
we have been out all this while! I thought verily the Question had been,
whether God lays little stress upon Circumstantials under the Old Testament,
and the New, and we are now flamed off with this conclusion, that we may be
secure from superstitious fears: which is very true, whether Christ had
instituted many Ceremonies or few; whether he had laid great, or little stress
upon them; but all the Policy of this lies in a crafty insinuation, which it is
to be hoped the perfunctory Reader will swallow down, That all fears about
displeasing Christ in the Matter of instituted worship, are but superstitions
fears.

(3) The Reason of his consequence follows: Because (forsooth) in the N. T. the
(...) wisdom has expressed far less concern for such little points. But I
expected to be informed where Christ has expressed for less (...) for the^
points: I do not know how it is possible to express far less co^rn, then a very
little: But he that put words into the Fathers mouth so lately, may make the
Son also speak what he pleases, and both of them to bear false witness against
themselves.

But whereas his Argument proceeds thus: If God laid so little under the O. T.
upon positives, how much less under the New: I should invert his Argument, If
God was so rigorous in his animadversions, so punctual in his prescriptions,
when his institutions were so Numerous, his praescriptions so multiforme, what
will he be when he has prescribed us so few, and those so easy, and useful to
the Observer? If we cannot be punctual in the observation of a very few
positives of so plain signification, how should we have repined had we been
charged with a Numerous Retinue of Types, and Carnal Rudiments? If Christ's yoke
be accounted Heavy, how should we have sunck under the Mosaical Paedagogy? The
servants of Naaman thus humbly expostulated with their Lord. 2. Kin. 5. 13. My
Father if the Prophet had Commanded thee some great thing, would thou not
have done it? how much rather then when he says to thee; wash and be clean?
Suppose Christ had exacted of us what Barchocheba exacted of his Disciples,
that every one in token of absolute subjection should cut of his little finger;
had it not been better to enter into Life maimed, then having all our joints to
be cast into hell for our disobedience; how much more then, when he has
enjoined us only these few, which are our singular privilege, as well as our
unquestionable Duty? our Benefit, not our Burden; and our helps, and not our
hindrances in the way to everlasting felicity: The fewer are his institutes,
the more punctual will he be in exacting Conformity to them; And therefore as
the last thing Christ instituted before his death was the Ordinance of the
Supper, so the last command he gave before his Ascension, was that of Baptizing
all Nations, charging them to observe whatsoever he had commanded them.

If a tender, and loving Husband at the point of death should recount to his
beloved Spouse, all the former evidences of endearing affections, and withal
tell her that he expected nothing in lieu of so great love, but that he might
live in her memory, when he is dead and gone, by one only observation; surely
the words of a dying friend would live in the living friend, and if there had
been ever any true conjugal affection, it would operate strongly to be punctual
in that single observance: our B. Savior when he was just ready to give
himself a price of Redemption for Many, institutes his last Supper, with the
greatest punctualness Imaginable; and being ready to Dye, Commands all his
faithful Followers -- Do this in Remembrance of me. And is it not a hard case
if his Church cannot afford to be tied up precisely in this one thing? We read.
22. Luke 14. That Jesus sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him, and v. 19.
he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it to them, saying
(...), Do this in Remembrance of me! Now it is a great Question made by some,
what should be the Antecedent, to this Relative [(...)] and the Reverend, B.
Morton a great Patron of Ceremonies in his Treatise of the Sacrament, cites
some Josuites thus: [Hoc facite:] ad omnes praecedaneas Christi actiones
refertur. And as Chemnitius upon 5. John. 28. (...): Recte (inquit ille) (...),
ad Totum Complexum eorum, qua hactenus dicta sunt refertur: so say I; this
Relative [(...)] in the institution of that Sacrament, ad totum Complexum eorum
quae hactenus dicta, and facta sunt refertur. Do this* relates to the whole
complex of all those things which Christ had done before. And if so, then it
includes sitting down: Or the Application of our selves to the Table in a
posture suited to a Feast; which agrees best with the celebrated Rule of
decency, seeing there is no Nation under heaven shall kneel at their meals; yes
(says that Learned Bishop) but I will except Time, and the posture of sitting;
and excepting these two Circumstantials, (...), is referred to all the rest:
But then I would reply. 1. That there was no necessity to except Time; Because
it neither was, nor possibly could be included in the Command, Do this: for all
men that have any Ambition to speak congruously agree it to be nonsense, to
say: that Time can be done. It must be some action here to which this (...)
must relate. 2. If he will needs except the Action of sitting down, I ask Quo
warrant^? why should one Ante^dent Action be excepted more then all the rest?
And if one, why are not all the rest foreprized? The Papists have excepted the
whole Cup from the Laity; the Reverend Bishops have excepted sitting; and then
why may not a third except breaking* a fourth. Blessing? and then come the
Quakers, and the Learned Grotius with a Non semper communicandum per symbola;
and shut out the whole institution: I confess I never liked these exclusions,
ever since I saw first one parcel, and then another excluded, till at last
there was a clean House: And thus by our Enquirers Maxim we have made a fine
Sacrament of it, under pretense that Christ lays little sires^ upon
circumstantials under the New Testament: Little stress did I say? Nay None at
all; For if God laid very little stress upon them under the Old Testament, and
the Divine wisdom has expressed far less concern for them under the New; I
cannot guess, what that something should be, that is far less then a very
little, but a mere Nothing;

We should now examine his instances under the New Testament; but plenty has
made him so poor, that he will give us but one; But one indeed; but that one is
a great one, and may stand for Many: When (says he) the Apostle Paul had
vehemently declaimed against the Necessity of Circumcision, and proclaimed the
danger of it, as is obvious to any one that reads his Epistles, yet the same
Paul Circumcises Timothy, to the intent that thereby he might render himself,
and his ministry more acceptable to the Jews. This is his one, his only, great
Instance out of the New Testament.

And it was but Reasonable that a person so polite, and terse in his style,
should employ all the flowers of Elegancy to embellish it, and therefore for
it is greater ornament, he will now use a Figure, which some by a hard Name call
(...).

It has been hitherto taken for granted by all that I have met with, that the
Apostle Circumcised Timothy some good while before he wrote any one of his
Epistles, and somewhat longer before he wrote those wherein he proclaims the
danger of Circumcision. The first Epistle that he wrote was that first to the
Thessalonians: And (not long after) the second to the same Church: The
postscripts to both which, Date them from Athens, where we find him Acts. 17:
But the learned Dr. Lightfoot judges, and I think upon clear grounds, that they
were penned a year after, and written from Corinth. But whether from Athens, or
Corinth, both must needs be written after the Circumcision of Timothy, which we
find Acts. 16. 1. In his journey to Lystra and Derbe: And the Learned Estius is
of the same judgment with our own Learned Doctor: The Learned Whitaker also
concurrs thus far with them. Qu. 6. contra Humanas Tradit: p. 415. Novi
Testamenti Canonem non fuisse tum editum cum Paulus hanc Epistolam ad
Thessalonicenses scriberet (he speaks of the second Epistle written the same
year with the former) imo ne ullos quidem N. T. libros tum fuisse scriptos
affirmo, excepto solo Matthaei Evangelio, and (si irenaeo credimus) etiam
Matthaei Evangelio Antiquiores fu^re hae duae. If then these two Epistles were
the first he wrote; and they written from Athens, according to their
postscripts, or from Corinth, as indeed they were; It Is certain that they, and
therefore all the rest, must be written some time after the Circumcision of
Timothy;

Here is then a most desperate stumble somewhere or other; unless he can prove,
(and what can he not prove) that St. Paul's journey to Lystra, and Derbe was
after his journey to Athens, and Corinth, which unless he shows himself a
scorn to the Reader he will not attempt.

The instance being so impertinent, we need not much be concerned about the
winding up of his conclusion: yet because some may have a mind to be pleasant,
let us have it.

In which carriage of his he has beyond all exception demonstrated to us, that
all Ceremonial Appendages are perfectly s^bordinate, and ought to yield to the
designs of peace, charity, and edification, as the greater good: yes this is
Demonstration: infallible Demonstration! Demonstration which puts the
Controversy beyond all exception, and the poor Non-conformists are siderated
with the violence of it. And yet to speak plain English, here is nothing but
pitiful trifling: For. 1. This Irrefragable Demonstration is reared upon a
rotten foundation; that Paul wrote his Epistles first, wherein he declaims
against Circumcision, and then afterward Circumcises Timothy. 2. All that he
has built upon that foundation is as rotten. That all Ceremonial Appendages are
perfectly subordinate, and ought to yield to peace, charity, and edification:
let me observe.. 1. If these Ceremonious Appendages b^ so perfectly subordinate
to those great ends; then how will it prove that God lays very little stress on
them? Just as if some superacute Philosopher should undertake to prove, that
because eating and sleeping are perfectly subordinate to Health, and life,
therefore we ought to lay very little stress on them.

. 2. If those institutions of the Gospel which he calls Ceremonious Appendages,
should at any time cross the great ends of peace, charity, and edification,
there is no doubt but that they ought to strike fail, but he cannot prove that
the meanest of Christ's institutions are opposite at any time, to a just peace,
that they weaken Christian charity, or hinder edification: Nor can we suppose
without the highest derogation to the Divine wisdom. That any of Christ's means
for edification should ever overthrow their designed ends. Their subordination
to the end shows their inseriority to the end; but since Christ has allotted
them their place, let no man dare to disturb their station.

. 3. If Divine Ceremonial Appendages ought to give place and yield to peace,
charity, and edification; then we may presume without presumption, that Humane
Ceremonial Appendages shall be compelled to submit, and conform themselves to
those great ends, and that none shall ever lay such a stress upon these as may
endanger, much less destroy those glorious intendments. But here we are
disappointed! God must lay little stress upon his, but they will lay incredible
weight upon theirs. And as one said (...): let heaven, and earth be blended and
jumbled together in an eternal (...), It Is a principle to be maintained to the
Death, that no Ceremony oughtto yield to the recovery of Peace, the reviving of
frozen charity, and promoving edification.

And now to shut up all, and himself, and whole discourse out of doors, he
Recommends to us 14. Romans 17. The Kingdom of God (that is, the Gospel) is not
meat, and drink, that is, consists not or lays little stress upon those nice
and perplexing matters, but in righteousness, peace and joy: whence some would
be ready enough to infer that that Church which lays very great stress upon
these nice and perplexing matters, is none of the Kingdom of God: And I shall
only desire him to add for a close that Apostolical Golden Canon, v. 20. For
meat destroy not the work of God: do not by unseasonable using, much less by
rigorous Imposing things Indifferent much less things doubtful, and least of
all things sinful in their use, destroy souls created of God, Redeemed by
Christ, and capable of eternal Happiness; where God has Commanded, let him be
obeyed, not disputed, not cavilled out of his right, and where God has laid
little weight, let none make their little fingers an insupportable burden.

CHAP. VI.
Whether the Magistrate has Authority to determine such Externals of Religion
as are the Matters of our Dispute?

FAbulam Auditor lege, Lector audi! when the Eagle, persocuted by the Beetle,
could find no place of safe Retreat, she prudently deposites her Eggs in
Jupiters Royal Lap, but he rather then endure the perpetual vexation about a
Birds nest, shakes them out of his Robe, and at once dashed all the Hopes of an
Aerie of Eagles: Our Ceremonies have sometimes sheltered themselves under the
pretense of Decency, and yet under that specious covert could not be secure;
thence they fled for Refuge into the Abstruse Receptacles of venerable
Antiquity, and Longaeve custom. Yet from those Buroughs have they been hunted.
The Churches Authority to judge of the Lawfulness, and to impose what she so
adjudged Lawful amongst the numerous Tribe of indifferencies was nextly
pleaded, but upon more severe Researches into the Records, no such commission
can be found, At last therefore they have taken sanctuary under Constantins
Purple, and when Princes shall be weary of protecting them against the pursuit
of Scripture, they will fairly shake them thence also, and leave them to shift
for themselves.

That the Persons, and Authority of Magistrates are most sacred, the one, not
to be touched with common, and unclean hands; the other, not to be profaned with
Irreligious Breath, all Protestants must acknowledge: of which deep things,
whilst we discourse it, will be seasonable to caution our selves from the Royal
Prophet, Ps. 131. Not to exercise our selves in great matters, or in things too
high for us. Where though the Humble Lamb may safely wade, the Castle-bearing
Elephant must be forced to swim.

I look upon the extent of the Princes power to be as far beyond my Reach as
the Primum mobile; which though I can neither touch, nor measure, yet may say,
there is a Being beyond it: thus though it were unpardonable boldness to
Determine its bounds, or say Thus far shall it go, and no farther, yet a truly
Loyal heart may conceive, and a modest tongue express, There is a God above it.

That the Magistrate is Custos utriusque Tabulae. The great Fiduciary of Gods
Law; is not so much a Confession extorted from us, by Rack of Scripture, as our
Triumph that he is so^ Rejoicing in (...) th^kfulness to the ^lmighty, who has
made him a Nur^ng ^ather to his (...),

To preserve the worship of God in purity, and his worshippers in Peace, is a
Flower of the Crown Imperial, which Adornes the Royal Diadem far more then all
it is own Diamonds, and Rubies; and gives him a more Orient Luster, that he
serves the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, then if he had grasped the
universal Monarchy, and brought mankind to adore his footstool.

As no foreign power can justly pretend to intermeddle with his Government at
home, so no person of whatever Character at home, ought to own a dependence
upon any foreign Potentate Abroad. Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers: upon which words Holy Bernard thus: si omnis anima; ergo and vestra:
Quis vos excepit ab universalitate? Qui tentat excipere, tentat decipere. If
every soul: Then yours also (ye Ecclesiastics!) for who made you an exception
from the General Rule? the Pope that would exempt you from your Sovereigns
Jurisdiction, does but expose you to the Indignation of God.

What is the ne plus ultra, the utmost extent of this Power in Civil, and
Religious concerns, for such pittisul creatures as we are to determine, were at
once to discover our folly, and betray our pride: And yet we may say without
offense, though Princes are called Gods; They shine with borrowed Beams, from
the Divine Majesty, the fullness of whose power is Incommunicable: And Propriety
with Law in the former case, and God with Conscience in the latter, will go as
near to be the shoars, that shall terminate this Ocean, as any two things that
shall measure with them for exactness.

There are two sorts of Persons that fancy they have laid an eternal obligation
upon Princes, beyond all possibility of requital: The first are they who would
entitle them to an absolute Right to, and Dominion over the possessions of
their subjects: The second, they would make them sovereign Lords of Conscience:
Thus the great Hooker, Eccles. Polity. p. 26. In litigious and contraverted
Causes, when they come by Authority, to be Determined, It is the will of God,
that we should do accordingly, though it seems (yea perhaps truly seems) in our
private judgment, or opinion, it is utterly disallowed by the Law of God. And
yet these Men are truer friends to their own Interest, then the Princes in this
Matter; for whilst they de^k his Achievements, with Titulado's, impracticable,
useless and cumbersome Regalities, they are sure to make provision for
themselves, and wisely lick their own fingers: for thus it has ever been the
cheap way of Churchmen to sell shadows for substances; as his Holiness sells
the shred of a Lambskin to an Archbishop for a thousand pounds sterling, and a
Consecrated Rose for more then his whole Belvedere is worth.

When the Enquirer then is so Zealous to become the Princes Champion in
Spirituals, I hope he understands, on which side his Bread is buttered, and
will speak two good words for himself, whilst he speaks one for the Magistrate;
And when he has a little Reproacht others, and magnified his own sincerity in
this undertaking, he wipes his mouth decently, strokes his Beard gravely, and
Reasons most profoundly upon these two Heads.

[1] That the Magistrate exceeds not his Commission when he enterposes for the
Determination of the Circumstantials of Religion.

This Proposition thus loosely hung, may be owned or disowned according to
every man's humor; Dissenters may subscribe it, whithout the least prejudice to
their cause, or Reflection upon their practice; and they may deny it too, when
they have done, whithout fear of self-contradiction, or danger of entrenching
upon the Magistrates Authority. For. 1. What must we understand by
[interposing] If I might freely deliver my own private opinion; It Is lawful,
nay expedient, nay necessary, that he interpose, or else I am afraid his poor
dissenting subjects will be worried to death: But they who plead so Zealously
for his Interposing, when that interposition is not tempered to their good
liking, make the vault of Heaven echo again with their clamours that the
Distressed Church is quite undone. In a word: if Churchmen will be Determining
one thing after another, that we can see no end; New subscriptions, New oaths,
new jests, New Ceremonies, superconformity to the Canon, above Law; and
practice above Canon; what will become of the simplehearted Laics, if a
vigilant and prudent Prince do not interpose, and timously determine upon their
Determinations. 2. I now utterly despair of understanding his Meaning of
Circumstantials: A word that has run through as many shapes as are in all
Ovid's Metamorphosis; And amongst all the pleasant stories in that ingenious
Romance, I remember one that the Reader will not condemn for impertinent.

There was one Ezisichthon, whose (...), and extreme voracious stomach had no
other supply at last, but from one Daughter: now this Madamolselle (you must
know) had a singular faculty to transform her self into any shape she pleased:
once he sold her for a round sum, and she came trotting, or ambling home
again (for she had all her paces) in the shape of a bonny filly: Another time
he sold her, and received his money honestly for her, and she came home in the
shape of a Milckcowe. Such another ambiguous, versatile Creature is this
Circumstantial] If we should say, the Magistrate has no power to Determine
Circumstantials, presently he is oth' top oth' House: what an obstinate
generation are those Fanatics! What will you not allow your Prince to appoint
where you shall assemble for your public worship of God? must he have no
concern in time, and place, in order to the securing of the Peace? yes! yes
Sir! withal our hearts, and we shall be heartily glad on it, humbly thankful for
it, and honestly proud on it too, and I would ^e could preavail with our
Enquirer to be our Sollicitour to procure us a Determination of those
Circumstantials: well then (says he) you agree the Magistrate may Determine
Circumstantials, but such are the Ceremonies, and now you are in a cloos, get
out again how you can.

3. Therefore he should have resolved plainly whether the Magistrates
Commission extends to the Determination of all, or only some certain
Circumstances; and my Reasons are these. 1. If he have not a Commission to
Determine All, then the question will Recurr, whether it reaches those under
Debate? for thus he Argues. Circumstantials may be Determined by the
Magistrate: But Ceremonies are Circumstantials. Therefore Ceremonies may be
Determined by the Magis^rate: Now if the Major in this Syllogism be not
universal, the Syllogism is peccant in form; If it be: then deprecating the
Displeasure of those whom we truly Honor in the Lord, and for the Lord we
humbly deny it. All Circumstantials may not be Determined by the Magistrate,
for. 2. Christ has already Determined of some Circumstantials, and whoever
makes it one, it is no Question with me, that no power on earth can undetermine,
or otherwise determine, what God has already fore determined 3. There are some
Circumstantials which cannot profitably, and therefore not Lawfully receive an
universal, and uniform Determination. 4. Because if all undetermined
Circumstances may be Determined in their use, the life of Man may be made the
most wretched miserable and undesirable thing in the world; and he had as goo^
preach that other more eligible, and more edifying Doctrine, Ita, and de te
literam longam facito! for where should the most ca^telous foot tread besides a
snare? and such is the Condition of superstitious Papists, whose consciences
are perpetually perplexed with endless scrupulosities about those minutes which
the Church has made sin, which else had been as Innocent in offensive things as
a piece of powdered Beef, and Turnips.

Now for the proof of this Doctrine, he tells us: It has been (...) fully, and
substantially done by the incomparable Hugo Grotius, and by a late eminent
Divine of this Church, that it is enough to referr the Reader to them. Indeed he
must be an incomparable Person that can write Substantialy, about
Circumstantials, but I confess I do not build much either upon the Authority or
Reasonings of the otherwise incomparable Hugo, ever since I read his dangerous
discourse, Lib. 1. cap. 4.. 13. de jure B. and P. Si rex habeat partem Imperii,
partem alteram Populus, (...) Senatus; Regi in partem non-suam in volanti, vis
justa oppon poterit; quia eatenus Imperium non habet; Quod, locun habere
sentio, etiamsi dictum sit, Belli potestatem penes Regemfore: id enim de Bello
exter^o intelligendum est; cun alioqui quisquis partem summi Imperii habeat,
non possit nor jus habere eam partem tuendi, quod ubi fit, potest etiam Rex
suam Imperii partem, Belli Jure, Amittere,that is: If King has one part of the
sovereign Power, and the People, or Sen^ the other part; If the King shall
invade that part which is none of h^ own, just resistance may be made against
him, because so far (...) has no Auth^rity at all: which I judge to hold
true, although it (...) said. That the power of making war is in the King; for
that must be understood of a foreign war; whenas otherwise, whoever has a
share in the sovereignty, cannot but have also Authority to Defend that share;
which when it so falls out, the King may lose by the right of war his own
share of the sovereignty Here is dangerous Doctrine enough to Cure me of my
Ambition of ever being a Hugono^.

As for that late eminent Divine of this Church, who has so convincingly
asserted this power, I cannot divine who it should be, unless perhaps that
Longwinded Author, with whose eluoubrations some are resolved to vex the
Fanatics though they never read him themselves. And therefore leving these
voluminous Authors to scold it out with their own Mouths, let us attend to the
enquirers more concise Reasonings.

(1) It Is certain (says he) that Magistrates had once such a power in the
Circumstantials of Religion, and that in the old Testament. It is certain
indeed that they had a power not only in the Circumstantials, but the
substantials of Religion, all the Question is, whether they had such a power as
he pleads for. And if they had it, then whether they had it, jure Regio, or
Prophetico? whether in their own Right as Kings, or by Delegation in some
extraordinary case from God?

. 1. The Prince might have, nay he had a power to spur up, and quicken the lazy
Priests, and Levites to their duty, and yet no power to create them a duty: He
had power to punish Churchmen, to restrain the exorbitances of the Clergy, and
for Maleadministration to cashiere them, nay to order the High Priest himself,
if he proved factious, seditious, or Rebellious, and endeavored any Alteration
of the Theocracy either in Church or State, but he had no power to make New
administrations; He had a power to restore the corrupted worship to it is
primitive integrity, but he had no power to institute Worship; and therefore
it is more then Ridiculous to Argue from a Power, to such a power.

. 2. He pretended to prove, That the Magistrate in Determining these
circumstantials, did not exceed his Commission: and his medium is from the
Jewish Magistrate. Now his proper, di^, and easy way to have evinced that the
Jewish Magistrate had this power, had been to have exemplifyed the Commission
it self, and not stand trifling with Matter of fact, to prove Matter of right,
especially seeing that the Commission is upon Record; and many doubts in Law
will arise from the fact, as whether what was done was done jure? and if jure;
then Quo jure? Now for the Commission from him by whom Kings reign, it was
ready drawn of old only a blanck left to insert the Name of that particular
Person, whom God immediately or by ^cession should choose. 17. Deuteronomy. 18. 19. 20.
It shall be when he (...) upon the Throne of the Kingdom, that he shall write
him a Copy of this Law in a book out of that which is before the Priests, and
Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of
his life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God to keep all the words of
this Law, and those statutes to do them; that his heart be not lifted up above
his Brethren, that he turn not aside from the Commandment, to the right hand,
or to the left: to the end he may prolong his days in the Kingdom, he and his
children in the midst of Israel: from whence it is evident, that though the
Israelites were for some time in their minority governed by Judges, yet when
their Nation should grow up to it is greatest perfection, God would then bestow
upon them ^he most perfect form of Government, viz. Monarchy, and in the most
perfect manner continue it, viz. by succession, not impeaching his own
prerogative to alter either the form or the time, but with a Negative upon any,
or all the people, so is it as plain that God fyes up his Prince to Govern by
the (...): the Deuteronomy, a Copy of the Laws and statutes Morel and positive,
without turning to the right hand or the left, in excess, or defect, mangling,
or mending Gods Laws. Allowing to himself still a power to vary, but not to
them save by his Direction.

. 3. This great proof for the Magistrates power over the Circumstantials of
Religion, is fetched from the Magistrates power i^ the Jewish Commonwealth; He
that is so severe upon the Nonconformists, that they are Iudaizers if they
argue but a fortiori from Moses to Christ, now takes his greatest proof from
David to the Christian King, and though it be scandalous for them to Reason
from that Topic in Doctrinals, yet is safe and honorable for himself to
Reason thence in Politicals, and Ceremonials, his instances come now to be
considered.

. 1. David (as I showed before) altered somethings and instituted others in the
Temple worship. That Is his instance: And David (as I proved before) altered
nothing, instituted nothing, without special Direction from God, that is my
answer: which special warrant when it shall be produced for any Alterations of,
or Additions to Christ's institutions under the Gospel, they shall by me be most
Cordially embraced.

. 2. Hezekiah (says he) without a Scripture for it, broke the Braze^ Serpent to
pieces, though it was a Symbolical Ceremony of Gods own Iustitution. Oh but if
Hezekiah had set up one braz^ Serpent as a Symbolical Ceremony, without Gods
institution, it had been more to his purpose, then if he had broken a hundred.
Let him take these few things along with him, and then make the best he can of
his instance: 1. If Hezekiah needed no Scripture warrant to destroy an old
Antiquated Institution of God, because it had been, and still was abused to
Idolatry, much more may a Christian Prince without further Scripture warrant
abolish such Symbolical Ceremonies, as being originally the mere inventions of
men, have been, and still are abused to the most foul Idolatry, and grossest
superstition that ever was in the world. 2. Let the Enquirer recollect himself
a little. He undertook to prove that Princes have power to set up Ceremonies,
and his instance proves only thus much, that they have power to pluck them
down. 3. Hezekiah needed no Scripture to empower him to destroy the brazen
Serpent, because it was then no institution of God: It had been once indeed a
temporary appointment of God, but the ceasing of the End was the Determination
of the use; when it is sacred Relation ceased, it was of no more value in Gods
account when Hezekiah broke it, then so much Brass. It Is not true therefore
that Hezekiah broke in pieces the brazen Serpent, though it was, but though it
had been for^rly an institution of God He did not make it, but declare it, to
be Nchushtan, an old Relic, made a New Idol, and now served, as it deserved.
4. I do not understand that the brazen Serpent was a Symbolical Ceremony, what
grace, what duty did it signify? A type it was, to direct their faith to Christ
fot that time, to expect the healing of their souls from him, but the visible
service was only to heal their bodies stung with the fiery Serpents. 3. John.
14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of
Man be lifted up? 5. Hezekiah had Scriptures more then one, not only to enable,
but Command him to do it. He needed no new Authority, but new wisdom to Apply
al^s old general Command to a particular case. If the Enquirer could but show
as much Scriputre warrant for the setting up one Ceremony, as Hezekiah had for
destroying a thousand Idols, he would think himself a jolly fellow. I might
urge his Authority from the second Commandment, where God declares himself a
jealous God in the Matter of instituted worship, and how many following
generations might smart for the prevarication in that particular, he well knew:
There might have been a Dram of the brazen Serpent, as well as an Ounce of
the Golden Calf, in their subsequent calamities* if he that was Custos
utri^sque Tabulae, and now had not his name for nothing, had not testified
against that abomination: But I shall crave leave to Remember him of the
incomparable Huge, who upon this fact of Hezekiah thus. Egregium Documentum
Regibus, at quamvis been instituta, sed non necessaria, ubi (...) male
usurpantur, e conspectu tollant, ne ponant offendiculum Caecis. A Notable
Lesson to all Kings, to remove out of the way such things, however at first
well instituted (yet not at present necessary) when they are commonly abused,
that they become not a stumbling block to the Blind. Where we see the
incomparably quicksighted Huge could find a Scripture to justify Hezekiah, and
yet it was very far fetched, from 27. Deuteronomy: 18. Cursed be he that makes the
blind to wander out of the way. And yet he has a clearer vindication of
Hezekiah's fact from Scripture: where speaking of their Burning Incense to the
brazen Serpent, he thus expresses himself. Quod inter illa erat quae Dei solius
honori Reservata, extra Templum, usurpari non lic^bat. Which (Incense) being in
the number of those things, which were peculiarly appropriated to the worship
of God, might not be Lawfully used out of the Temple. 30. Exodus 38. Whosoever
shall make like unto it to smell thereto, shall even be cut of from his people:
But what need all these circumlocutions, when God commanded his people, 34
Exodus 13. To destroy the Altars, break the Images, cut down the groves of the
Nations, for that he is a jealous God, That wise and discerning Prince could
easily see the Command reached all the Instruments, and utensils of Idolatry,
especially those found amongst his own people, his people in Covenant, for whom
thus to transgress, was to provoke him to his face.

. 3. But his great instance is from Hezekiahs celebrating the Passover
otherwise then God had Commanded, and in that one fact he finds several
branches of his variation from the first institution.

As ((...)) He caused the Passover to be kept by all Judah, and Israel on the
second Month, though it was not according to the divine Institution, but done
by the advice of his Council upon pious and prudential Considerations: 2.
Chron. 30. 5. Old Objections must be content with old Answers. [1] Hezekiah had
sufficient warrant from the word of God to celebrate the Passover at that
time, pro hac vice, the people being under those Circumstances: 9. Numb. 10.
11. If any man of you shall be unclean by reason of a Deod body, or be in a
journey afarr of, yet he shall keep the Passover unto the Lord. The fourteenth
day of the second month at even shall they keep it. That we may reach the full
Intendment of this Deuteronomy, or after Law, we must carefully attend to the
occasion of it. In v. 6. There were certain men that were defiled by a Dead
body, that they could not keep the Passover on that Day, the day of the
institution; this was a case seeming inconsiderable, and such whereon our
Enquirer would have said very little stress, made no bone of it, being a
Circumstantial, a Nicetie about the Time, but the people being more
Conscientious brought the case to Moses; and he sound it so weighty, that it
needed the Resolution of God himself; v. 8. stand still, and I will hear what
the Lord will Command concerning you. Why, what needed that? Had he not all
Kingly power within himself? had he not his Council of the seventy two? might
he not have first Determined it to be a Circumstantial, and then have
determined what he pleased about a sorry Circumstance? or was he so meanly
instructed in the extent of his Royal authority? and how little stress God laid
upon these circumstantials? well, nevertheless he will consult the Lord for a
Determination of the case: whereupon God gives him that command which we have
already heard, v. 10. 11. wherein I observe. 1. That though that Question was
propounded only concerning that particular case, of a Person unclean by a dead
Body; Yet the gracious God, who well knew, that many other incident cases of
the like Nature would emerge out of the various providence which they would
come under in aftertimes, and that they would still be at a loss for resolution
about their Duty therein, Answers also concerning him, that was in a Journey,
or far from home; which Philo understands De peregrinatione in Regionem a
Judaea long Dissi^am; the very case of the ten Tribes in Hezekiahs time. 2.
That under these enumerated particulars, of being defiled by a dead body, or in
a journey, were comprehended all other irregularities, which might render them
uncnonically meet, to observe the Passover: It a statuit Philo. (says our
Synopsis) qaia eadem est Ratio omnium. There Is a Parity of Reason, which
reaches all other cases: This then was the case of the ten Tribes, they were
afarr of, kept from the worship of God by many pressing Circumstances, for
which God in this provisional post-Law had taken care: And for Judah, they were
defiled, all things out of course, worship decayed, the Temple polluted.
Sacrifices neglected, and universal disorder, and therefore under the case of
defilement by a dead body, God makes provision for them also, for eadem est
ratio omnium: thus. v. 3. They could not keep it at that time, because the
Priests had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, Impedimentum, hic erat illi
simile, nempe justum, illi enim Dies mensis primi, (quibus Phase erat
Observandum) Templo expurgando consumpti sunt: And both Protestants, and
Papists, Junius, Piscator. Estius, Lyra, Martyr, vindicate Hezekiah's
proceedings from that General Law, Numb. 9.

[2] Whereas the Enquirer would insinuate, that the King did all this by the advice of his (privy) Council, he may know that there was another Council of
more Authority in the concerns of Religion, which being appointed by God
himself, might more reasonably have been consulted: once more I will hear
Grotius, de jure Belli, and Pacis, Lib. 1. cap. 3.. 20. Haec cum ita sint,
tamen Aliqua judicia Regibus Adempta, Arbitror mansisse penes Synedrium 70
virum, quod divino imperio, a Mose institutum ad Herodis tempora perpetua
cooptatione duravit; Itaque and Moses, and David Iudices, Deos vocant, and
judicia vocantur judicia Dei, and judices dicebantur non humana, sed Divina
vice judicare; imo aperte distinguuntur Res Dei, a Rebus Regis; 2. Chron. 19.
11. ubi Res Dei, monentibus doctissimis Hebraeorum. Judicia exlege Dei
exercenda, intelligi debeant; Although these things be thus, yet I conceive
that some judicial matters, exempted from the Kings Cognizance, were under the
jurisdiction of the Sanedrin; which being instituted by Moses, at the Command
of God, endured in a Continual succession, to the days of Herod: and therefore
both Moses and David call the Judges (of that Council) Gods: and their
judgments are called the judgments of the Lord; and the Judges are said to
judge not in Man's Name, but in Gods. And hence is it that the Matters of God,
and the Matters of the King are apparently distinguished. 2. Chron. 19. 11.
where by the Matters of God (as the most learned of the Jews inform us) we are
to understand, the determining of cases out of Gods Law. And thus also the same
Grotius upon this place. Ad v. 2. The King had taken counsel. and his Princes,
and all the Congregation in Jerusalem; id est, inquit Grot. (...). And the
meaning is plainly this, That the King and his Princes, (or privy Counselors)
advised with the Sanedrin, whether it were Lawful in this exigeney for both
Judah, and Israel to keep the Passover in the second month, by virtue of that
decl^ration of God. Numb. 9. And the Court did agree in the affirmative Nemine
contradicente. [3] But let us suppose the worst that can be imagined, that
Hezekiah had varied from the Canon (...) the Institution, yet did he make a
Canon that they should transgress it for ever? Suppose that in a perplexed time
he kept it once on the second Month, when Necessity, an old evil Counselor
(when not directed by Gods word) stood at his elbow, and had his ear; yet did
they not ever after observe it on the first Month? If he brought Judah to
Israel at this time, Israel must come up to Judah at other times: Men may turn
the stream of Gods institutions which way they will, but they will find their
old Channel again in time: Truth was before error, and it will be after it;
and therefore both King and People, when the Reason of this seeming
irregularity ceased, ceased their practice; but will this justify any to take
any Ordinance from its proper Hinges, and force it to turn for ever upon other
Centers?

This was indeed the great Transgression of Jeroboam, in divine Worship. 1.
Kin. 12. 32. Who ordained a Feast in the eight month, on the fifteenth day of
the month, like unto the Feast that is in Judah, -- Even the month that he
devised of his own heart. It Is true he was a Person obnoxious upon many other
Accounts, guilty of other superstitions and encroachments upon Gods Authority,
and yet the Scripture takes special notice, and severely brands him for the
Altering of the month, the Circumstance of time, without better warrant then
he had from his own heart, or the Regal Authority. [4] Still admitting that
this was done besides the primitive institution, or the warrant of that
after-Law, yet still the Prophets of the Lord were in Judah, with whom in
extraordinary cases both King, Princes, People, and great Council might advise:
and must we needs think that so prudent, so pious a Prince would run upon his
own Head, in a matter of such concern, when he might so easily have received
particular instructions from Heaven? [5] Supposing still more then all this
comes to, that his practice was besides the primitive pattern, not warranted by
Numb. 9. that he had no Lawful Direction from the Sanedrin, nor from any of the
Lords Prophets, (which yet can never be disproved) but that he made this
alteration merely Iure Regio (which can never be proved) yet did he not set up
any one Mystical Ceremony, appointed no other worship, part of worship, m^ans
of worship, only he determined of the time for that once: which though it had
been a presumption too high for the greatest Prince to attempt, (as the case
then stood) yet it came far short of appointing New institutions, or Symbolical
Coremonies.

(2) A second branch of his variation from the primitive pattern, he give us
from v. 17. Where he appointed the Levites to kill the Passover, which by Gods
appointment was to have been performed by the people themselves: wherein he
supposes, That by the Institution the people ought to kill the Passover; that
Hezekiah non-obstante that Institution appointed the Levites to do it; that he
did this without Divine Direction, and yet was perfectly innocent in what he
did.

. But 1. Whether by Gods appointment the Paschal Lamb was to be stain by the
people, or the Priest, is a Question that has been ventilated by no small
Names: and though it seems most probable that the people were entrusted with
that service, yet the grounds are too weak the ^rain of Consequences too many
and intricate, for a wise Man to erect a superstructure of that height, and
weight upon it, that Princes may from thence dispense with Gods Law.

They tha^ hold that the Master of the Family was not Commanded to slay it in
his own Person, do urge 12. Exodus 27. It is the Sacrifice of the Lords
Passover. And if a Sacrifice, then to be performed by a Priest, and whereas it
is said. ver. 6. That the whole assembly of the Congregation of Israel should
kill it, they answer, Jugulent, id est Iugulari Curanto, nempe per Sacerdotes.
That their killing was no more then their taking care that the Priests should
kill it.

As to my own private Judgment, I conceive that the Master of every Family was
a Priest within his own Temple, and did perform that service according to the
primitive Institution; but that as soon as God had chosen out the Family of
Aaron to Minister unto him in that Holy employment, all the powers that lay
dispersed, and scattered up and down particular families were thereby united;
and devolved upon that family which God had called. And that this
notwithstanding the people in this as well as other Sacrifices had some hand in
the oblation of it.

Abarbinel reckons up ten things in a Sacrifice; five of which he assigns to
the people. 1. To put their hands upon the head of the Sacrifice. 2. The
killing it. 3. The taking of the skin. 4. The dividing it into parts. 5. The
washing of the entrails. The other five he allots to the Priest. 1. To receive
the blood in Basins. 2. To sprinkle it. 3. To kindle the fire on the Alter. 4.
To order the wood. 5. To take the parts of the flesh that were sacrificed.

. 2. Whether Hezekiah Commanded the Levites to kill the Passover against the
Rule of the Institution? is yet another Question. For. 1. It Is the judgment of
some, that in Hezekiah's Passover the Levites did not Personally kill the
Lamb, but only deliver it into the hands of the Priests to be killed. So
Menochius: Existimo rem ita peractam esse, ut populus Immundus, Agnos Levitis
darent; Levitae ad Sacerdotes afferrent, qui eos immolarent. I conceive (says
he) that the matter was thus transacted, that the people being unclean,
delivered the Lambs to the Levites, who handed them to the Priests, and they
slew, and Sacrificed them. 2. It seems more probable that the Levites did
actually slay the Passover, as also those other Sacrifices. Chapt. 29. v. 34.
And in justification hereof I affirm, that if it was besides the order of the
first Institution, yet it was agreeable to the after Determination of God
himself, and t^t whatever con^ the (...) (...) ^in, it was appointed them jure
Divino, non Regio. And if so; then how will it evince, that the Prince had this
power over Gods institutions, because God had such a power to alter, and change
the first institution according as he in wisdom saw good?

Now that whatever change was made, was wholly by the Command of God, I think
will be evident from these Scriptures. 2. Chron. 35. 3. 4. 5. 6. And (Josiah)
said unto the Levites -- Serve now the Lord your God, and his people Israel,
And prepare your selves by the houses of your Fathers, after your Courses,
according to the writing of David King of Israel, and according to the writing
of his Son Solomon -- So kill the Passover and sanctify your selves, and
prepare your Brethren, that they may do according to the word of the Lord by
the hand of Moses. Now hence it is evident, that the Levites in killing the
Passover acted according to the writings of David, and Solomon: which writings
must necessarily be one and the same, and both of them Received from the Lord.
1. Chron. 28. 19. Where David protests: That the Lord made him understand all
this, in writing by his hand upon Him: 2. It Is plain also that good Josiah
aimed at this one thing in all he did, that all might be done according to the
word of the Lord by Moses, and then either the Levites must be judged to have
the same power by the Command of Moses, or else that no subsequent Dispos^tion
of affairs otherwise by the Authority of God could be adjudged contrary to what
he had Commanded by Moses. 3. It is plain also that Josiah had no respect to
Hezekiah's practice as the Reason of his own, because he quotes not the
practice of Hezekiah, but the writings of David and Solomon, so false it is
what the Enquirer so confidently asserts, that Hezekiah preferred the Levites
to assist the Priests in killing the other Sacrifices, which never before they
were admitted to.

And therefore I would be satisfied, to what purpose Josiah should trouble
himself, to conform to the patterns of Moses, David, Solomon, in these
Circumstantials, if by praeregative Royal He might dispense with, alter, r^peal
in whole, or in part any of Gods positive institutions.

. 3. Whatever irregularities there might be in ^his Passover of Hezekiah, (and
to be sure there were some in so great and inveterate a degeneracy) that holy
Prince humbly deprecates the just displeasure of God, and stands not saweily to
justi^y himself, that it was in his Commission to order Circumstantials in
worship. v. 18. They did eat the Passover otherwise then was written. And
Hezekiah prayed for them. v. 19. 20. saying, Lord God pardon every one that
prepares his heart to seek the God of his Fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the sanctuary, and the Lord hearkened to
Hezikiah, and healed the People. Whence it is undeniable. 1. That if we would
take the exact measure of the stress which God lays upon an Ordinance, we must
have no regard to those idle coined distinctions, invented in case of u^most
extremity, as men in famine will live (poor souls) upon any thing, but to the
word of Institution. They did otherwise then was written. What Moses his
writing was, they knew; what David's, what Solomon's writings were, whereby the
Levites were warranted to Kill, or assist in Killing the Passover, they also
knew, yet somethings there were not warranted by any of these writings, for
which there was no scriptum est: and [otherwise] in an Institution, is
[contrary] to the Institution, and for these Hezekiah begs pardon. 2. That
though the people who had been long hardened under the degeneracy, made no
bones of the matter, they might perhaps look upon all these as Circumstantials,
upon which God laid little stress, (for in times of corruption there are never
wanting some ingenious persons who will justify any thing,) yet Hezekiah a
Prince of an apprehensive spirit and tender conscience, knowing well, that not
to keep close to what was written, in instituted Worship, might draw down a
curse, sooner then procure a blessing, ^e earnestly cries to God for the pardon
of irregularities. He went as near the Archetypes of the institution as the
iniquities of the times, and a general prevarication would admit, and for the
rest he is importunate with God that his jealousy might not consume them.
Wherein our Enquirer had he stood by would have su^ciently derided his
superstitious folly and fear, that laid so great a stress, where God laid very
little, not understanding the praerogative of his Imperial Crown, in dispensing
with these Circumstantials. 3. That this irregularity was so heinous in the eyes
of God, that some wrath was already broken out from the Lord upon the people.
The plague was begun. And it was high time for a zealous Prince to interpose,
not to determine Circumstantials, but to Determine that wrath, which for these
Neglected Circumstantials was kindled, which by prayer he attemps, the only
Incense by which, in his politic capacity, he could stand between the living,
and the dead.

And thus the Jews say: Antea qui comederunt occisi sunt, sed Regis precibus
clades cessiavit; They that first eat of the Passover in their uncleanness,
were cut of by the inmediate hand of God, but by the interposition of
Hezekiah's prayers the plague stayed. 4. And we may reasonably hence conclude,
that this pious Prinse, who was so sensible of the peoples irregularity in one
kind, would have been as apprehensive of the Levites deficiency in another, had
their fact conrravented the Institution; And as little Reason to doubt, but
that the jealousy of God had smoaked and flamed out against the Levites as well
as the people had they killed, as the other ate the Passover otherwise then
was written. And therefore Grotius, who magnifies this as an illustrious
instance of Royal authority to relax a Divine Command in case of necessity, yet
dares not affirm that the King did all this upon his own Head, (least whilst he
advanced his Power, he should draw his prudence into Question) but Consulto (ut
credibile est) prius Synedrio: having first advised with the Sanedrin about the
Legality of the fact:

When therefore he asks us this Question; since the Magistrates had once such
a power, how came they to lose it? I confess I cannot tell! I believe they have
as much power as ever they enjoyed; and this I am certain of, that never any
received such a power from God, as would warrant him to alter any of Gods
institutions, to set up a New Religion, a new Office, or institution, without
special direction from divine prescription, or immediate Revelation.

(2) We come to his second Argument, which is this: The New Testament is
frequent in asserting the power of Magistrates, and requires all to be subject
to them, of what Quality or condition soever. 13. Romans 1. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers. Thus far he has no Enemy, at least he ought to
have none. The practice of the primitive Christians, which commented admirably
upon that Text of the Apostle, and other clear places, has put all this out of
dispute, who were most severe in their obedience, under the most severe
persecutions. Thus Tertullian in Apolog. Cap. 30. Nos pro salute Imperatorum
Deum invocamus, -- Precantes sumus pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis
prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem,
populum probum, orbem quietum, quaecunque hominis, and Caesaris vota sunt. We
pray to God for the safety of our Emperor; that God would give them a long
life, a peaceable Government, that he would preserve the Royal Family, that he
would vouchsafe them a faithful Council, a Loyal People, a quiet world, valiant
Armies, and what soever their own wishes can des^re. Thus Dionysius in his
Apology for the Christians, in the persecution under verus, Nos unum Deum
colimus, and veneramur, omnium fabricatorem, huic etiam sine intermissione, pro
eorum regno ut firmum, and stabile Maneat preces adhibemus. We worship (says
he) and adore only one God, the Creator of All things, and to him we power out
our prayers night and day, that the Government of our Emperors may abide firm,
and unshaken. They that would plead. Christianus sum, I cannot conform, would
as sincerely say, Christianus sum, I dare not resist: There is then no Question
but that we are all upon pain of eternal damnation bound to obey the Civil
Magistrate, and all that are sent by him, in all civil things which are not
demonstrably sinful, according to the Municipal Laws, but the Question will
meet us again though we avoid it, How far their power extends in matters of
Immediate worship, and things directly within the verge of Conscience, wherein
possibly I can yield as far as another, though I would proceed upon better
grounds then the Enquirer has laid down, which now I come te examine.

. 1. The New Testament (says he) no where excepts the case of Religion. Answer
1. No where excepts it? Ay but where d^s ^he New or Old express, and include
it? I was in hopes tha^ according to his promise, he would have proved that the
Magistrate exceeds not his Commission in determining the thin^ under debate,
and he puts us of with this, They are not excepted out of his commission: He
that Acts by Commission, must have his powers authorized by his Commission.
Suppose a Prince should issue out a Commission to certain Delegates to hear and
Determine all Differences relating to the Forest, and they shall intermeddle
with affairs that are out of the Purlieus, will it be thought enough to say,
These places are not excluded their Commission. 2. Nor do I except, the case of
Religion, out of the Magistrates Commission, but only Humbly enquire, of the
Enquirer, how far the Commission extends in Religious matters? To this he
gives us an Answer, I mean so far as Circumstantials, and those things which
God himself has not defined. But this will either destroy all again, or not
mend the matters one jot: for, 1. I no where find that God has excepted
Substantials, more then Circumstantials out of his Commission: In what respect
the one is included, the other is so: and in what respect the one is excluded,
the other is so: that is, both are included, for his preservation, and both
excluded, as to his alteration of, adding to, or subtracting from them. If a
Commission be produced that the Magistrate shall guide me in all acceptable
external instituted Worship, excepting the substantials thereof, I have enough;
for exceptio in non exceptis firmat Regulam. The exception of substantials
would more strongly include the Circumstantials. And therefore I am afraid he
will not produce a Commission that excepts substantials. Let it be substance or
Circumstance: let men invent what Terms or Names they please, If in the outward
exercise of Religion Christians shall disturb the peace, they shall know and
find that the Magistrate has a coercive power that will reach them and all
their outward Actions, for the assecurating that peace wherewith God has
entrusted him. To give Alms is an Act, a substantial Act of Religion; yet if
any Pharisaical spirit shall sound his Trumpet to draw a concourse of people
after him, and thus turn the trumpet of Religion into a trumpet of Rebellion;
if he shall make Sacramentum pictatis, vinculum iniquitatis. He, and his Act
come within the Magistrates Commission; And yet it extends not to Alter an Act
of Religion, but to suppress a Design of faction, and sedition.

2. Such an exception as he fancies in the Magistrates Commission, as it no
where appears, so would it be purely nugatory, did it appear, unless we had
withal some infallible (...), to discriminate the Circumstantials from the
substantials: Otherwise either he might encroach upon the substantials, under
the Notion of Circumstantials, or a refractary people would be always crossing
and thwarting his determinations, under pretense that the substantials were
invaded, when he was only modelling and ordering the Innocent Circumstantials:
And thus as the sea and the land are always eating into each others Liberties,
or as in some Nations, where prerogative and propriety are not equally
balanced, the one is beating up the others Quarters perpetually, so would
there be an unappeasable war between these Substantials, and Circumstantials,
which like the Marches between two Kingdoms of no firm correspondence, would be
ever subject to the longer and sharper sword: But Christ has not left these
concerns at such a loose end.

. 2. He argues thus: If they have not power in such matters of Religion as we
speak of, it is manifest they have no Magistracy, or legislative power at all in
Religion. I will deal freely with our Enquirer: for ought I know to the
contrary, they have this power, and a far greater power in the Matters of
Religion w^hreof he speaks, for I do not yet understand what those Matters of
Religion are whereof he speaks? but to answer as well as I can conjecture at
his intentions. 1. I know not what a Legislative power in Religion means in the
hands of any but the Lord Jesus Christ. The Scripture has told us. 4. Jam. 12.
That there is one Lawgiver who is able to save or to destroy. He that can
eternally save, upon obedience, or eternally damn upon disobedience, may
securely challenge a legislative power over the Church. It Is certain from
hence, that Christ is the only Lawgiver to his Church, in some sense; and in
what sense that should be, but that he alone can impose matters of immediate
worship upon the Conscience, I cannot tell. He that denies Christ to be the
only Legislator, at this day, may with equal Reason deny him to be the only
Judge in the Great Day: and it is not worth the while, for a few Ceremonies to
loose one of the Articles of our Creed: Hitherto a General Council has been
thought to have the Highest visible power on earth to make Laws for the Church,
and yet the Church of England has Determined. A^. 21. That they may err, and
have sometimes erred ^en in things pertaining to God. And therefore it will ^e
our safest, and wisest course to leave the Legislative power in matters of
Religion in the hands of Christ, where God entrusted it, and where we found it,
who can neither deoeive, nor be deceived.

2. There may be a Magistratical power about Religious matters, where there is
no Legislative power: The Magistrate may have an Executive power to do all that
God has commanded Him, and see others do all that God has commanded them, and
yet no legislative power to alter, or add to the Institutions of Christ: what a
vast Field has every supreme Magistrate, wherein he may place out all his zeal,
power, and Authority, and yet never touch ^he Philactory, or fringe, of the
Garment of Christ, either by enlarging or pairing it away. His power is very
evident in the Moral Law, bottomed upon Eternal, and immutable Reasons, and to
build it upon such dubious, and precarious Hypotheses, ^r to overcharge it with
unscriptural powers, is but secretly to undermine it, or crush it down with
it is own weight.

(3) His third Argument is this: It Is generally acknowledged (and accordingly
practiced) that Fathers and Governors of Families have Authority in Matters of
Religion within their own families, at least so far as the case in hand. Nay
pray forbear a little: That they have an Authority in matters of Religion, is
indeed acknowledged, and I wish it were more practiced; All I haesitate at, is,
whether he has such a power as far as the case in Hand: The case in hand is or
should be, whether the Magistrate has power to determine, such externals of
Religion, as he (to blind the business) thought meet to call Circumstantials:
and such a power, as Dissenters acknowledge not, so they practice not: It were
very hard if a Master of a Family should arrogate to himself such a power as to
enjoin his Wife, Children, Servants, Relations, Strangers, to have a Pugil of
salt laid upon their Tongues, in token that they shall not be ashamed to have
their speech seasoned with savoury discourse, without submission to which
Crotchet they shall either not be admitted into the family, or if already
admitted, cast out of doors, or however not permitted to hear a Chapter read,
or join in prayer all their days; This would have been a little more to the
case, of which our Enquirers instances come exceeding short.

Who doubts (says he) but the Father, or Head of a Family may prescribe what
Chapters shall be read? what Prayers used? what times shall be set apart for
Devotion? what postures, whether kneeling, standing, or being uncovered? who
shall officiate in his Family? with innumerable others of a like Nature: And if
they be but of the like Nature, they will never do us any harm. Let Us look'em
over however!

1, What Chapters may be read: Why truly if the Question be only which of the
two or more, of equal Authority, He may be as fit as another: but if the
Competition were between two, the one out of Scripture, the other out of some
Legendary Fabler, that has stufft a Farce with Romanticks, I Question much his
power to Determine, for God has at least Determined thus far, that in all our
Worship of him, we speak and read nothing but the Truth; and he that teaches
his Family, ought to teach from, or according to the Oracles of God:

2. What Prayers used. God will not accept a female from him that has a Male in
his Flock; As the Prince will not accept such a present, much less will the
great God, who gives what he receives, and therefore may justly expect the
best. No Master of a Family has Authority to offer prayers to God less good, if
God have furnished him with better.

3. What times shall be set apart for Devotion: The setting apart of Common
time for Family Worship, is a mere Circumstance, which neither renders the
Worship more or less acceptable to God as it is time. And it is disjunctively
commanded by Him, who has commanded Masters of Families to continue in prayer,
and watch in the same with thanksgiving. 4. Col. 1. 2. If God has commanded
Worship, he has also therewith commanded some time, wherein to Worship: A time
must therefore necessarily be resolved on, but (...) good favor this is not to
the case in hand. And yet as large as the Masters power may be in this matter,
he must have regard to the General rules of the Gospel: that All things be done
for edification, to advance the success of the Duty. He may neither determine
upon a Revolution too infrequent, nor upon a continuance too short, to slubber,
and huddle over the Ordinance in formal have; nor upon an unseasonable hour,
when his overworked, and overwatched servants are ready to drop asleep, when
tired Nature is ready to over-Master the souls gracious propensities toward
Gods service. And where he seems to have most power, he has far short of an
Absolute power.

4. For postures whether kneeling, standing, or being uncovered. I never so
much admired the difference between praedicamental situs, and habitus, as to
move a quarrel, whether being uncovered was a posture or no? yet I think these
things are not capable of an universal, fixed, unalterable Law. If one of these
postures shall render any one in the Family incapable of pursuing, and reaching
the ends of an Ordinance; That Parent shall sin against God; who rigidly exacts
the most plausible posture, or gesture; and I suppose he has no Commission from
God to sin against him: If standing shall so disease a weak child, that being
in pain he cannot attend the present service; If kneeling, shall ordinarily
expose another to drowziness; If being uncovered, shall prejudice health, and
endanger life; If any of these or any other, shall distract the mind, make the
duty a Burden, wear out the Body, Masters of Families must know, that their
power is for edification, and not destruction, and God will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice, whatsoever an Imperious Master will have. He that shall teach that
Magistrates may dispense with the Circumstantials of Gods worship, will sure
never be so hardy, as to teach, that Masters of Families, and Magistrates too,
ought not to dispense with their own institutions.

5. In what Habit: No Master of a Family has power to enjoin any Religious
Habits, appropriated to divine service: In the General it is true, Habit is
necessary, upon many accounts, for health, decency: But Religious Habits are
not so, not put into the Charter of Domestic Power, nor indeed capable of a
Canon.

5. Who shall Officiate in a Family: The duty of Officiating in the Family, is
primarily incumbent upon himself; I know no Reason he should claim the
Authority, who waves the duty: If he will have the honor, let him discharge
the work of a Master of a Family, nor may he Command his Child to pray that
cannot pray, with that usefulness to edification to the whole: If any person
whose greater Abilities may manage the Service more to the glory of God be
present, his charitable prudence will instruct him to procure such assistance
as may best promove the spiritual concern^ of those under his charge.

To shut up this point. The powers here ascribed to a Master of a Family, are
such as do not reach the case in hand: Determination of Chapters, Prayers,
Times, Postures, Gestures, Persons, which were not before determined by the
divine power, will not make up one Mystical Ceremony; and the Magistrate may
have all this power, and yet none such as will reach the case in hand; That
power which will serve to make a Primitive Directory, will not serve to impose
a Modern Liturgy; All that can possibly be screwed out of these instances of
Paternal Authority is no more then this, that he may Determine between two or
more Circumstances, one of which is disjunctively necessary to the performance
of a necessary duty: but it will be hard when he comes to try it, to infer a
power to impose mystical Ceremonies, which are no ways necessary to the
performance of any duty, no not by Disjunction.

I presume I have saved my Bail, if I should give no further answer, yet for
his greater satisfaction I shall trouble the Reader with these few
Considerables.

. 1, That the Governor of a Family, being upon the place, and having all
present Circumstances within his prospect, may more usefully determine upon all
determinable Circumstances, then a Magistrate for a whole Nation, and the
several Congregations therein, whose Accidents are so various that they cannot
possibly come under any uniform Determination: suppose a strict Law were made
at Paris, that every particular Church in the Nation should commence their
public service on the Lords day precisely at nine a clock, it is
Mathematically certain, that some would have done and got half through their
dinners, before others would be half way in their Devotions; They in furthest
Eastern Parts would have come to their Amen, before those on the Calabrian
Ocean would be at their Oremus, because of the diversities of Meridians, and
Longitudes, and yet all would be but nine a clock.

. 2. That the consequence from the Power of a Master of a Family, to the Civil
Magistrates power, is not very clear: for the Master of a Family is supposed to
have Minors in his Family, who cannot be safely trusted with the Determination
of those Circumstances, which must necessarily be determined, but it would be a
reproach to the Christian Religion, that all the Bishops, Pastors, and Churches
in a Nation could not find wit enough to determine, what time of the day were
most expedient to Assemble in. The power of a Prince is far more Noble, then
that of the Family Governor, and yet by Reason of the incapacity, and
unfitness of the matter, the bulkiness of the Aggregate; the lesser power may
possibly Determine upon some small Circumstances which the greater power is
unfit to do: To be Captain of a Man of War is more honorable, then to Command
a Skuller; and yet this latter will tack about more nimbly, then that
cumbersome Argosie, because the Vessel is more Manageable.

. 3. This uniformity which is so much driven at in all these arguments, as the
great Reason of the Necessity of universal Determination, is a name much
bandied in speculative discourses, rather then a thing practicable; if we may
judge that not fecible, which never yet was attained. Let us look a little
nearer home! And first we find no Punctual uniformity between the two
Provinces: He that can sing Divine Service in the Province of York, may without
new instruction be utterly to seek in the Psalmodie of Canterbury; look upon
the same Province, and compare the Parochial, with the Cathedral service, and
there is less uniformity still. He that can ^adge pretty well at a
Country-Church, is quite lost in the uncouth usages of the Minister: Look into
the Parochials, and some have their Conformity, superconformity, statute
Ceremonies, and Canon Cer^monies, so that you would hardly judge them to be
half-sisters: take a step nearer, and look in the same Parish Church,
uniformity is not to be found there; the Minister is not conformable to
himself. At one prayer he stands, at another he kneels, at one part of the
public Service he is all white, and then that Color is most decent, by and by
all Black, and then that is most decent; nor is there any uniformity between
the Minister, and the people; ^e, at the Delivery of the consecrated Elements,
praying in a posture of standing, and they in the Act of Receiving, who pray
not, yet confined to Geniculation. Nor is there less discrepancy between the
several parts of worship; for whereas the grand Plea for Ceremonies is a
certain Decency, which they conciliate to the service, and their great
usefulness to stir up the dull minds of men, yet only Baptism is adorned with
the sign of the Cross, and the rest left naked of so great an ornament, and yet
the Apostles Rule is, let all things be done decently; and we have as much need
to have our dull minds quickened in the other Sacrament, and all other pars of
worship.

. 4. Lastly. That power which belongs to the supreme Civil Magistrate, as such
belongs to all and every supreme Magistrate; but this power of instituting,
imposing Ceremonies belongs not to every supreme Magistrate, therefore it
belongs not to the supreme Civil Magistrate as such, that is, it belongs to
none.

The Reason of the Major Proposition is taken from that Common Axiom. A (...),
ad omne valet consequenti^: The proof of the Minor is this: That which belonged
not to the supreme Civil Magistrate for three hundred years after Christ's time,
belongs not to all Civil Magistrates; but this power of instituting, and
imposing Ceremonies belonged not to the Civil Magistrate for three hundred
years after Christ's time, therefore it belonged not to all. To enervate which
Argument it must either be denied that the Roman Emperors during that Period
were supreme Civil Magistrates, which St. Paul opposes, charging the Churches
to obey them; or asserted that they had a power to determine of the
Circumstantials of the Christian Religion, and prescribe what Ceremonies they
saw good in the Evangelical worship.

[2] We now come to his second Thesis. If the Magistrate may Determine these
Matters; then not only Christian Charity, and humility, but Common Prudence
requires us to presume of the wisdom, and reasonableness of his determinations,
and much more to obey them.

I shall say little, but perhaps smile the more at the prettiness of the
consequent. It Is our duty to presume of the reasonableness, but much more to
obey those Determinations; that is, it is much m^re our duty to obey, then to be
Rational.

That we are to presume very highly of the wisdom of our Superiors acting
within their proper Sphaere, we readily admit: For when God calls them to a
work, he will bestow competent wisdom for the discharge of it: but yet am I not
to presume so unmeasurably of any ones wisdom, as to resign up my Faith and
Conscience, with the disposal of Gods worship without more a do to it, If God
had given him Authority to determine these matters, I should not have been
concerned to Question his wisdom: Gods Command had superseded my little
scruples, and though he had miscarried in his prudential Decision, I should
have received the praise of subjection, but till such Authority do appear, I
shall s^t down on this side such pr^sumption, though somewhat beyond despair.

If the Reader has any pity left, he may do charitably to bestow a little of
it upon me, that must be obliged to answer all the Sentences and Apothegms in
wits-commonwealth, and yet to this drudgery I shall patiently submit ^ill I am
quite tired, and then Resign this Province:

(1) It Is enough (says he) to warrant, and require our obedient, that the thing
is the Command of our Superior, and not beyond the Sph^re of his Authority.

That Religion is within the Magistrat^ Sph^re, I have freely owned, but not to
all intents, and purposes; not to pluck up what God has planted, not to plant
what God has plucked up. Substantials, and Circumstantials are all within his
Sphaere, but not to do what he pleased withal.

As all Persons, with their Civil concerns are within the Magistrates Sph^re,
their lives, Liberties, and estates all come under his cognizance, and yet
there are some great Lawyers, and Loyal subjects, who think they are not within
his Sph^re to dispose of them at pleasure; so are all the conncerns of Religion
within his Sphaere too, to preserve, not to destroy; to propagate, not to
alter; to encourage, not to innovate in the worship of God: for All power is
for edification, not destruction;

Every Christian has Religion within his sphaere, that is, he has a concern in
it, but no concern over, and above it; Tota Religio, but not Totum Religionis,
as Totus Homo, yet not Totum Hominis are within the reach of Magistracy: He has
a power to secure Religion; Religion is therefore within his sphaere; but he
has none to make new Religion, or a new part of Religion, that therefore is out
of his sphaere, nor will it excuse me to God, his word and my own conscience
blindly to obey in every thing, some whereof may be out of his sphaere, because
he has a power to command somethings which are within his sphaere.

The true Ancient Protestants of this Church with no less zeal then success
defended the Princes Power, and supremacy against all the claims of Rome, and
yet never ascribed such a power to him as might shackle Conscience, and dispose
of Religion at pleasure. I shall give the Reader a taste from the learned Bishop
Bilson, who dedicates his book to Q: Eliz: and it came abroad Cum Privilegio.
Dial: p. 533 534, 535. etc. The Discourse is between a Papist, and a Protestant.

Philander. If the Queen establish any Religion, you are bound by your ^ath to
obey it whatsoever it be. Theophilus. We must not rebel, not take Arms against
the Prince (as you affirm you may) but with reverence, and humility serve God
before the Prince: Phil. Then is not the Prince supreme. Theo. Why so' Phil.
Your selves are Superior, you will serve whom you list. Theo. As though to
serve God according to his will, were to serve whom we list, and not whom all
Princes, and others ought to serve. Phil. But you will be Judges, when God is
well served, and when ^t: Theo. If you can excuse us before God, when you
mislead us, we will serve whom you appoint us: otherwise if every Man shall
answer for himself, good Reason he be Master of his own Conscience in that
which touches him so near, and no man can excuse him for, Phil. This is to
make every private man supreme Judge of Religion. Theo. The poorest wretch that
is may be supreme Governor of his own heart: Princes rule the Public, and
external actions of their Countries, but not the Consciences of men. Phil.
Would you have such Confusion suffered in the Church, that every Man should
follow what he list? Theo. I would not have such presumption, and wickedness
brought into the Church, that Christ, and his Word should be subjected to the
wills, or voices of Mortal men: For though the whole World should pronounce
against him, or it, God will be true, and all men shall be liars. Phil. No more
would we. Theo Why then restrain you Truth, to the Assemblies, and sentences of
Popes, and Praelates, as though they must be gently entreated, and fairly
offered by Christ, before he might attempt, or expect to recover his own. Phil.
We would have things done orderly. Theo. Call you that Order, where Christ
shall stand without doors, till your Clergy shall consent to bring him in?
Phil. God is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace. Theo. It Is no
Confusion, for one Family, yea for one Man, to serve God, though all the
Families, and men of the same Realm will not. Joshua said to the people: If it
seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you whom you will serve, but I, and
my house will serve the Lord. Elias was left alone, for any that he saw willing
to serve God in Israel, and yet abated not his Zeal: Micheas alone opposed
himself against 400. Prophets; with what judicial Authority, can you tell? Amos
neither spared Jeroboam the King, not Amaziah the Priest, and yet he was but a
simple Heards-man, and not so much as the Son of a Prophet. John Baptist had no
Competent Jurisdiction over the Scribes, and Pharisees that sa^ in Moses his
chair, and yet he condemned them for a Generation of Vipers. The Counsels,
where Peter, Stephen, Paul, were convened, accused, and punished, lacked none of
your Judicial formalities, and yet the Apostles stoutly both resisted, and
condemned their Deliberative, and Definitive sentences. Phil. The Apostles
Commission we know, but yours we know not. Theo. You cannot be Ignorant of
ours, if you know theirs; so long as we preach the same Doctrine, that they
did, we have the same power, and Authority, which they had keep your Competent
Jurisdictions, Judicial Cognitions, and Legal Decisions to your self: The Son
of God first founded, and still gathers his Church by the mouths of his
Preachers, not by the summons of Consistories: He that is sent to preach, may
not hold his tongue, and tarry, till my Lord the Pope, and his Mitred Fathers
can intend to meet, and list to consent to the ruin (as they think) of their
Dignities, and Liberties. Phil. Deshise you Counsels? Theo. By no means; so
long as they be Counsels, that is sober, and free Conferences of Godly and
learned Teachers; but if they wax wanton, against Christ, and will not have the
Truth received, until they have consented, we reject them as Conspiracies of
the wicked, which no Christian ought to Reverence -- But will you suffer God to
make Laws for his Church? Phil. What else? Theo. And may not every private Man
embrace those Laws which God has made, whosoever say nay? Phil. He must. Theo.
What if some Bishops will not agree they shall? must the Prince, and people
cease to serve God; till the Clergy be better minded. Phil. In matters of Faith
the Prince and lay-Lords have no voices. Theo, In making Laws they had. Phil.
True! But Laws for Religion they might not prescribe. Theo. No more might
Bishops! It Is only Gods Office to appoint how he will be served. Phil. Gods
will must be learned at the Mouths of the Bishops, Theo. They must Teach,
leaving always the Liberty to the Prince, and people, to examine their
Doctrine, and avoid their error, and if they teach not Truth, the Prince and
people may expel them.

I shall now leave it to the Determination of the Impartial, and unprejudiced
Reader, whether he that was then the Protestant, would not now be the Fanatic;
and whether he that makes our Enquirers Objections, would not have passed for a
Catholic of the Roman edition in those days?

(2) Humility (says he) requiring that we think meanly and modestly of our own
Reasons, Charity that we judge favorably of another, and Prudence that we
think best of the Magistrates, all these together make it our duty not only to
obey, but to do it with all cheerfulness imaginable. Ans. 1. No humility
teaches me in the matters of eternal salvation, to put out my own eyes to see
with another spectacles: my Neighbors eyes may be clearer, and stronger then
mine, yet mine are mine own; He that has better eyes then I, has this
happiness, that he may direct himself better, but yet he would direct me worse,
without the use of my own: A Christians own Reason, informed from Gods Word, is
the immediate guide of His steps in all acceptable obedience to, and walking
with God. Blind obedience in this case is no obedience: Humility teaches me to
think my self a Man, and therefore may err; but not a Brute, which cannot but
err: It neither teaches me to Revere any Creature as my God, nor to despise my
own Intellectuals, as if I were a beast. 2. Though Charity Command me to judge
favorably of another spiritual estate for the present, his eternal state for
the future, yet it Commands me not to neglect making provision for my own: It
Commands me to love another as my self, and therefore nor above my self; I
cannot expect another should be true, if I prove false to my own soul. It Is a
blind charity, and only fit for the Hospital, that would make me of every man's
Religion, of whom it teaches me to judge favorably: for at this rate I must be
of twenty Religions, and perhaps one half of them together by the ears with the
other half: Charity will heal the evil eye, and make it good, but not put it
out. 3. Charity teaches me to think best of the Magistrates Reason in Common
Kingdoms, but better of Scripture Reason in the territory's of Conscience. And
prudence will dictate to me, that God who has placed him in his Political Orb,
will provide an Intelligence to move that Sphaere regularly, for Qua supran^s,
nihil ad n^s, but no Prudence will teach me to espouse a Religion because it is
his, but because it approves it self to the Test, and touchstone of all
Religion, the word of God.

I could learn better Divinity from an honest Heathen then this stuff: Pliny
has given us this Rule: Cantissimi cujusque praceptum, Quod dubitas ne feceris.
And Tully: Quocirin been praecipiunt qui vetant quicquam agere, quod dubites
aequum sit an iniquum: They preach true Doctrine who warn you not to do any
thing, whereof you doubt whether it be good or evil. And though such a prudence
as he has described may contingently do me no great hurt at home, yet it will
make me a Papist in Italy, a M^ssulman at the Port, a Heatheen in China, or
rather every where just Nothing.

(3) It Is a Common mistake to think Charity, and Compassion only due from
Governurs to their inferiors in the frame and composure of their Laws, for
it is due also from inferiors toward them, and that they ^ake a fair, and
canaid: construction of their inj^nctions. The duty is reciprocal without
doubt, but with great difference (...) we pity, and pray for our Superiors
under their burdens of Government, and expect only pity from them under our
loads of subjection; And though we account subjection no servile yoke, yet it is
a yoke; as Bernard in another case, Dulce quidem conj^gium est jugum, sed tamen
jugum; And yet a compassionate tenderness toward inferiors in those things
wherein God has tied up Conscience, is an abundant recompense for all that
subjection: we would willingly part with all that is properly our own, to
secure that which is properly Gods; And though Magistrates are strictly above
our pity, and compassion, yet we hope we are not be low theirs: If they call
for our pity in any case, it is to see them tormented with the importunate
solicitations of one part of their subjects to destroy the other: As it must
needs be an unspeakable affliction to a Father to be harrassed by some of his
Children to Abnegate and disinherit the rest. As it is a great injury to the Son
to endeavor to monopolize his beams; to the Fountain, to impropiate it is
streams, when the one would shine indifferently, the other flow impartially
toward all, so is it a great Trouble to a generous Prince to have his favors
intercepted, his Royal grace under sequestration, that he cannot equally
influence the whole Body, of which the grace of God has made him Head.

Nor do we dare to judge our Superiors, but our selves: Not their intentions,
but our own Actions: which if we may not do, better it were to be divested of
these cumbersom Reasons of ours, which therefore serve to increase our misery,
because they teach us what it is to be Happy.

To make a candid interpretation of their Actions, we own our Duty, and as we
suppose they steer by the light of their own judgments, so we hope they will
indulge us to Act by ours: If we mistake, we wrong our selves, if our mistakes
should wrong them, we submit to correction: If they mistake, we must wait under
the inconveniences of the effects of that mistake, till the Father of Lights
shall inspire other Counsels; only let us Remember, that it is the Princes
Glory to be Rex Hominum, non Asinorum, nec Angelorum.

(4) The Scriptures (says he) call the Magistrates. Masters of Restraint. 18.
Judge. 17. And it is amongst their most glorious Titles, the least of which (if
any may be called little) we Revere; And it will be their immortal honor to
restrain wicked men from doing evil, if they cannot restrain them from being
evil: It was a flower in Jobs Coronet, 29. Chapter 17. 2. That he brake the ja^ of
the wicked, and pluck the spoil out of his Teeth, Masters^ of Restraint they
are, not to estrain Religion, but irreligion, and the insatiable thirst of thoe
which nothing will Quench but the blood of their Brothern* (...) that which was
earned with the sweat of their faces.

(5) Nor will it be a foolish Charity, (...) blind obedience to permit our
selves to the (...) of our (...) in those little things (...) speak of: To
permit and resign up our selves to the conduct of others in Religious matters
absolutely is blind obedience, whether a sober Enquirer will call them little
or no. Though the things may be small, the blindness of our obedience may be as
great as if the things were greater; Blindness consists not in the Object; but
in the Faculty, but. 1. The things wodiscourse of, (if we discourse ad idem)
are no little, but the great things of the Gospel: Great I say, if we either
consider the greatness and danger of those Principles which they proceed upon,
or the greatness, and dangerousness of those Consequences which they draw along
with them, a ^ttle spark may kindle if neglected a great flame; They suppose
either that Christ had not all power committed to him in heaven, and in carth
or that he has given it away by some Dormant warrant, and clandestine
Commission, or that he never exercised his Power to settle the Regiment of his
Church, or that his Edicts may be Rescinded, and cassated by humane will. And
they draw along with them a train of Fatal consequences, as that it is possible
the condition of Christ's Church may be irremediably more servile then ever was
that of the Jewish, if Religion should fall into bad men's hands. But no sin is
little to him, that knows what blood it cost to expiate it, what sorrow it
costs the true penitent to mourn for it, and what pains it cost the true
Christian to resist it. 2. If the things be so little in the judgment of
Imposers, we hope we shall taste of their compassion in indulging such little
things; It shall be no little praise we should return to the great God, no
little returns of duty, and exemplary obedience we should make to his
Vicegerent, that should permit us the indisserent use of indifferent things,
and suppose them so, yet the faith of indifferent things is no indifferent
thing: But I observe, That when our Enquirer would have Dissenters punished for
the Neglect of these things, then they are not little; then they become the
greatest, weightiest, most important things in the world; then Churches,
Government, Religion cannot subsist without them, as accidents cannot subsist
without their substances* so neither substances exist without their accidents;
but when he comes to drole us into compliance, then they are little triffles,
the minutes, punctilios, of Religion. 3. If to resign up our selves in matters
of immediate worship without a warrant from God, to any but God, be not blind
obedience, it is because we are blind, and cannot see what blind obedience is:
We freely commit our selves to the Political conduct in all things temporal; a
ministerial Conduct we own in our Pastors, and Teahers; a Sovereign Conduct we
would gladly reserve for Christ. We would willingly go any whether but to Hell,
do any thing but sin, lose any thing but the peace of our Consciences, and part
with any thing, but what is none of ours to dispose of, rather then seem to
tergiversate from the Commands of our Governors.

And as we confess the Magistrate stands upon higher grounds then we; so we
must, and without displeasing our Superiors way say; That Christ stands upon
higher ground then he; And when we shall come to stand before his Tribunal,
there to receive according to our works, we shall all stand upon even ground,
as to any difference, that external advantages in this present world, shall
then make.

(6) We have Reason to persuade our selves that we may as easily lie under
prejudices, as they; and that we may be as much transported with Considerations
of ease, and liberty, as they may probably be suspected to be with Ambition.
Ans: It Is the duty of all to watch against those temptations, to which welye
most open from without; and to watch over those corruptions, to which we are
most obnoxious from within: we dare not think it probable that our Magistrates
are transported with Ambition; And we profess that we are not transported with
any base lust, or pitiful considerations to suspend active obedience, till we
discover such transport by its proper fruits. But if we must still be
represented by our sometimes Brethren, but now Persecutors, as misguided by
prejudices, we are sorry for it, but cannot help it: and must place these
secret Aspersions in the number of those burdens, which by frequent use grow
familiar, and less pinching, and such as seeing they are not to be avoided,
wisdom dictates they ought to be contemned. And yet we shall pray that our
Magistrates, like the highest Boughs of the goodliest trees being most
fruitful, may bow down themselves with abundance of precious fruits, and drop
some of it into the laps of their despised, but loyal subjects.

(7) There are no less different capacities of mind, then Constitutions of
Body, and as great difference in men's outward Circumstances, as in either of
the former: The Magistrate will certainly thence judge that there ought to be
as great a diversity and latitude in his Impositions: He that has a larger
swallow, let him have a larger cann: Let the best stomach have the largest
trencher: and since one stomach will bear, what would oppress another, why
should one man's Conscience be compelled to digest, what another can easily put
over: Either we must practice, whilst we think not the same things, which is a
sordid piece of unworthy Hypocrisy, and no credit to uniformity to congregate
such Heterogeneous materials; or else tormented, because our Constitutions,
capacities, consciences, circumstances are not of one size, which is not our
fault, for we had not the mingling of our temperatures, nor the putting
together of our frames; or else (which we hope they who are wiser then us all
will judge most eligible) that every one retaining his different sentiments
which impede not Christianity, or disturb the peace, may be indulged in a
practice peaceably managed, suitable to those innocent variations. And since
our Enquirer has quoted an old story, I shall only repeat his words, and leave
the Reader to his own thoughs for the application: Those that would have the
Laws fitted to their humor, without respect to other Men, do but imitate the
Barbarous Custom of the Infamous Procrustes, who is said to have either Rackt
all those Persons that fell into his hands, and stretched them out to his own
size, if they were too short; or cut them of to his own proportions, if they
were too long. And really if any of the Dissenters be of that Imperious and
Tyrannical temper. I know not why they should expect that Mercy they will not
show, or institute themselves in those Privileges, out of which they would
eject all others.

I have heard that the famous B. Andrews, Disputing with the great Cardinal
P^ronne about these Matters, urged very smartly, That Man ought not to Add to
Gods word, lest he loose his part in the book of life. The Politic Cardinal
asks, why then do you retain the Cross in Baptism? The Bishop answered:
Because Authority enjoins it. And for the same Reason (replied the Cardinal) we
retain all the rest of the Ceremonies: that Rejoinder the Bishop made, I do not
remember.

It Is the great duty, and will be the unspeakable comfort of all in Authority
to preserve the whole worship of Christ pure and undefiled, and all the
Worshippers of Christ in peace, and security, and when they have done this,
they seem to me to have discharged their Commission, and may sue out their
Quietus est; and easily receive, That huge, well done, good and faithful
servant, Thou have been faithful in a few things, I will make thee Ruler over
many things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord. As for them who fear a
Prince, will have nothing to do, since Necessaries are already Determined,
unlawful things, prohibited* if he may not Determine the Rest: They are worse
scared then hurt; God has cut him out work enough in his precept, and many
times (for the sins of a people) ^uts them out harder work by his providence,
and he is little beholden to those Over-officious (...), who prompt him to
grasp more employment, whilst any lies upon his hands. The Christian Religion
was perfect, and absolute at all points, as it came out of Christ's Hands, and
if we make it no worse when it is in ours, he will never complain, though we
never make it better:

Alcibiades brings in the Athenians Complaining to the O^acle of Jupiter (...),
that their enemies the (...) pr^vailed against them; and yet (say they) we
offer many, and costly Sacrifices, when they present the Gods with few cheap,
or none. The Oracle answers (and it might have become a better mouth) That the
(...), The plain simple service of the Lacedaemonians was more acceptable to the
Gods, then all the splendid, pompous willworship of the Athenians.

As the great God is exceedingly jealous in this particular, so has he not le^t
himself without a witness in the Consciences of those who had no other Notices
of Gods nature but what came in by the light of nature, or some refracted beams
of Revelation conveyed to them by Tradition. The Pythagoreans taught this
Doctrine, that the Gods were to be worshipped, (...), according to their own good
pleasure: And it was one of the Platonical dictates. That all Divine Worship
must be (...), measured by the Acceptance, and appointment of God.

The Conference which Numa Pompilius, the great Roman Ritualist had, or
pretended to have with the Goddess Aeger^, instructs us, that he confided
little in his regal power, without a divine (...) to conciliate a due Reverence
to those Ceremonies, which having in them no moral goodness, depended wholly
upon a positive institution, and that no Artifice will ever preserve a
Religious Rite, sacred and intemerate, which is not stamped with a jus Divinum.

If indeed an Old fragment, a trivial sentence, or shred out of an heathen
Author, were to be the Canon of our Faith, or the Rubric of our worship, I
could easily comply with this Enquirer, who brings (and it is as fair a proof as
any he brings) a saying of Aemilius Paulus to his Soldiers. Vos Gladios acute!
What you your swords, and be ready to execute what shall be commanded you, but
leave the Management of affairs to your General. If Christans do really owe
that subjection in Religious matters to their Superiors, which Private
Soldiers owe their General in the field, this Controversy is at an end, and
with it all instituted Religion in the world, that deserves that excellent
Name. It may easily be applied: Provide you knees to bow, and backs to bear,
mouths to say what shall be put into them, Hands to subscribe what shall be
tendered to you, and leave the Truth of Principles, the composure of a worship,
the guidance of Conscience to wiser heads. And he might have quoted us Caesar's
Commentaries to as much purpose, where that great Commander upon the reluctance
of his Soldiers to engage, sharply chides them, quod aut quam in partem, aut
quo Consilio (...). si^i (...) aut cogit^dum putarent: Who durst once surmise,
^r enquire, either whether, or upon what design they were ^rawn out. And thus
at last we shall be sped both of a Dir^tory for worship, and a Canon of
Church Government; and may with the Traditores of old deliver up our Bibles for
wast paper: unless we had rather imitate the famous Legi^ fulminatrix, who knew
how t^ wh^t their swords against the Common Enemy at the Command of the
Emperor, and yet to refuse a Religious Ceremony, vouched by no other then
humane Authority.

His fine sentence out of Cato is also hugely wide in this case, Nulla lex
s^tis ^mnibus comm^da, id (...) qu^ritur, si majori, Parti, and (...) summ^
prodest. No Law sits aequally easy upon all men's shoulders, the only
consid^ation is, whether it suit with the Generality, and be useful in the
main. It Is very true Lawmakers cannot apportion out their Civil Constitutions
to an Ounce or a Dram; but one scruple of Conscience weighs heavier then a
Pound of temporal inconveniences. If it be true, that because in the laying of
an Impost, Custom, or E^cise, the Minor part of the civil S^ffragans must yield
to the Major, that therefore a Religion too must be chosen by the Poll, and God
compelled to accept of that, or Nothing, which the Majority of votes shall
allot him, Religion shall be sure in most parts of the world to be out-voted by
Atheism; Truth run down by Error, Holiness proscribed by impiety: As Socrates
in his time was a Fanatic, Athanasius in his an Heretic, and Christ himself
amongst the hightrotting Scribes and Pharisees a Deceiver: with such maxims as
these has Christianity been prostituted to will and pleasure: Regi aut civitati
imperium habenti nihil injustum quod utile: To a Prince, or Commonwealth vested
with sovereign Power, nothing can be unjust, that is profitable. In summa
fortuna, id aequius, quod validius; In the highest estate, that is ever most
just, that has obtained the upperhand. And the Enquirer has approved himself a
person qualified with Carneades his Excellencies, Qui pro falso, non minus quam
pro vero, vires eloquentiae potest intendere; One that for time of need can
strain his wit, to set a fair Gloss upon a fowl matter, and with as little
trouble can expose a Truth, as impose an Error.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein Christian Liberty consists? The Enquirers Reasonings examined, and
Dissenters vindicated from that Insinuation, that they pretend by their
Christian Charter to be discharged from Obedience to Laws.

IT is a Privilege that has too much of Absolute Soveraingty in it for the
Opponent, to impose what state of the Question he pleases upon the Respondent:
The Enquirer has therefore got the poor Non-conformists upon a sure lock, if he
can oblige them to maintain, That Christian liberty discharges them from
obedience to Laws.

There are indeed some Laws from whose obligation if Christian Liberty cannot
discharge us, it can do very little: and there are other Laws, from which if
Christian Liberty should pretend to give a discharge, it would assume too much.

To Discharge from obedience, is to Ambiguous a Term to be put into this
Question. For. 1. Christian Liberty in some cases does not discharge us from
obedience, but prevents the obligation: It does not dissolve the Bond, but
prevents the Binding; 2. Christian Liberty may discharge from a Necessity of
obedience (in some cases) which is the formal Reason of subjection to a Law,
and yet not discharge from the Lawfulness of doing that which is the Material
part of the Law: If a Law be made the Matter whereof is things purely
indifferent in their Natures, and these things appropriated to the immediate
service of God, Christian Liberty will not make it unlawful to do those things,
but it will still maintain it is ground, that it is Lawful not to do them.

The Province of this Liberty whereof we now treat lies between those things
which are necessary, and sinful; as it is frequently pleaded about the
Magistrates power, since things forbidden cannot Lawfully be done, nor things
Commanded, Lawfully omitted (in their proper seasons) the Magistrate must
either have a power in these middle concerns, or he can have no Legislative
power at all: The same or some such thing I would affirm here; whatever is
sinful admits of no Release, whatever is a duty admits of no indulgence, and
therefore Christian Liberty must have it is appartment in these Adiaphorous
things, or be quite shut out of doors.

Now seeing the Magistrates power lies only in those things (...), such as
stand in a posture of neutrality, and side in neither with good nor evil; and
seeing also that Christian Liberty has for it is Sphaere indifferent things,
these two powers must needs strike fire, and their interests perpetually clash,
unless some expedient may be found out to reconcile their seeming enterfeering
motions.

Indifferent things may fall under a twofold Consideration, either as they are
applied to, or used in ordinary affairs of Humane life; or as they are
appropriated to divine Worship, and preferred to serve in Religious affairs: in
the former respect they come unquestionably under the Magistrates Cognizance,
which our B. Savior has put beyond the Die of Controversy by his exemplary
practice: 17. Math. 24. Where though he might have pleaded a peculiar
Privilege, yet he rather chose to wave it, and recommend to us a singular
pattern of due subjection: in this case then Christian Liberty ought not
interpose. In the other Consideration Christian Liberty puts in a claim, and
this also our Savior has made indisputable by his example, who though he would
freely submit to a tax of twenty pence, would not yield to their Ceremony of
washing hands, though it was not worth a farthing, when Superstition had lifted
it up above it is place.

And yet as sacred things in their external exercise may come under the
inspection of the Civil Powers, in order to the securing of Public peace,
which is directly entrusted with him by the God of order and peace; so may
things in their own nature secular, come under the Jurisdiction of Christian
Liberty, when they shall be advanced above their Pedigree, and made either
parts of Worship, or Conditions to the enjoyment of Communion therein.

There are two sorts of Persons who as they are enemies to all Truth, so they
are but back-friends to Christian Liberty; some there are who have made it such
an Idol, that they have sacrificed things sacred and civil to it is Deity: and
given it such a boundless Dominion, as if like Quicksilver it were neither to
be contained, s^is aut ^lienis Terminis. Against these I shall need to say the
less, because every one has a stone to throw at, a cudgel to bestow upon them:
Others there are who have Adorned it with a Hogan Mogan Title, and yet have cut
asunder the senews of it is Authority, and with these it is a mere Name, which
either with Ech^ evaporates into air^, or with Narc^ssus dissolves into water.

But that there is such a Charter our Enquirer grants: I suppose he has found
it amongst some ancient Records, if it be not forfeited for want of Renewing,
yet that it has some considerable immunities and privileges, he thus
demonstrates.

1. From the gratitude we owe to him that purchased it: and therefore we may
conclude that Christians stand seized of a good and indeseazable estate
therein, for it could hardly claim so much gratitude to be Tenants at the will
of M^n;

2. From the price it cost him; which was no less then the precious blood of a
Redeemer; and surely that which could not be purchased with silver and gold,
should never be sold for the highest offer of things corruptible.

3. From that strict injunction. 5 Gal. 1. To stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and not to be entangled again with the yoke
of bondage: from whence the Apostle instructs us; 1. That no force can wrest
this sacred privilege out of our hands without our own consent: it is our sin
if our Charter be lost. 2. That we are prohibited to submit our necks to any
Religions yoke, as well as that from whence the Disciples were t^en exempted;
for as good have the back broken with an old burden as with a new one.

This Christian Liberty being so considerable in the purchase, must be also of
great usefulness in the Practice; which that we may the better understand and
improve, I shall modestly give the Reader my thoughts in the ensuing
propositions.

(1) Christian liberty consists not i^ a mere liberty of judgment: because. 1.
This had been too mean (...) purchase for the Blood of Christ, to procure us
that which never was, never could be denied to any Creature that had a
judgment. For. 2. The ^ews when under their most ^le burdens, had ever a
liberty to judge the things imposed, to be indifferent in their ^wn Natures,
antecedent to the positive Law of God 3. Such a liberty the poor ^ird in the
cage may celebrate, and fancy herself a citize^ of the woods, when she is
confined within the grates of her little Cloister: such a one the prizoner may
flatter himself with; And it reminds me what I observed the other day pa^ng in
the street^, this gilded Inscription invited my eye: Pray Re^ember the poor
Freemen, that are Priz^ners in (...): Poor Freemen indeed (thought I) who have
only the freed^m to talk how they have served an apprentiship with a Master,
and now must serve a double, perhaps a perpetual one, with the Jailer. 4. Nay
this would increase the bondage, to be always harping upon our liberty in actu
pri^, and yet never taste the sweet of it in ac^ secundo. 5. This would render
the Christian Church in a worse plight then that of the Jews, who though they
bore m^re (...) then we at home who breath in a freer air, yet had this
countervailing advantage, that God himself was the Imposer; It is no such
bargain to exchange a Divine for a Humane yoke, though somewhat lighter: and if
it be so, no thanks to those officious gentlemen, who would gratify Magistrates
with a power over all indifferent things, and therefore it is but contingently
that ours is not much more insupportable.

(2) Christian liberty consists in something Practical: that which tends to,
and chiefly lies in the using. 5. Gal. 13. Ye have been called unto Liberty,
only use not your Liberty for an occasion to the flesh: where the Caution that
we do not misuse it, strongly implies that it must be used. And if it lay only
in a freedom of judgment, the Caution had run; use it not at all: All external
use had been an abuse of it.

(3) This liberty must hold in utramque parte^, that we may Act or not Act, or
determin^ this or that way, or it can be no liberty: And this will be granted
by all those, who deny the will to be free, unless it have a powerful freedom
toward both the Terms: but as the self-determination of the will to one side
prejudices not it is liberty: so the determination of our Christian liberty (by
our choice, guided by Prudence and Reason) is no extinguishment of it is radical
freedom. And as external compulsion, and foreign force put upon the will,
would be a violation of it is liberty, so all force put upon this Christian
liberty, is an annihilation of it.

(4) He that has enstated me in this great Privilege, ha^ also commanded me to
restrain my self in the exercise of it: and that (1) by prudence, when the use
of an indifferent thing would prejudice my Neighbors spiritual good, my own
salvation, or the glory of God: in these cases I must not plead my Christian
liberty to Act. but exercise my Christian liberty to forb^ar what would oppose
those commanding ends of all Religion. Qui f^ciunt quicquid licet, hac (...)
d^labuntur ut ^iant quod non licet; He that will always do all he may, shall
easily slide into the doing of what he may not. The same thing may be usefully
done at one time, which would sinfully be done a^ ano^er: 1. Cor. 6. 12. All
things are Lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. And Omne Quod non
expedit, in quantum non expedit, non licet; Whatever may not be done with
expedi^cy, cannot be done Lawfully. 2. God has commanded me to restrain my self
in the exercise of my Christian liberty by Charity to my weak Brother: To lay a
stumbling block in the way of the weak, or blind, is a gross abuse of my
Christian liberty; Because no use of an indifferent thing ought to weigh
against my Neighbors spiritual w^lfare: And it argues a very light esteem of a
soul, when I am too proud to abridge my self in a trifle, rather then hazard
his seduction into sin, and exposing to the wrath of God; this Rule the Apostle
was under: 1. Cor. 10. 23. All things are Lawful for me, but all things edify
not; And when they edify not, Charity commands me to forbear them, in
Compassion to my Brothers soul.

(5) Though Christian Liberty may in some cases be restrained, yet can it not
in any Lawfully be resigned: He that has Commanded me to moderate it by the
Rules of prudence and charity, has yet Commanded me to stand fast in it: He
that resigns his Liberty in one case, by consequence gives it away in all; for
though he has not actually resigned in every case, yet has he virtually
betrayed it, by yielding in one, for there is the same reason of all the rest;
as an owner may forego the use, and yet reserve the right; which right will
reduce tho use too in season; so may a Christian wave his Liberty in the use,
still serving his Right, that when opportunity shall invite, the use may
attend, and wait upon the Right.

The main violation of Christian Liberty lies in a fixed, stated, perpetual
compulsion to do what God has permitted me to omit, or in a like fixed, stated
prohibition to do what God has made Lawful: For indeed this is that mainly
which distinguishes between the restraint, and the infringment of this Liberty:
in the restraint and moderation of my Liberty by prudence, charity, or whatever
other methods God has Commanded, though I suspend my act for a time, yet when
those Circumstances which rendered such suspension a duty, go of from their
places, I reassume the free exercise of my Liberty; the Stream for a while
damm'd up, finds it is old sree Channel, and slides along in it is wonted course:
but if a Law be made that I shall never act what I might Lawfully do; or that I
shall always act, or always in such a Revolution, and at such stated Periods,
it is then an apparent encroachment upon my Liberty: This the Apostle notably
teaches: 1. Cor. 6. 12. All things are Lawful for me, but I will not be brought
under the Power of any: (...). To be brought under the power of a thing
indifferent: or under the power of any Person in a thing indifferent, is that
great violation of this Charter. For. 1. Such resignation of my self to be
restrained fixedly and statedly, is to subscribe, engage, and make an implicit
vow and oath against all opportunities of using my Liberty for the spiritual
good of another, which providence may offer to me. Gods Providence by mustring
together all due Circumstances, is the great Director when, and where to use,
and employ my Christian Liberty: If then such concurring Circumstances should
command my forbearance of an Act, to prevent the sin of my Brother; If now I
have suffered my self to be determined the other way, that I will const^ act,
and never forbear; I have tied my hands behind me sro^ plucking him out of the
snare of sin, and perhaps the pit of Hell. And this is an evil the utmost reach
of whose mischievousness I cannot possibly foresee: For God may possibly place
me in such a juncture of Circumstances, that I might reasonably hope, might win
souls to Christ, and I have ^acled my hands, and cannot act, or hung a padlock
on my own mouth, and cannot speak; or an advantage may be put into my hands to
prevent the sinful scandal of another by my forbearance, and I am not ^ijuris,
but must act: 2. By such predetermination of my self in things indifferent, in
submission to any man I do as much as in me by alter the nature of indifferent
things. For things sinful can never be done; Duties must always be performed in
due time, and place, and indifferent things should be indifferently used, as
present Circumstances invite Prudence, and Charity to determine: but when once
they are predetermined, I can no more do an indifferent thing, then if it had
been sinful; or no more omit an indifferent act, then if it had been necessary.
3. By such a fixed predetermination of my liberty I ascribe more to man in his
positive precepts, then to God in his affirmative moral precepts: for the Acts
of such Commands may be suspended pro hic, and Nunc, when they obstruct some
great Good, but in this case I must act uniformly, without respect to
circumstances, let thousands be offended, stumbled, wounded in Conscience, and
prejudiced against Religion. And in short, by such Resignation of my liberty in
is it exercise, I have reduced my self to that imaginary Liberty of Opinion,
that dreaming freedom, which the Lollards enjoyed in their Tower, and the poor
Protest ants in Bonners Cole-hole.

(7) When Christian Charity commands me to forbear the use of the thing, which
otherwise is within the Charter of Christian Liberty to use; and at the same
time the Christian Magistrate shall command me to to practice that very thing
by a fixed Law; I humbly conceive, that Christian Charity ought to restrain my
Liberty, not to act, rather then the Commands of the Magistrate enforce me to
act, 1. Because the restraint which Charity puts upon me, will soon determine,
and ^pire, but the Command of the Magistrate is perpetual: 2. The restraint
which Charity puts upon me is internal, and so agreeable to, and consistent with
the greatest Freedom and Liberty, but the restraint, put upon me by the
Magistrate, is external, and compulsory, which comports not with my inward
liberty: for if he deals merely by his will, and authority, that suits not with
my reason, and therefore has in it the nature of force; But if the Magistrate
should deal by Argument, then when a stronger appears to act according to his
precept, then that drawn from the good of my Neighbor by Charity, Christian
Liberty may be free, and yet obey: provided always that that argument be taken
from the nature of the thing commanded, and not from the naked commands. 3. The
weak Christian for whose sake Charity commands me to forbear acting, is one
that cannot prevent his own weakness, his stumbling scruples, and aptness to be
wounded; but he that commands me to act, may prevent, recall, or suspend his own
Edict in that which in it is own nature is indifferent. And God has commanded me
not to offend my weak Brother by the use of indifferent things, but he has no
where commanded the Magistrate to impose indifferent things, which become not
some way or other necessary. 4. It seems a most horrid thing to interpret
Scriptures at this rate: That I should be commanded to walk Charitably, till I
am commanded to walk uncharitably; And forbidden to destroy him for whom Christ
dyed, by my indifferent things, till I am enjoined to destroy him. Not to wound
weak consciences, till I am commanded to wound them. Thus shall Moral precepts
be avoided by humane positive Laws, which cannot be superseded by the Divine
positive Laws. And if one may be thus enervated, the whole D^calogue has no
firm station; And thou shall not make to thy self a graven Image, may be eluded
by this, till we are commanded by Authority, and I am somewhat confident the
foundation laid by the Enquirer, will bear that superstructure.

It is therefore a most approbrious, and invidious charge with which he begins
this discourse. All that we have hitherto discoursed about the power of the
Magistrate, some think may be avoided by pleading the Magna Charta of Christian
Liberty] for though it may be pleaded against some power that may possibly be
assumed, yet against none wherewith he stands' endowed by the Law of Nature, or
Scripture; nor indeed against any useful power for the attaining the great ends
of Government, public peace, and tranquillity.

The Church of England in her avowed Doctrine asserts, that Christ has ordained
in his Church two Sacraments, generally necessary to Salvation; now we
conceive, that having a Right as Christians to all the Ordinances of Christ
necessary to Salvation, ChristianLiberty may plead the enjoyment of all
thoseOrdinances, upon those naked Terms Christ has off^r'd them to Mankind.
This is our Maegna Charta; And if any shall encumber that Communion with new
clogs, provisoes, restrictions, and limitations, we plead our Petition of
Right, which if it be denied us, our Christian Liberty is so far violated.

Nor do we deny the Magistrate a Power about our Christian Liberty; If any
shall turn this Liberty into licenciousness, he may restrain them: Nay he may
restrain the Liberty it self, where God has not praeengaged us to restrain it;
And he will eminently employ his power for Christ, when he exerts it, to assert
and vindicate to all his loyal Subjects the free use of that great Charter; And
if encroaching violence shall make a forcible entry upon that privilege,
whereof we are in quiet, and peaceable possession; we shall complain of the
force to him, who will remove it, and reinvest us in our Christian freehold,
whereof Christ has made the purchase with his own blood.

Two things there are which the Enquirer has lustily promised us, and therefore
we may confidently expect from him: first, that he will give us the true
notion, and secondly, the due extent of Christian Liberty: and he has freed his
name pretty well, for first he has made it a mere notion, and then laid an
extent upon it, that is, he has seized it into his own hands, upon pretense for
the Magistrates use.

[1] And first for his true notion (for none cry stinking Mackerel) there are
two things also very considerable: the liberality of his Concessions, and the
Policy of his Retractations. He makes us fair lange Deeds, but with a secret
Power of Revocation frustrates all; so that when we come to cast up our
accounts, we must say, with that Bewildred Clyent, in the Comadian, when he had
advised with his brace of Advocates; Probefecistis, incertior sum multo quam
du^m.

(1) For his Concessions they are truly noble, and generous, and such as would
heal us all.

1. Concession. p. 88. When the Gospel was fully published, then the aforesaid
enclosure is laid open, and all Nations invited into the Soci^ty of the Church
upon equal Terms, neither party being bound to those nice Laws of Moses, nor to
any other but those plain, and reasonable ones contained in the Gospel! This is
certainly the great year of Iubilee! And will he not deserve to be shut out for
ever that shall refuse so free an invita^ion? Is he a reasonable Creature that
refuses the plain, and reasonable Terms of Communion, contained in the Gospel?
what a hideous Monster would a Schismatic be, did Churches keep to these
Terms? but his Limitation retracts all this again:

-- And such other (not contradictory to them) as Public wisdom, peace, and
Charity, shall dictate, and recommend. Now you have it! Thus the Crane most
courteously invited the Few to Dinner; but fitted him with such Terms of
Communion, that unless he could stretch his neck as long as hers, he shall have
his belly full of nothing but hunger; Esurire licet, gustare non licet!

It minds me of the Story of Sanctius the King of Arragon's Brother, who
marching against the Saracens, diverted himself a while at Rome; the Bountiful
Pope, who is always prodigal of what costs him nothing, causes him to be
proclaimed, Sanctius by the grace of God King of Egypt, etc. The noise of
Trumpets calls him to the Belcony, and he asks what was the matter? He was
answered that his Holiness had presented him with the Entire Kingdom of Egypt:
Presently he commands his own Trumpetters to go, and salute the Pope in
requital. Caliph of Baldach: Thus has the Enquirer gratified us with an empty
Concession, which by his Retractation is (...)! I shall not need to observe to
the Reader the Egregious folly of such Propositions. We are not bound to the
Laws of Moses (i. e. as Terms of Communion) nor any other, but such other --
That is, we had been free, but that we are in bondage. Negatives are infinite!
and under that one word [such other] we may be pestered with more then those
Nice Laws of Moses. For. 1. Who can tell what public wisdom may Determine? The
public wisdom of Italy, and Spain, has introduced such a Lumber of those other
Terms, as has eaten out almost all Religion, with the Divertisements of
Iudaical, Paganical, whimsical Constitutions: The public wisdom of Abassia has
introduced Circumcision it self, and no thanks to these Principles, or the
Discourses of Erastian Novellists, that the case is better with us.

2, Peace and Charity require no other Terms then those plain ones laid down in
the Gospel; Charity teaches us not to lay stumbling blocks in the way of those
that would come toward the Church; Peace requires us to unite upon Christ's own
Terms; But the Name of Peace is often used to destroy the thing: so Austin of
old: Eccl^siae nomine Armamini and contra Ecclesiam Dimicatis. Thus are we
gogled to part with our Christian Liberty for Peace, when as the parting with
the Ceremonies would secure both Peace, Charity, and Christian Liberty. 3. It Is
very Childish to put the determination of those other Terms of Communion upon
the Tresviri, Public wisdom, peace and Charity. For what if they accord not in
their votes about the Terms? what if perhaps Public wisdom should clash with
Charity? Charity should say I will have no Terms of Communion that may exclude
Persons of honest hearts, though weaker Intellectuals; but public wisdom
should contend for some other intercalated conditions, which may render Divine
Institutions more August and solemn; 4. No public wisdom can possibly
Determine upon those other Terms; in a way that shall secure the Interests of
Charity, nor in what cases I am bound for her sake to restrain my self in the
use of my Christian Liberty. For the prudent admeasurement between my Christian
Liberty, and my Charity to my Christian Neighbor, depends upon the view of the
particular Circumstances of time, place, Persons, which cannot come under the
prospect of public wisdom: Suppose a Command were given forth from public
wisdom, that I should at such a time, and in such a place drive a Coach with
violenee down the Highway, and when I come to execute this Command, I find
multitudes of little Children playing in that Highway; the Circumstance of
these Persons was not foreseen by public wisdom; must that therefore take
place of my Charity to destroy the lives of these little ones? or my Charity
submit to public wisdom, and fall pell mell in amongst them? Our Savior has
Commanded us not to offend any of his little ^nes; telling me that if I do, It
were better that a Millstone were hanged about my neck, and I east into the sea:
public wisdom may perhaps command me to do something not sinful in it self,
but when I come to Obey, I find evidently it must scandalize them; I refer it
to Charity, peace, and prudence to determine this case between them.

. 2. His second generous Concession is. There lies now no more bonds upon the
Consciences of Christians, then did upon the Ancient Patriarchs, saving those
improvements our Savior has made upon the Law of Nature, and those few
positive institutions of his expressly set down in the Gospel: And what a
blessed day were it with the Christian world, if we might see this made good!
This would shut out of doors all those Ianus Articles, penned by wise
Reconcilers, to persuade the combating Parties first to shake hands, and then
to fall more suriously to Cudgels. This would shut out of doors all Humane
impositions: forestalling our Communion with the Christian Church.

But now Mark the Retractation. -- And that men obeying these are at liberty to
conform to whatsoever Common Reason, Equity, and public Authority shall
impose. Had he not turned wrong at the Hedge Corner, it should have followed
thus. -- And that men obeying these, are at Liberty to enjoy all the
Privileges of the Gospel. But. 1. Is not this a broad contradiction, that
there is no more bonds upon our Consciences then upon the Patriarchs, and yet we
are bound to submit to those other terms, imposed by public authority? That
is, we are at Lib^rty upon their Terms, but only for one thing, that we are not
at Liberty upon their Terms: And we may serve God as cheap as they, but that we
must serve him at dearer rates: Did Abraham receive the Modes of worshipping
God from Gerar, or the Terms of serving God from Egypt? and yet those Kings
where he sojourned were friendly, and extended their Royal bounty to him. 2. We
are at Liberty to conform to whatsoever common Reason Equity, and public
authority shall impose: At Liberty (...) conform? but are we at Liberty not to
conform, if com^ Reason oppose public Determinations? It Is an idle thing (...)
put the determination of my Liberty upon Reason, Equity and authority, unless
we were assured they should always agree, which yet in some Countries may not
be till the secular Games, or the Greek Calends. 3. This is in effect to say,
that if we obey what Christ commands us, we are at Liberty to give away our
Liberty in all the rest: whereas our Liberty was given us, not to give it away
at a clap, but to dispense it in parcels, as weak Christian^ have occasions to
borrow of us.

. He concedes yet further, for Liberality grows upon his good Nature. Our
Christian enfranchisement discharges us not only from a necessity of observing
the Law of Moses, and the Rites of Judaism, but further, and especially sets us
at Liberty to pursue our own Reason. And can he pretend to be a Rational
Creature, that will not submit to it is Dictates? If ever Christian Liberty have
scope enough, it must be when it exspatiates in the fields of our own Reason; I
am confident, the most straight-Laced precisian cannot pretend he is pincht:
But now the Limitation! -- And to Obey any Laws of men that shall not
contradict the express Laws of the Scriptures.

I suppose there are very few or none in the world that form their Laws
expressly contrary to Scripture Laws, and yet they may make such as may as
effectually frustrate the design of Scripture Laws, as if they had in Terms
point blanck contradicted them: A rare Liberty this is; and was the foundation
of that Gentleman's humor, who profess't he would Preach in a Fools Coat, if
the King should Command him. For I do not remember that that contradicts any
express Law: amongst all the crafty devices of the Devil to induce our
Grandmother Eve to eat of the Tree of Knowledge; and of all the weak excuses
of Eve for eating of that Tree, I wonder: This was not thought on, that it was
not contrary to any express Law of God. For. 2. Genesis 16. God commanded the man
saying, of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely eat: But of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat: But it seems the Devil had not
learnt the Sophistry to evade the precept, because the express Law was given to
the man, and not to the woman: There are Consequ^ntial Laws which we have no
liberty to contradict: That a Minister contradi^t not destroy not the ends of
his Ministry; a Christian the ends of his Christianity: And it had been
impossible that all Negatives should be expressed, Thou shall not stand upon
thy head: Thou shall not wear a Fools Coat: Thou shall not play at Dice, or
Cards, in the Worship of God: but thus he thinks he has made goodprovision for
a safe conformity to the Ceremonies, because it is not said; Thou shall not use
the Cross in Baptism; Thou shall not use Cream, Oil, Spittle; Thou shall not
conjure out the Devil. At which backdore came in all the Superstitious
fopperies of Rome. And with this passeport we may travel all over the world,
from Rome to the Port, from thence amongst the Tarrars, and Chinese, and
conform to all, for perhaps we shall not meet with one Constitution that
contradicts an express Law of Scripture:

4. Concession. p. 191. I have a power in utramque, and may do, or leave undone
all those matters that are not defined in Scripture. This indeed makes amends
for all: for if it be part of my liberty to leave undone, what is not defined
there, as well as to do what is not so, I have no great Reason to complain for
want of liberty; but yet there is a Restriction behind that recals one half of
this -- According as public Laws, and the ends of all Society, shall require.
Thus all along the Reader will observe that he seems to retreat from his Fort
in the Concession, and when we are mounted he springs his Mine, and blows us
all up* with his Retractation. The sum of this liberty then is thus much: we
have a liberty in utramque, but you shall be determined to one: you may do
which you will, provided you do which another commands you; you may pursue your
own Reason, provided you do not pursue it, but the public wisdom; you are not
tied up to any other ins^itutions, save only those plain ones of the Gospel,
provided you be obliged to such other as Authority commands. This is such an
^tramque, that I have been studying what should be the substantive to it, and I
cannot imagine what, unless it be in utramque, either a good benefice, or a
Comfortable importance: I shall further offer these things.

1. Christian Liberty may be restrained by public Authority, and by private
Reason, but if public Authority restrain it one way, and my private Reason
would restrain it another, and the public authority shall carry it against my
own Reason, not only Christian, but Humane Liberty is violated.

2. The perpetual determining of my liberty to one part, that I may in no case
act the other way, whether it be by an external compulsory power, or by my own
superstition, is a violation and destruction of my Christian Liberty.

3. Authority, peace, Charity prevailing with my Reason, to determine one way,
will not violate Christian Liberty, for when the great ends of Peace and
Charity shall cease to be obtained by such determination, it is supposed also
that Reason will cease, and Authority ought to cease, to continue such
determination.

4. If Peace, and Charity shall cease to call for such a determination ad unum,
and thereupon my Reason cease to put me upon such a determination, and yet
Authority shall continue its determination; my Christian Liberty will warrant
me to follow my own Reason.

That which was the intolerable burden of the Jews, which they were not able
to bear, our Enquirer tells, p* 186. was especially this: That the Law of Moses
enjoined a great number of little observances, which by their multitude were
hard to be remembered, by their Nicety difficult to be observed, and by their
mere positive nature, and having no essential goodness in themselves, had less
power upon the conscience of men, to awaken their care, and diligence about
them; and because it is hard for the mind of man to attend to many things at
once, especially if also the things in which his care and obedience is
required, be such as are not enacted in his Conscience, and when he can see no
other Reason of, or advantage by his obedience but merely his obedience,
therefore was that Law called impossible: This, say the Dissenters, would be
their case, should they submit to what the Enquirer pleads for, and there fore
an infringment of their Christian Liberty.

There is one Text of Scripture by which he will prove that his is the true
Notion of Christian Liberty: The Apostle (says he) in several of his Epistles,
but especially that to the Romans, en joins the Christians in their scruples
about eating of certain Meats, and in the conduct of themselves to consult
Charity toward their weak Brethren, the peace of the Church, and their own
edification: to which purpose he advises us to see 14. Romans and Chap. 15. Now
if the Reader will be Ruled by me, we will venture for one quarter of an hour
to look into those places, let the danger be what it will, and I am confident
we shall not find our Christian Liberty determinable by any outward power: v.
3. The Apostle lays down the only true way of maintaining peace and love
amongst Christians under their various apprehensions, and various practices. ^t
not him that eats, despise him that eats not, and let not him that eats
not, judge him that eats. And to this Rule the Canons of 1640. did attend.
Can. 8. We recommending (not commanding) to the serious consideration of all
good people, The doing reverence and obeissance at their coming in, and going
out of the Churches, Chancels, and Chapels in the practice, or omission of
which Rite they desire that the Rule of Charity, prescribed by the Apostle, may
be observed. That they which use this Rite, despise not them which use is not,
and that they who use is not, condemn not those that use it. Which Rule was it
applied to all other matters of the like nature, would undoubtedly preserve
what of Love is left, and recover that measure of Christian amity, which is
lost. Peace may be had under differing notions about indifferent things, and
peace must be had under differing practices suitable to those differing
notions, not by screwing up the weak to the Latitude which the strong allows
himself, nor by pulling down the strong to the narrow practices, wherein the
weak are confined, but by the strong Christians not despising the weak, and the
weak Christians not judging his more grown, and stronger Brother; v. 4. The
Apostle gives a Reason against this uncharitable judgment: who art thou that
judge another man's servant: every Christian as to his Conscience, is Alieni
f^ri: the Servant of God: And if he be summoned before a foreign Tribunal, may
plead, It is Coram non Iudice. To his own Master be stands or falls: v. 5.
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: The things before us may
perhaps be indifferent in themselves, but yet if we have not a full assurance
that they are so, we are bound to suspend our act. For as our rejoicing must be
in our selves, and not in another, so must our satisfaction; It Is not the
clearness of a practice in another mind that will warrant my acting, I must be
fully satisfied in my own mind. v. 13. The Apostle lays down an excellent Rule
for the prudent restraint of our Christian Liberty. Let us not therefore judge
one another, but let every man judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling
block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. If my Christian Liberty will
warrant me to act. yet Christian Charity will teach me to moderate my self in
the use of that liberty, when such acting would occasion the sin of him that is
not so persuaded of the Lawfulness of my fact; which is to be limited to things
of this nature whereof he treats, namely things indifferent, for if my Brother
will be offended at what God has made my duty, there is no remedy, but that he
lay aside his unjust offense, and not that I lay aside my necessary duty: v.
15. The Apostle gives a Reason of his former Rule: If thy Brother be grieved
with thy Meat, then walk thou not charitably; And much more if he be
scandalized, and drawn into sin: Is it not a most unchristian humor to insist
so peremptorily upon doing, because in it self Lawful; when Charity
countermands that doing, and therefore it is unlawful in the use. Destroy not
him with thy meat for whom Christ dyed: surely thou have little value for a
soul redeemed by the blood of Christ, if thou will for a sorry indifferent
thing hazard its eternal damnation: our liberty to act must stand out of the
way, when a Brothers soul comes in place; v. 19. Let us follow the things that
make for peace, and the things that may edify one another. Here we have another
Rule for the restraint of our liberty in things indifferent: When the using my
liberty would disturb the peace of the Church. I must cease to act: for the
strong may forbear what he judges Lawful, and yet the weak cannot do what he
judges sinful: And therefore to the strong he speaks thus: v. 22. Have thou
Faith? have it to thy self before God: Art thou persuaded such a thing is
Lawful, notwithstanding the many violent presumptions of others of it is
sinfulness, keep thy judgment to thy self; trouble not the Church with thy
Orations, let thy disputing talent yield to the weak judgment of others. But to
the weak he speaks thus. v. 23. He that doubts is damned if he eat; because
he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

All this while here is not one syllable of restraining Christian Liberty by the
Authority of another, by outward force, and violence, all must be determined by
a Christians own Prudence, as moved by the edification of another Charity to
his soul, and the peace of the community: not a word to consult my own secular
advantage, and emolument; Not a letter that Conscience, Christian Liberty,
private wisdom, my own Reason must be impressed to militate under the command
and conduct of the public wisdom, the public Reason, or the public
Conscience.

That is therefore the thing which he must bring about by sorr^e lincks of
consequences, some trains of deductions; And he advances toward his
conclusion, by winding stairs, that we may be lead seni^ sine sensu to the top
of his matter, to the height of his design without taking notice of our ascent,
and the whole contrivance of this Chapter lies in the Dexterous management of
this one Engine.

(1) His first Postulatum is this: That Christian Liberty does consist in a
freedom in utramque: (pray do not mistake him) that is, that antecedently to
the Considerations of prudence, peace, and charity, it is equally in the power
of a Christian to do or not to do, any, or all those things that are not
expressly forbidden by the H. Scriptures. Very good! Then I will assume: But to
love God with all my heart, and soul, and strength, is one of those things
which God has not expressly forbidden in the H. Scripture: Therefore
antecedently to the Considerations of prudence, peace and charity, It Is in the
power of a Christian to love, or not to love God with all his heart, and that
Christian Liberty consists in this freedom in utramque.

I am not so uncharitable as to think that the Enquirer owns this conclusion,
or that any principle he holds will infer it: All I note it for is to evince
to him, that he has worded his matters besides his onw intention, and that he
intended really to have said: That Antecedently to the Considerations of
prudence, and charity it is equally in the power of a Christian to do, or not to
do, any or all those things that are not expressly forbidden by, nor contradict
the express Laws of the Scriptures. And taking the words according to the
presumption of his meaning, and not the Letter, I say. 1. Here Is something more
then Truth. That Christian Liberty gives us a power to do what is not expressly
forbidden: many things are forbidden by consequence, which are not expressly
forbidden. I pray show me an express prohibition to recognize the Popes
Supremacy. To subscribe the Tridentine Decrees; And if this be part of the
Enquirers Christian Liberty, to do, what is not expressly forbidden, I hope he
will not find himself aggrieved if we judge that he, and some others of the
same Latitude, are not at so irreconcilable a distance from Rome, as they
would be thought.

2. As all is not Truth, so neither is this the whole Truth: for Christian
Liberty gives us a Power-to do, or not do the things neither commanded, nor
forbidden, not only Antecedently to the considerations of prudence, peace, and
charity, but also. 1. subsequently to those considerations, that is, as soon as
ever those considerations shall ecase; and 2. conco^itantly with those
considerations; that is, further they shall reach: For though (...) suspend my
act in charity to my weak Brother, yet am I empowered to act at the same time
out of the Cognizance of my weak Brother; and as soon as those considerations of
peace and charity shall vanish, no other considerations separate from them,
ought to keep the restraint on foot, but my liberty recovers its former luster.

3. There is much ambiguity in the jumbling, the considerations of prudence,
peace, and charity together: for the considerations of peace and charity are
objective, such as I am to consider as the motives, and inducements to restrain
my liberty: but the consideration of prudence is subjective: that is, Prudence
is that virtue which is to make a judgment, when, and in what cases, those two
peace, and charity, are considerations suffieient to enforce such a restraint:
so that, would we speak plain English, the matter amounts to no more then this:
that Antecedently to my prudent consideration of the concerns of peace, and
charity, I may do, or not do, whatsoever is in it self indifferent: which Truth
will be too feeble a foundation to erect his intended superstructure upon.

(2) His second Postulatum is this: That it is no infringment, but an exercise
of this liberty, actually to be determined to that side toward which prudence,
or charity, shall incline: Though in the mean time the other side be in general
as Lawful as that: It would ill become me to teach him how to word his own
conceptions, though I should rather have chosen to have expressed my self; not
disjunctively. [To that side toward which prudence or charity shall incline]
but rather conjunctively, [prudence and charity] or most properly [prudence at
the invitation of charity] for prudence enclines me neither one way nor other
further then as she is directed by the considerations of peace, and charity,
the good of my self or Neighbor; nor can the interests of these two ever be
divided. But I answer. 1. That it is no infringment of Christian Liberty for
prudence, to determine upon my own act, as that I will not do an indifferent
thing, when peace, and the spiritual good of my Brother prohibit me; Because
the Scripture, which contains the Charter of Christian Liberty, has also
directed my prudence, thus, and in this case to restrain it: but yet (which is
the thing he drives at) to be determined to one side by outward power, civil
force, naked Authority, or will; when my own Reason can see no Prudence is such
a Determination, is an evident infringment of my liberty: so that to be
determined to one side may be an infringment, when I am determined by violence,
or menaces; and yet to determine my self upon the considerations of Charity,
and Peace, may be none; for in the former case, I see no Reason of my
obedience, but my obedience; but in the latter I am determined by my own
election, upon rational grounds, becoming a rational Creature.

2. Though a prudential determination not to act, at the Request or command of
peace, and charity, when otherwise I might have acted, be no infringment of my
Radical Liberty, yet it is a restraint of my Liberty, which the Enquirer calls,
p. 208. A denying himself some part of his liberty, and therefore it seems
improperly called an exercise of Liberty: It Is indeed an exercise of my
Prudence, an exercise of my Charity, but hardly an exercise of my Liberty,
further then as the will is the principle of such restraint, and determination.

3. Though Prudence man teach me not to act, but to adhere to the side of
Charity; yet Prudence must not take her measures for not acting from such poor,
low, selfish considerations, as the saving, or gaining those outward advantages
to my self, which are the great Idols of Prudence salsely so called, which is
no better then carnal policy, and sinful selfishness; but from the interest of
Gods glory, the advancement of his Gospel, and all this bondfide, for if
Prudence mistakes in her reckonings, an imaginary good end will not indemnify,
and save her harmless.

(3) These two points thus gained (as the Enquirer fancies) will give abundant
foundation for a third to be inferred from them, viz. That whatsoever is so
free to me, that I may do it, or not do it, according as I shall be inclined by
the considerations of Brotherly charity, and compassion, must of necessity be
also, as free to me to obey the Magistrate, and serve public peace, and order
in.

Let us but resolve this unwieldy proposition into it is distinct branches, and
we shall need no more to expose it is nakedness. 1. What soever I may do at the
command of charity, I may do at the command of Authority in order to public
peace: Now to furnish him with a minor: but I may practice the Ceremonies at
the command of Charity, therefore I may practice them at the command of
Authority in order to public peace. And now for the proof of the minor we are
as far to seek as ever.

This then is the Quintessence of his Reasonings, the utmost resort of all the
wit, and learning of this Chapter, which in other, and more advantageous words
to his purpose he gives us thus: Whatsoever I usay do in compassion to my
Brothers infirmity, surely that I may much more do in Reverence to Gods
Ordinance, the Lawful Magistrate, which is the point I have all this while
drove at.

But this conclusion however he seems cock-sure of it, will no ways follow from
those premises. And the fallacy of it is so thin that it is transparent to the
weakest eye. In the first postulatum he allows a freedom to act in utramque,
antecedently to the Considerations of Prudence, peace, and Charity: In the
second he asserts, that it is no infringment of this Liberty to be determined to
one side by prudence, or Charity. In his third, that we may (and therefore may)
act or not act according as we shall be determined by Authority. I shall sum
up my answer in these particulars, and conclude.

. 1. Though the Lawful Magistrate be Gods Ordinance, yet it remains a Question
und-cided, whether he be Gods Ordinance so far, and for this end, to deter^ of
things indifferent, antecedently to the determination of Gods providence, by
gathering together all due Circumstances which ought to determine the Natural
indifferency of the things aforesaid: Many things are true secundum quid, which
are not so simpliciter. But if he shall judge it a Prize worth all his labor
to impose upon us with so broad a Sophism, much good may his own Dream do him.

. 2. Though the Lawful Magistrate be Gods Ordinance, yet it is a greater
Question still, whether he may determine my Liberty in utramque, to the one
side, when Charity would determine it to the other: that is whether he has
power to Command me to act, when Charity prohibits me to act, or make it my
duty to move, when Charity commands me to stand still.

It Is true the concerns of a true and desirable peace, and Charity are
inseparable: nothing can advance the design of the former, but what does really
subserve the interest of the latter: for so has the Apostle conjoined them, 14.
Romans 19. Let us follow after the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith we may edify one another. Whatsoever advances the edification of my
Brother, advances also Peace, unless imprudent men have made the Terms of peace
so desperate, that it is not attainable, without the ruin of Charity, which the
Enquirer confesses an essential part of our Religion: but yet it is possible
that the Command of a Magistrate may oppose the concerns of Charity, in which
case, I think without offense I may say, he is none of Gods Ordinance to that
end and purpose, nor has God given me any Liberty to obey in that case: And as
such a Command would be a direct invasion of my Christian Liberty, so obedience
to such a command would be a plain betraying of it: If therefore the freedom to
act in utramque he determined to the one side, by charity. I have no freedom
(under that posicure of Circumstances) to submit to a determination to the
other side at the Command of Authority.

. 3. As the Lawful Magistrate is Gods Ordinance, so is it an express Ordinance
of the same God, not to use my Liberty in indifferent things, when by such use
my Brother is made weak, or stumbled, or offended. 14. Romans 21: And it is a hard
way of concluding; That what one Ordinance of God countermands, that I may do
at the command of another. God has oftens superseded general Commands by
special ones, but I find not that he has instituted any general Ordinance to
suspend the duties of a special Command. He that says, If thy Brother be
offended, eat not, has given no power to any to say; Though thy Brother be
offended, yet eat! And if our own prudence upon the view of all Circumstances
shall determine that it is my duty not to act at the prohibition of Charity,
notwithstanding a Command to act by the Magistrate, yet cannot this be
interpreted Irreverence to Gods Ordinance the Lawful Magistrate, unless we will
suppose, that by showing obedience to the one, we must be irrevertent to the
other of Gods Ordinances.

. 4. Christian Liberty is committed to every Christian to keep for the use and
behoof of his weak Brother, and not to resign at the mere pleasure of another:
Public peace, and Charity shall not need to weigh against one another, for
their interests sweetly meet together, and kiss each other; but when a Command
issuing out from will, pleasure, and bare power, shall come in composition with
them, Christian Liberty has secured me, and prudence will counsel me, and
Charity enclines me, and God commands me what course to steer, which way to
take.

. 5. The Magistrate himself is Gods Ordinance, the great Officer and Minister
of Jesus Christ to secure, and preserve the great Charter of Christian Liberty
sacred, and inviolate, against all the encroachments of those who would commit
a rape upon a Privilege, in it self so innocent, to others so useful, and in
the price paid for it so invaluably dear and precious.

The sum of which is this much, that though charity and peace are always
agreed when to use, when to restrain my liberty, yet if any power without
reference to the concerns of these shall endeavor to restrain my liberty, by
commanding me to do what Reason and Prudence shall inform me, are repugnant to
those ends; such Command is a plain infringment of my liberty, and my obedience
a plain abuse of my liberty, unless we can imagine. That it is an exercise of my
Christian Liberty to act against the great ends of Christianity; or an exercise
of my freedom to run against the Dictates of my judgment, and Conscience.

To conclude therefore, if this be that great thing, he has all this while
drove at, I must tell him, he drives at too surious a rate for me to keep pace
with him; but thus would Phaeton drive, though he set the world on fire; such
was Iehue's Career, though he sought himself more then God, and so have I seen
your hair-brained Drivers resolve to whistle out their whilstle, though the
Cart turn over.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a Tender Conscience; what it is? and it is Privileges.

IT was a malicious Artifice of Julian the Apostate, to erect the Images of the
Heathen Gods in the Forum near his own statue, reducing hereby the Christians
to this Dilemma either to seem to worship the Images, whilst they Reverenced
his statue, or to contemn their Sovereign, by refusing to bow before the
Images: into the same straights would the Masters of Ceremonies bring us: That
either our Loyalty must Argue us into a Conformity to their intentions: or
Nonconformity shall be an interpretative contempt of Authority: Thus has it
ever been a succesful Policy to twist their own concerns with those of Majesty*
and Royalty, that they may not be separated. And when they have laid up their
little knacks amongst the sacred (...), in his Majesty's Jewel-house, to touch
one Ceremony, is to steal the Crown.

Conscience has ever hitherto maintained a good Repute amongst the more
Civilized part of Mankind, and he has been adjudged a Person unmeet for
converse, that should once prostitute and debauch it; It will therefore he
expedient at least, first to represent it as an usurper, and then to execute it
as a Traitor.

I pitied that Innocent Person who being fast asleep, and dreaming no harm, an
assassinat puts into his hand the bloody knife wherewith he had committed an
execrable Murder: upon which violent presumption being apprehended he is
arraigned, condemned, executed.

Thus the Jews found no better way to deliver our B. Savior over to the
Secular Powers, then to misrepresent him as an Enemy to Temple, and Caesar;
Church, and State: and when they had arrayed him in a Mock-robe, put a
Reed-sceptet in his hand, and a Crown of Thorns on his head, lead him out with
Triumph to be Crucified.

The Enquirer being very sensible that this Conscience has been an old Enemy to
the dear concerns of Ceremony, tells us feelingly: That unless we can pull down
this usurper, we must look for no Magistracy; and except we discover the
weakness and absurdity of this pretension, all endeavors of Restoring
uniformity in the Church will be vain, and useless.

The Masterpiece of Iezabels Policy was to make Naboth more then he desired to
be, that he might be really less then he deserved to be. 1. King. 21. 9.
Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth on high among the people; and set two men Sons
of Belial to bear false witness against him saying: Thou did blaspheme God
and the King; then carry him out, and stone him that he may dye.

This Conscience (says he) is thought to have not only a privilege, but a kind
of praerogative, to carry with it an exemption from all humane Laws, but
especially Ecclesiastical; it pretends to be Gods peculiar, and exempt from any
inferior Cognizance; Nay it looks like a Dictatorian Authority, and seems to
be Legibus soluta, This (they would make us believe) can limit the Magistrate,
null Laws. forbid execution, and which is more, change the very nature of
things, and make that good and holy, which was wicked, and rebellious before.
This can Canonize any Opinion, Legitimate any Action, warrant any extravagancy
in the person that owns it, Whatsoever he thinks, can be no Heresy; and
whatsoever he does, can be no sin:

In which charge he has sprinkled here and there a word of Truth, for he that
would be believed in a great falsehood, must be sure to intersperse some little
verities. Conscience is a most Absolute Monarch indeed, if it has all these
praerogatives, but this is the great praerogatives of his own Conscience, to
bear salfe witness against his Neighbor; and (if we may call things by their
proper Names) by unworthy, scandalous insinuations, sinister reflections, and
false accusations against Dissenters, to provoke the Magistrate to proscribe
them as Outlaws. But I answer.

. 1. The highest Immunities I ever met with, ascribed to Conscience are in
Bishop Saunderson, a most Zealous stickler for Ceremonies. Sermon. on 14. Rom,
23. There cannot (says he) be imagined a higher contempt of God then for a Man
to despise the power of his own Conscience, which is the highest under Heaven,
as being Gods most immediate Deputy for the Ordering his life, and ways; (...).
Could the Heathen say. Conscience is a God to all men; which is somewhat a
higher Note, then the Enquirer makes the Dissenters sing: that it pretends to
be Gods peculiar, and is exempt from any inferior Cognizance.

. 2. It Is a most injurious charge, if applied to Non-conformists, that
Conscience can alter the nature of things, make that good which was wicked, and
Rebellious before; etc. All they say in this particular is with A^es. These. de
Consc: 18. Tanto vis est Conscientiae, ut actionem sua natura mediam, efficiat
Bonam, vel malam; and sua natura Bonam, reddat malam, quamvis illam quae sua
natura, mala est, non possit convertere in Bonam. So great is the power of
Conscience, that it can make an Action in it self indifferent, to become either
good or evil (viz. to the Person) and an Action, in it is own Nature good, to
become evil. Although it cannot make that which is in it is own Nature evil, to
become good. Which Powers are clearly ascribed to Conscience by the Apostle. 1.
The power to make an indifferent, or good action in it self, to become evil to
him that judges it to be evil, and yet will venture upon it: 14. Romans 14. To
him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. 2. It Is power
to make an indifferent thing good: using it to Gods Glory, with all other due
circumstances, is clear also from 1. Tit. 15. Unto the pure all things are
pure. But that it can alter the nature of things; that it can make an action
evil in it self to become good, that it can null Laws, are such powers, as no
Casuists have ever attributed to it, but those whose Consciences carry an
exemption from any necessity of speaking truth, when it is in order to the
Advancement of their cause. But it is too common for men to charge others with
the wickedness of their own thoughts, and hearts, and what was once their own
Old Crime, to make other men's New Accusations.

. 2. As to the Power of Conscience to excuse Error from Heresy: we say, that
there may be a material Heresy, which is not formally so: what a Man judges to
be a real Truth, though possibly it may be a dangerous Error; yet unless there
was Prava Dispositie as the cause of that Error, or something of Obstinacy in
the will in Adhaering to it; Error, and Heterodoxy it is, but Heresy it cannot
be; that is, it will not Denominate the Person a Heretic: Thus the Learned and
judicious Mr. Hales: Heresy is an act of the will, not of the Reason; and is
indeed a lie, not a mistake: for else how could that saying of Austin be true.
Errare possum haereticus esse nolo. I may possibly mistake, but am resolved
never to be an Heretic: That is, by a tenacious and obstinate abetting any
mistake after Conviction.

There are three things which we are obliged to wait upon our Enquirer in. 1.
Whilst he entertains us with his discourse what Conscience is. 2. What a Tender
Conscience is. 3. What privileges, or exemptions it may claim to?

[1] What Conscience is: Now (says he) if men loved plain English, and to
understand what they say, it is plainly this, and no more: a man's own mind, or
understanding, under the distinct consideration of reflecting upon himself, his
own actions, and duty. He may call this plain English, if he pleases, define,
and describe his own Conscience how he will, but we poor people are edified
much what as with the Rhemists Parasceve, Azymes, and Paraclete; who seeing
there was no remedy but they must Translate, were resolved that few should be
the wiser for the translation.

There are somethings that look oddly in this Description.

. 1. It seems very improper to assign the mind or understanding for the Genus
of Conscience. For Conscience is not a faculty, but an Act seated in a faculty;
Or the exercise of the faculty of the understanding, putting the will upon
operation: Thus that forementioned Bishop. ibid. The will of Man (which is the
Fountain whence all our Actions immediately flow) should conform it self to the
judgment of the Practique understanding, as to it is immediate Rule, and yield
it self to be guided by it; And indeed the Office of Conscience is not only to
judge what is good or evil, according to those Notices it has of God from the
light of Nature, and Scripture, nor only to take Cognizance whether the will
has obeyed those Dictates of the practique understanding, but to be a monitor
and Counselor, nay a Commander to the will to act according to it is
Discoveries of good or evil. This is good, therefore I charge thee to do it:
and this is evil, therefore I command thee to avoid it.

. 2. It seems very defective, in that it tells us of the mind reflecting upon
actions, and yet mentions not with Reference to whose Authority it is so
pragmatical, as to meddle with those Actions: whereas all that Conscience
Dictates as a Counselor; ^ll that Conscience Determines as a Judge, is in the
Name of the supreme and sovereign Jehovah. 4. Jam. 12. There Is one Lawgiver
who is able to save, and to destroy, and who are thou that judge another? 14.
Romans 4. Who art thou that judge another man's Servant; to his own Master he
stands or falls.

. 3. His Description seems very lame, in that he makes the whole employment of
Conscience to be reflection: whereas it is in it is Commission to Dictate before
the fact, as well as to reflect upon the fact. It teaches what we ought to do,
as well as enquires and examines whether we have done well or no: And such a
faiture will expose us to great mistakes in this case; as that we are not bound
to examine the Lawfulness of our work before we act; but to rush Headlong upon
the precipices of dubious and suspected things, and examine them afterward at
leisure. Whereas the Apostle condemns the Gentiles, especially that they knew
before such and such things to be evil, and worthy of Death, and yet not only
did those things, but took pleasure in those that did them. 1 Romans 32.

Of such a Conscience as this he will certainly make a proportionable
emprovement: For scarcely (says he) any man that says his Conscience is
incontrollable will say, his own Opinion or Reason is the ultimate Rule of his
actions. Truly I believe so, nor any man neither that says his Conscience is
Controllable, except he be out of his senses: for I would sainbe in formed what
an ultimate Rule signifies, with him that pretends to speak plain English, to
them that understand nothing else? I have heard of a subordinate and ultimate
End: And I have heard also of a near, and a Remote Rule, but an ultimate Rule
like that Monster which was like a horse, and yet not a horse, is like sense,
but in truth very Nonsense.

All that we affirm of Conscience as it is a Rule, is no more but this: That it
is the next, and immediate Guide, and Director of our Actions; And that the
mind of God, however notified to us, is the next and immediate Governor, or
Director of Conscience; That as nothing can possibly intervene between the
Command of Conscience-, and the will and executive power in Man; so nothing can
possibly interpose between the Authority of God and the Conscience; and both
these are expressly owned by the above mentioned learned Person. Dr. S. 1. That
God is the immediate Controller of Conscience by his word, and will revealed to
us. Conscience (says he) is Gods most immediate Deputy, for the ordering the
life, and ways of men. 2. That Conscience is the immediate Rule of our Actions;
The will of Man (says he) should conform it self to the judgment of the
practique understanding, as to it is proper, and immediate Rule.

And such were once the Notions of that great Man, when he is professedly
pleading the cause of Conformity, which had never been waved but that wise men
are aware, the cause not to be tenable, if Conscience be not made a piece of
Nonsense, whose Nature and Office are therefore inconsiderable, because
unintelligible.

But some wise men or other it seems have formed a parcel of objections (or
else he has formed them to their hands) which h^ will answer, and then suppose
himself victorious.

1 Objection, Allowing Conscience to be nothing but the mind of Man, yet even
so it is subject to no humane Laws: for as much as no Man can force me to think
otherwise then I do, nor Compel me to be of his opinion, in the inward sense of
my mind; my mind therefore or Conscience is only obnoxious to God.

To which he Replies. [The answer to this is easy! for since my mind is not
insallible: I may and must have something to guide my mind, and that is it
which we call Law.]

To which I rejoin. That this is an easy, but not a satisfactory answer. For.
1. The Remedy is not proportionable to the disease: For if the Reason why my
mind must have something else to guide it, be, because the mind is not
infallible: the same Reason will inform us to have recourse to a better guide
then that which he calls Law, because Humane Laws are not infallible: It will
mend the matter but sorrily to take me of from one fallible guide, and send me
to another. 2. Since the mind of man is thus fallible, and there is a necessity
that it have something else to guide it in it is determinations, God has
provided an infallible directory in his word, in all things concerning his
immediate Worship, and that is it which we call the Law of God.

3. But if the mind of Man be fallible in it is Directions, as well as Humane
Laws, It Is safer to be guided by that which God has made my next Director
though fallible, then by that which being also fallible, he has not made so.
God has constituted Conscience the next, and immediate Counselor to my will,
the next, and immediate Deputy under himself, and therefore to err with a
Humane Canon, against the voice of Conscience, is to despise and contemn the
Authority of God in whose Name it speaks; whereas to err with my Conscience,
against an Humane Decrre, is but a part of that frailty, to which all imperfect
Creatures are obnoxious. 4. Nor is it universally true what he says: that the
Law (of Man) morally obliges (to follow it is Directions) that is, it will be my
sin, if I do not: for it may be my sin, if I do obey in some cases; as well as
my sin, if I do not in others; at least the Apostles were of this opinion. 4.
Act. 19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you more then
God judge ye. Whatever inconveniences therefore shall ^rise, from an absolute
resignation either to the Laws of men, or to our own minds directed by natural
light, we have the infallible word of God, which is a light to our feet, and a
Lamp to our paths, for the guidance of our particular Actions.

2. Object: But we are beund to obey the Dictates of our mind, or Conscience
before any Law, or Command of any humane Authority, if they happen to interfere.

He replies. It Is true in things notoriously, and plainly evil. -- But where
those (the Law of God, or Reason) are silent, there the Law of the Magistrate
is the Immediate Rule of my Conscience, and then to contradict that, is to
affront the Public Tribunal, with a private Consistory, etc.

To which I Rejoin.. That he has given away his whole cause by this one
Concession. That a higher Law of God or Reasen may make a nullity in the Law of
the Magistrate: for if Reason in any case may make such a nullity: it must
either be the public Reason, or the private Reason: If the former: then it
amounts to no more then this goodly maxim, that the Magistrates Reason may
make a nullity in his Law. But if it be the latter: that private Reason may
make such a nullity, then Conscience guided, and directed by that Reason cannot
transgress the Law, because Reason has already disannulled it, as to that
particular Person: And if it be said, that it is only in things notoriously
evil, that Reason has this Sovereignty to make a nullity in the Law; It Is
easily answered, that whatever my Reason judges evil, is notoriously evil as to
me, for I have no way to make out the Notoriety of the evil of a thing, but my
Reason informing it self from Gods Word.

. 2. We are bound to obey the Dictates of our own Consciences, in not acting
against them in those things which only appear notoriously evil; And God
himself has tied up Conscience from taking one step under those apprehensions.
14. Romans 14. To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean. And the Reasons are very evident. 1. Because Bonum oritur ex integris,
malum e quolibet Defectu. The want of that single Circumstance of the
satisfaction of my Judgment that it is Lawful makes the action sin. 2. He that
has a prepared mind to act contrary to what he takes to be the Law of God,
would act accordingly, if it really were the Law of God. As he that dares to
strike a private Person, whom he takes for a Magistrate, would no doubt have
struck him though he had been a Magistrate: Every man takes the voice of
Conscience to be the voice of God, and he that will disobey that Dictate which
he supposes the voice of God, will disobey that dictate which really proves to
be his voice.

3. The goodness, or evil of an action is much estimated by the will of the
Deer. He that judges an action evil, and yet will do it; God sees that though
the thing was not evil, yet he had an evil will. The Action was not materially
evil, but it was so interpretative. I must once more quote the same Learned
person: If a Man (says he) be fully persuaded in his Conscience, that a thing
is unlawful, which yet in Truth is not so, the thing by him so judged unlawful
cannot be done without sin. Even an erroneous Conscience binds thus far, that
a Man cannot go against it, and be guiltless; because his practice should then
run cross to his judgment, and so the thing could not be done in faith: for if
his reason judge the thing to be evil, and yet he will do it, it argues
manifestly, that he has a will to do evil, and so becomes a Transgressour of
Gods General Law, which binds all men to eschew all evil.

. 3. Nor is this to affront the public Tribunal with a private Consistory, nor
set up my own opinion against Gods institution: for it is Gods own institution,
14. Romans 5. Eet every Man be fully persuaded in his own mind.

3. Objection: But if after all my Consideration of the Reason of public Laws,
I cannot satisfy my self of the Lawfulness of the thing commanded, I must then
Govern my self by my Conscience, and not by the Law.

He Replies. If the unlawfulness of the thing commanded is not as plain, and
visible, as the Command of God for obeying Authority, my opinion, or
Conscience, will be no excuse to me; Because I forsake a Certain Rule, to
follow an uncertain.

To which I Rejoin: That he has made a very unaequal Comparison: viz. Between
the unlawfulness of the particular thing; and the general Command of obeying:
whereas the comparison ought to have been between; either Gods General Command
not to act against my Conscien; and his General Command to obey Authority; or
else between the unlawfulness of that particular action, and Gods Command to
obey in that particular: It is plain in the General, that I ought to obey
Authority. And it is as plain in the General, that I ought not to sin against
the dictate of my Conscience. It may be doubtful, and not so plain, that this
particular action is sinful; but then it is doubtful, and no more plain, that in
this case it is my duty to obey. Compare the General Law of obeying the Laws,
with the general Law of not sinning against my Conscience, and it is much more
plain, visible, or what he pleases, that I ought not to sin against my
Conscience, then that I ought to obey the Laws of Humane appointment; for that
I ought to obey the latter admits of many exceptions, but that I ought not to
act against the former admits of none. And if Conscience may deceive me in a
particular instance; so also may the Law deceive me in the particular Command.

This will more evidently appear, if we take the Ranverse of the case, thus: If
the Lawfulness of the thing commanded by the Law, be not as plain and visible,
as the Command of God not to act against Conscience, no Command of the
Magistrate will excuse me, because I forsake a certain Rule, to follow an
uncertain.

God commands me to obey Authority the same God commands me not to sin against
my light. In some cases I am not bound to obey Authority; but in no case am I
allowed to act against my light: It Is very clear that the Magistrate has a
power to Command, but not so clear that he has a power to determine things
indifferent, and make those determinations the conditions of my enjoying the
means of Salvation: But it is very certain, that Conscientia errenea ligat,
licet non obligat, An erroneous Conscience though it oblige me not to act
against what God has made a Duty; yet it binds me up from ever acting against
it is Convictions; And therefore it is safest to adhaere to the clearer side, and
not to act against the Decission of Conscience, in compliance with a Command
which it is uncertain whether it oblige or no.

And in a word, if this way of our Enquirers Reasoning be solid; Then it will
not excuse a Protestant from sin, who refuses to how before an Image when the
Magistrate Commands it; Because it is plain in the general, that we ought to
obey Authority, but not so plain that it is sinful to how before an Image, if
things disputable be less plain then indisputable.

4. Objection: But if after all endeavors of satisfying my self to Obey the
Humane Law, yet the thing commanded by the Magistrate (however innocent in it
self) seems to be as plainly unlawful, as obedience is plainly a duty; What Now?

He replies,) This case is pityable, and will make some abatement of the sin of
Disobedience, but it does not totally excuse it, much less make a nullity in
the Law.

To which I Rejoin. That he has now made a very noddy of his Objector. That can
suppose the thing commanded innocent in it self. and yet to seem to him as
plainly unlawful as obedience is a Duty: But to the thing. 1. He has put the
case very unfaithfully: For we suppose the things controverted, though Lawful
in their abstracted natures, (and what actions are not so?) yet to be really
unlawful in their use, upon a just ballancing of all Circumstances: for we
conceive many things Lawful out of worship, which in worship are not so: Many
things Lawful when used without offense, which are otherwise when they give
offense to the weak: Many things Lawful when Conscience is satisfied, which are
not so under it is real dissatisfactions; many things Lawful to be used, under
the power of which it is sinful to be brought: 2. We say not that Conscience
makes a nullity in the Law, but that under present Circumstances it will not
suffer us to act: But if we had said so, we might perhaps have drunk in the
Delusion from his own words so lately quoted. Some higher Law of God, or
Reason, by which my Conscience is guided, has in that case made a nullity in
the Law of the Magistrate. 3. His Reason: Because s^n is a Transgression of the
Law. Applied to the Law of God is true; but when applied to the Law of Man, is
not of universal Truth: sor neither is the transgression of a humane Law always
a s^n: Nor at any time is it the formal Reason of sin, but because such
transgression of the humane Law, transgresses some particular Law of God, or at
least that General Law, to obey where we ought to do.

[2] His second Enquiry is What is a Tender Conscience? And here that nothing
sacred might escap^ the pe^ulancy of Privileged Drolery, he is in a Rapture of
facetiousness, and makes fine spout with poor Tender Conscience.

When Josiah that great Pattern of all Royal virtues, the great instance of
ripe Grace in green years had heard the book of the Law read, with those
dreadful comminations thundered out against prevarication in that holy Law, and
had duly considered how his people had incurred the menaces by violating the
praecepts thereof, he rent his clothes, and went to Enquire of the Lord. who
gives him this Answer: Because thy heart was Tender, and thou have humbled thy
self, I also have heard thee, says the Lord, 2. Kin. 22. 19.

Wisdom it self has taught us: That the man is happy that fears always; but
he that hardens himself, shall fall into mischief. 28. Prove. 14. They that know
the World is thick sown with snares, and those snares baited with suitable
temptations, will see Reason to walk very cautelously toward the world, and to
maintain a Godly jealousy over themselves, least they be surprised with the
deceitfulness of sin: But there are a daring sort of jolly Adventurers, that
fear no colors; that will come up to the mouth of a Canon, that neither regard
Gods threatenings, or warnings, the Devils stratagems, or the Ambuscadoes of the
flesh, but being foolhardy, make a mock of sin, and all preciseness about it;
who think it a piece of gallantry to dance on the brink of that praecipice,
that hangs over the bottomless pit, and can find no fitter essays of their
valor, and skill, then how to come within a hairs-breadth of Hell, and yet not
tumble in. And these are the men that fall into mischief.

This tenderness of heart being of so great price in the sight of God, we must
expect it will not escape long the severe lashes of virulent spirits; but it
will be difficult to persecute a thing so innocent before it be exposed, and
therefore they advise themselves from Amnon's example, who first defiled, and
then reviled his Sister Tamar.

A tender Conscience (says this Compassionate Enquirer) is nothing but either
an ignorant or uninstructed mind, or a sickly, melancholy, and superstitious
understanding, which he might more concisely have described without this vast
expense of words. A tender Conscienced person is one that has a soft place in's
Head: or had he but spoke in plain English, as he did in the Definition of
Conscience. He is a most profound Coxcomb.

They who preach this Doctrine to the World, might with the same labor, and
almost equal honesty, preach God out of the World: for whoever would dethrone
God from the heart, discovers but an impotent Ambition to pluck him down from
his throne in Heaven: But when they have run through all their vain methods to
excusse his sovereignty, God will maintain to himself an Authority in the
Conscience.

Nay this will destroy the Magistrates power also in a while, for whose sake
the Contrivance is pretended; for when subjects are once instructed so far to
debauch conscience, that though we judge an action sinful, yet we may do it, it
will lead to this easy inference, that though we judge the Magistrates Commands
Lawful, yet we may disobey them: for as we say, when men have got a hole in
their hearts, one concern will drop through after another without regret.

When the Italians would call any one Fool with an Emphasis, they say He is a
Christian! Hence forwards when the Devil would shame his modester Servants from
cowardice in sinning, he has a nickname for them, these are your men of tender
Consciences! And that which has been a Holy Engine of Gods wisdom to secure
from sin, shall now become the Devils Machine to flish raw novices in it.

That a tender Conscience is a good Conscience, has been hitherto presumed by
all our Divines; and I never met with a Collect in the Liturgy of any Church
that taught us to pray from the great plague of a tender Conscience, Good Lord
deliver us? which yet if it be so great a judgment, we may presume they would
have done. But the Enquirer is of another judgment, and perhaps may proselite
us with his Reasons.

1. Reason. Tenderness cannot be taken in the same Latitude with a good
Conscience, every good man has such a tenderness as to be afraid of sin, and
to decline the occasions of it: If this argument has any strength in it, it
must be because every good man is a Fool: But why I pray cannot a good, and a
tender Conscience meet in every good man? Oh the Reason is this, It would be
too arrogant and presumptuous for those that plead the tenderness of their
Consciences to suppose themselves the only men that make Conscience of what
they do. But if a tender Conscience be a good Conscience, it will be
nevertheless good, because some unjustly pretend to it, or others unjustly
revile it. Dissenters do not suppose themselves the only men that make a
Conscience of what they do; It suffices them to enjoy the peace of their own
without daring to judge other men's Consciences.

2. Reason: Because (says he) Then the contrary to it must be a brawny
Conscience. Well! what hurt is there in that? Soft and hard; tender, and
call^us; sensible and brawny, have been opposed before this dispute began: a
heart of stone is opposed to a heart of flesh, and would it not be a way of
Reasoning well-becoming a Rhethorician, to argue, a heart of flesh cannot
possibly be a good heart, the contrary to it then will be a stony heart. The
whole argument stands thus: If a tender Conscience be a good Conscience, then
the contrary to it must be a brawny or hard Conscience; now assume. But a
brawny or hard Conscience cannot be contrary to a tender Conscience, ergo* etc.
He that has nothing else to do with his time, let him abuse it in answering
such Syllogisms.

Ay! but (says he) this would be too contumelious to reproach all men but
themselves with: very admirable! As if the no^ions of words, or things were to
be taken from men's rash applications of them to themselves or others. A tender
Conscience would be a good Conscience, though the Enquirer had the confidence
to Monopolize all Tenderness to himself: And a brawny Conscience will be an
evil one, though he should be so contumelious as to asperse all others but
himself with it:

This way of Arguing is a shoe that will fit any man's foot, serve any man's
occasions, as will as the owners.

A Tender Conscience cannot be an ignorant mind, for it would be too
presumptuous and Arrogant for those that reproach it to account themselves the
only wise men on earth: And then the contrary to it must be an enlightened mind;
and it would be too contumelious to reproach all the world for Fools but their
own precious selves.

Use, is the grand Master of words: He that will speak as others sp^ak, must
either understand as they do, or be content to be misunderstood: A Tender
Conscience amongst us of the Populace, is Conscience under that Office of
warning us of the danger of sin; it Advises us to take the safer side in things
dubious, and rather avoid the smoke for fear of the Fire, then with Empedocles
rush into the smoke and find our ruin.

But the best of our Entertainment is yet behind: for he will now read a very
Learned Lecture to this Tender Conscience: which in my weak judgment is
monstrously absurd, seeing he supposes his Auditors to be all Fools. Men of
ignorant minds, or sickly understandings: The business lies here, how a Tender
Conscience must be qualified, that it may enjoy it is Privileges?

. 1. He that pleads for compassion upon the account of his weakness (that is
his Tenderness) must be so ingenious as to submit himself to Instruction: And
if the Enquirer must be the Instructor; He deserves to wear a Fools Coat for
his pains, for I would gladly learn that as the first Lecture; what is the
Nice, and Critical difference between a Tender, and a Compassionate Enquirer?

There are two points they say of wisdom, the first that we be able to advise
our selves, the second, that being Conscious of our own inability, we be
willing to submit to the advice of others, wiser then our selves: But this
tender Conscience being such a widgeon, it cannot be expected he should be
guilty of such ingenuity.

. 2. He that pretends to tenderness of Conscience, must make good his claim by
being uniformly conscientious. The plain meaning whereof is this: That he that
pretends to be a Fool, must ^qually maintain the Humor, and carry on the
Allegory of folly all the days of his life; otherwise (as he wisely observes)
it will be but Pharisaism!

To prove which deep Point he instances in David; whose Heart smote him when he
cut of the Skirt of Saul's garment, but it would never have been called
Tenderness of Conscience in David, if at another time he should have attempted
the life of Saul. And what he says is very true, if we take Tenderness of
Conscience in it is true and proper acceptance; but nothing more Ridiculous,
nay more dangerous, should we according to his New Notion, take a Tender
Conscience for a weak understanding.

I ask! Did David's heart smite him when he cut of Saul's garment? Yes! But was
it out of Tenderness of Conscience that it smote him? why yes! The Enquir^r has
just now told you so, are you deaf? Ay! But is a Tender Conscience nothing but
an ignorant or uninstructed mind, a sickly melancholy, or superstitious
understanding? why should you be so importunate? It can be nothing else: The
Enquirer has defined it so in plain English: Why then this is in plain English
the Doctrine under which his Auditors must be prepared for their privileges.
That David being a Tender hearted, that is, a Tender headed Person, through the
Tenderness, that is, the slenderness of his crazed intellectuals, coming under
the distinct Consideration of Reflecting upon his own action, in a melancholy,
and superstitious qualme rebuked himself for cutting of the Skirt of Saul's
garment.

But by his good favor this is too severe a Censure of that Holy Act of David,
whose Tender Conscience (after some surprizal) being recovered, and awakened,
sever^ly schooled him that he durst make so near an approach to the Destroying,
by the touching of the Lords Anointed. But such glosses he might find in some
old pair of Bandeleers -- Priscae vestigia fraudis.

Thus the Jews out of ignorance crucified Christ. 3. Act. 17. But when
Conscience was well informed, and sprinkled with that Blood which they had once
shed; when Grace had applied that to their Hearts, which they rashly imprecated
upon their Heads, they were pricked in their Consciences, and cried out Men,
and Brethren what shall we do? It was ignorance that lead to that murder, but a
Conscience made Tender, and reflecting upon their own act, which caused them to
repent of, and turn from their sin. The Rule indeed is a most excellent one in
it self, though wickedly applied in this particular; He that claims the
Privileges of a Tender Conscience, must make good his claim by being uniformly
Conscientious. For he that is Tender of eating a black-pudding, and yet not
tender of the blood of the Saints: he that scruples the Omission of a Ceremony,
though his weak Brother perish by it, yet never scruples to bear false witness,
nor to murder the reputation of another; he that is tender of the Ceremonial
Law of Man, and yet makes no bonds of the Moral Law of God: must not be allowed
to plead this Privilege; Though any one may be allowed the privilege of our
Authors tender Conscience, which is only this: That if he holds any Land in
Capite, he shall be begged for a Fool.

. 3. He that is truly Tender, if he cannot do all that is Commanded, yet will
do all he can. He that cannot bow at the Name of Jesus, yet perhaps can stand
up at the Creed. But what now if this instance of his Tenderness be
impertinent? I question whether bowing at the naming of Jesus be Commanded!
However Dissenters are excused by this Reason from conforming to what they can,
unless it be matter of their ambition to be admitted in the College of all
Fools.

To do all we can to no purpose, is small encouragement to the attempt: we are
denied Communion with the Church in all Ordinances, unless we come up to all
the Terms of Communion, Now since it is our apparent duty to live in the
practice of all Christ's institutions, if we cannot enjoy them in one place upon
Christ's Terms, his Command, and tenderness to our own souls oblige us to seek
out, where we may enjoy them better cheap.

. 4. He that cannot perform all that the Laws require of him, may forbe^
judging them that do, the man of a Tender Conscience finds it enough to judge
his own actions. This is a most excellent Rule; and Dissenters desire no more
liberty. Let them but judge of their own actions, and they leave all others to
stand, or fall to their own Masters. And it seems hard, if they may not be
indulged this privilege, since the silliest Creature that ever was is presumed
to have so much wit, as to come out of a sh^wr of Rain, rather then to be wet
to the skin.

. 5. The truly tender Conscience (that is, the Fool all this while) will freely
part with money, nay of all the men in the world, there is none so free as he,
for a Fool and his money are soon parted. Well! But if he cannot conform to the
Laws, he can pay the penalty. I promise you that is a great Question, whether he
can or no. Where nothing's to be had, the King must lose his Right. But if this
be the grand qualification of a Tender Conscience to be made a Beggar, I wonder
what his Privilege can be, unless it be to succeed old Clause, the King of
Beggars.

For his satisfaction; if the penalty be moderate, such as I can pay without
ruin to my self and family, though I be not satisfied in the justice of it,
yet herein I may lawfully depart from my own Right, and shall esteem it a great
mercy if my coin may compound for my Conscience.

[3] Readers you have heard the qualifications of a Tender Conscience, be but
now Masters of so much Patience as to sit out the Privileges; and that last
Scene will make you ample satisfaction.

(^) Every private Christian is bound in Charity, and compassion toward such a
Man, to deny himself of some part of his Liberty to gain him; that is, in those
things that are matter of no Law: where you have first a Bit, and then a knock;
or the fair Concession, and the wary Revocation.

. 1. The Conc^ssion; Every private Christian is bound in Charity to such a Man,
to part with some of his Liberty to gain him: wherein there are several things
to be advised upon. 1. The subject of the Proposition. Every private Person. 2.
The nature of the obligation. Bound in Charity, and compassion. 3. The matter
of the duty. To deny himself of some part of his Liberty. 4. The end to gain
him. In few or none of which particulars can I arrive at any clear satisfaction.

1.] Every private Person. And are not all public Persons bound by the Law of
God to walk charitably? not to destroy souls? I doubt we forget that God is
here the Legislator, with whom is no respect of Persons. Charity is the
fulfilling of the Moral Law: And if any Person be so public as not to be
obliged by it, we must leave those Commands, Thou shall do no Murder; Thou
shall not commit Adultery to exercise the small fry, and hamper the vulgar.

The Apostle Paul was a public Person, and one as well qualified to discern,
and impose things indifferent, as any that have made the fairest pretenses that
way, and yet he Professes with more then ordinary servency. 1. Cor. 8. 13. That
he will eat no flesh whilst the world stands, least he should make his Brother
to offend. And who shall venture to make that the matter of an Ecclesiastical
Canon, which the Apostle durst not venture to practice? They that assume a
greater Authority, had need give greater proof of greater Charity. And yet
greater was the importance of Flesh to the Health and life of Paul, then a
Ceremo^ can possibly be to the peace of the Church, For. 1. Flesh is
Disjunctively necessary to the health, and life of Man, that is, either flesh
or some other food; but neither this, nor that, humane Ceremony is necessary,
either to the glory of God, the peace of the Church, or Decency, and order in
the worship. The Church has served God decently, lived peaceably, and glorified
God eminently without them, and in his time may do so again. 2. Flesh was a
thing perfectly indifferent in it self, and owned so by all that were well
instructed in their Manumission from the Mosaical servitude; but the more we
are faithfully instructed in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, the more are we
satisfied, that we are at Liberty from all other Ceremonies of men as well as
from those that were once of Divine Institution.

2] Bound in Compassion, and Charity. I am not well satisfied that a Debt of
mere Compassion, or free Charity is all we owe our Brother in this case.
However; we owe our God a Debt of Justice; It Is he that says, Destroy not him
with thy m^at for whom Christ dyed. 14. Romans 15. And that there is no
comparison between the Law that enjoins Ceremonies, and that Law that commands
us not to offend our Brother, I thus prove: 1. The Law that forbids scandal, is
Negative: but the Law that commands Ceremonies, is but Affirmative. Now Gods
own affirmative precepts may have their outward acts suspended in some cases
for some time; but Negatives admit of no relaxation; He that says thou shall
not do, says, thou shall never do; unless dispensed with by a power aequal to
his that gave the Prohibition. 2. The Command of not scandalizing is purely
moral, the heart, and life of the sixth Commandment; For he that says thou
shall not Kill, primarily intends I shall not destroy the soul: but the Command
of Ceremonies but positive; And positives ought to give place to Morals: If
there be any Truth in that Doctrine of the Enquirers: That Godlays little
stress upon Circumstantials: that his own positive Laws give place to the Moral
Law: much more ought Man's Ceremonial Law give place to Gods Moral Law: Thou
shall not Kill. 3. The Command of not giving offense, because Moral, is
therefore perpetual, but the Command of Ceremonies Temporary, and may be
momentany, for the Church of England, 34. Art. Asserts a power in every
National Church, not only to ordain, but to change, and abolish Ceremonies. 4.
The Command of not scandalizing the weak, not destroying the soul, is in
Materia Necessar^, the thing it self is good in it self, and for it self,
though no positive Command had interposed in the case; but Ceremonies have no
other Goodness, but what is breathed into them by the breath of Man, which if
it were measured by the good effects, would be found very little. 5. The
Command not to offend, is unquestionably obligatory, but that Command for
Ceremonies is at best questionable whether it be so much as lawful. 6. The
Command to avoid offense, has a direct and natural tendency to beget and
preserve Amity and unity amongst Christians; but the Command of Ceremonies
apparently has occasioned Divisions between Protestants, and Papists, between
Protestants themselves, between those of the same Nations, and all Humane Terms
of Church Communion necessarily produce the same bitter fruit. 7. The power of
ordering the smallest matter in the Church, must conform to the Sovereign end
of edification. 2. Cor. 13. 10. -- The power which the Lord has given me for
edification, and not Destruction; But no power may suspend my duty of pleasing
my Brother to his edification. 8. Supposing the worst: That it is only a Debt of
Charity which my Brother may challenge of me, not to scandalize him; and a Debt
of justice to Obey the Magistrate in this very case, yet the Mini^s of justice
ought to vail to the Magnalia of Charity: As the Command of a Father, in lower
instances, ought to yield to the preservation of my Neighbors life.

3] Some would except against the matter of his concession: [to deny himself in
some part of his Liberty] what a small some that may be none knows: perhaps
there is no part of his Liberty, which that duty may not Command.

4] I except lastly against his propounded end: to please and gain him: as not
adaequal to that which the Command has in it is eye.

To scandalize, or give offense, may be taken either in a primary sense, and so
it denotes a culpable giving occasion to a Brother to sin, or in a lower and
secondary sense, for the angering, and displeasing of a Brother. This
distinction well observed would unravel much confusion, which pesters our
discourses.

1. If we compare the displeasing of a private person, with that of a public,
the latter is more sinful, and much more dangerous, for the wrath of a King is
like the roaring of a Lion.

2. To occasion culpably a public person to sin, is more heinous, then to
occasion the sin of a private person, because the sins of those in eminent
places have such a fatal influence upon the peoples pollution, and the
procurement of Gods displeasure.

3. But if we compare a scandal in the primary sense, with one in the
secondary, then it is no measuring cast, whether it be more eligible to
displease the one, or destroy the other: Nor can there be sin in displeasing
one, when I cannot otherwise please, but by destroying the other: for though my
own folly may possibly so ensnare me; yet God never puts me under such
Circumstances, that I shall be necessitated to sin:

. 2. You have heard his fair concession, now take his Limitation along with
you: That is (says he) in those things that are matters of no Law, but left
free, and undeterminate, there the Rule of the Apostle takes place. 15. Romans 1.
2. We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please our selves: And, let every one of us please his Neighbor for his good
to edification, and we will add. 14. Rom: 13. Let no man put a stumbling block,
or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. v. 15. Destroy not him with thy
meat for whom Christ dyed. v. 19. Let us follow after the things which make for
peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. v. 20. for meat Destroy not
the work of God.

This is the last retreat of these Gentlemen: Hither they retrire as to their
Triary, and strong Reserves. You ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, to
edify him heavenwards, not to murder his soul, till a Law be made to the
contrary, you are bound in Charity, and compassion to such a one, till you
receive further Orders, and then you must be savage, and barbarous: But his
Reasons follow.

1. Reason: because we may not do evil that good may come: The sinews of which
Reason lie in a supposition: that to omit a Ceremony, is an evil thing,
compared with the saving of a soul. This General Rule may be applied that other
way: we must not do evil that Good may come; and therefore may not draw a poor
Brother into sin, that some good may come by it; and the rather, if we consider
what good comes by it. As the saving my self a pecuniary mulct; or Recognizing,
the Magistrates power to Command; which may be done, and is so in many ways,
wherein the scandal of another is not concerned; And if I should transgress a
Ceremony, or so, for the saving of a soul, we may Lawfully presume upon the
general will of the Legislator, that no positive Command of his should be so
rigorously insisted on, when it would destroy a greater good.

2. Reason: We must not break the Laws of God or man ^ut of an humor of
complaisance to a Brother: Ans: To discharge a weighty duty, to avoid the
scandalizing of a Brother, to walk charitably: which the Enquirer p. 137. (when
he had occasion to magnify Charity) tells us is an essential part of Religion:
ought not to be put of with a frothy Droll, as if it were nothing but the
humor of Complaisance.

The Apostle whose head understood the speculation, and whose heart entertained
the love of this Doctrine much better then himself, has taught us other things:
That to sin against the Brethren, is to sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. It Is
to destroy with our meats (indifferent things) him for whom Christ dyed, 14.
Romans 15. And if these be matters of humor, and complaisance, and we should
venture a Ceremony for them, it would be but to stake one Complement against
another.

3. Reason: In those times (says he) the Magistrate being Pagan, took no care
of the Church, nor had passed any Laws concerning the management of the
Christian Religion: And so Christians had a great deal of scope, and room for
mutual condescension. -- But the case is quite otherwise when there is a Law in
being, etc.

Really, the Pagan Magistrate was very much overseen, unless perhaps he knew
nothing less or more of his Authority over things indifferent; and then the
Apostles must needs be to blame, who never informed him of that Power over the
Church, wherewith Christ had e^rusted him; And above all St. Paul was utterly
inexcusable, having so inviting an opportunity to do it in: Being so long at
Rome, having friends in ^aesars Household, and this in Quinqui^nnio Neronis,
when the Lion was treatable and approachable; Besides this must have obliged
him to entertain better thoughts of Christians, and Christianity, and engaged
him to protect, and defend it, when it lay so entirely at his devoir. The
Enquirer instructed us, p. 144. that such a Society as a Church, could never be
conserved without some Rites or other, nor any public Worship be performed if
all Ceremonies, and Circumstances such as of time, place, persons, and the
like, be left indefinite, and undetermined. He has told us since, that the
power of Determining and Defining these things ly's in our Governors who
understand the Civil Policy. p. 151. And now he tells us, That in those
(primitive) times the Magistrate had passed no Laws concerning the manage of
the Christian Religion: so that it was impossible that either Church Government
should be Lawfully administered, or public Worship duly performed, because the
Apostles were negligent in informing the Emperor of his power, or he careless
in performing his duty.

I wonder that amongst all the Apocryphal Epistles of Christ to Ag^arns, or
Paul to (...), we meet with none of the Apostles to Nero.

That whereas their Lord and Master had left them in great have, and either
through the ^urry of business had forgotten, or littlen^ss of the things had
neglected to settle his Churches, nor had passed any Laws concerning the manage
of Religion, for want of which politic constitutions they were in a lamentable
confusion, the worship of God lying at sixes, and sevens, the Government of the
Church mee^ Anarchy, none had power to Command, none were obliged to obey,
every one did that which was rig^t in his own eyes; none had power to impose,
or compel the rest to submit to such Terms of Communion as were necessary,
besides those few and plain ones appointed by Christ himself; And for as mu^ as
they were altogether by the ^ars about indifferent things, and they had no
Rules in their Law-^ooks to determine these intricate matters;

They do therefore humbly beseech his Imperial Majesty, that he would Review
and Revise their Religion, and add such other mystical Ceremonies, significant
of Gospel grace, wherewith his well-known piety could not but be intimately
acquainted; and that he would take speedy and effectual care with these
vexatio^s Tender Consciences, who scrupled eating of meats, because once
prohibited by the Law of Moses, and straightly charge, and Command that none
should gratify them in their weakness; and take such other, and further order
about their Religion, as he in his Royal wisdom, from time to time, and at all
times hereafter should judge meet, and expedient. And his Petitioners shall
humbly Pray, etc.


But to satisfy that Assertion, I shall offer further these pariculars.

1. It cannot appear that the Roman Emperors had any such Commission as is
supposed to make that no duty, which God had made a duty. To make it no sin to
give offense, which otherwise had been a sin: nor to add New Terms of
Communion, or to shut out of the Church those whom the fundamental Laws of
Christ would receive.

2. This principle of his Reflects most scandalously upon the greatest Temporal
Mercy which God ever vouch safed his Churches; I mean the Christian Magistrate:
for it implies, that the condition of Christians was much more easy under the
Pagan, then under the Christian Magistrate. Then (says he) the Christians had a
great deal of scope, and room for mutual condescension: but now they are
crowded up by restrictions. Then the Worship of God was not clogged with
needless Ceremonies, but now it is encumbered with New Terms of Communion. I
might then have relieved a weak Conscience. But the case is quite oth^wise
(says he) now there is a Law in being. Then I might have used my liberty in
indifferent things, and only be restrained by Prudence, and Charity, but now I
am debarred of it, by the will of Authority: This I say is a scandalous
Reflection: For God has promised Christian Princes as Nursing Fathers to the
Gospel Church, to secure and protect them, and the Enquirer makes them
Step-fathers, tempting us to think, that we have got no such great Bargain by
the change.

3. It Is clear that the Apostles had as much power to order the mere
Circumstances of worship, and Church Government, as was needful to their
exercise, and actual performance, or else all their determinations were sinful.

(2) The next privilege of this tender Conscience is: That it becomes the
Magistrate so far to consider the satisfaction of peoples minds, (as well as
the safety, and peace of his Dominions) as not to make those things the matter
of his Laws, which he for^sees men's weakness will make them boggle at. This is
his Concession: wherein he needed not have been so Timorous. For when the
Magistrate is settling the Civil peace of his Dominions, he needs not concern
himself, whether the people will skew, or no. But as if he had been afraid, he
had conceded too far, he wisely limits the concession, As, unless there be
weighty Reasons on the other hand to counterbal^ance that consideration; And
they must be weighty Reasons indeed, that will counterballance the edification
and Salvation of weak yet sincere Christians; that will counterballance the
peace, and safety of his Dominions; Indifferent things will hardly weigh
against these: but what are those ponderous things that will make the scales
even against these? why. 1. Such things, which (though some scruple) are
necessary to Government: yes, by all means; when things necessary to Government
are put in the balance, with the peace and safety of his Dominions, they ought
to turn the beam: but this is freely granted, that if men's scruples would
overturn Government, they must scruple on, at their own peril: But now we are
ready to join issue with him upon this point: That the things scrupled are
neither necessary, or any ways advantageous to the Being, well-being, or
Glorious being of this, or any Government: The Roman Empire was in its greatest
Glory, at its highest pitch, when the Apostles Baptized without the sign of the
Cross, and preached without the Holy Garment: The Christian Religion, naked, and
plain as Christ left it, had not the least evil, or malignant influence upon
the peace of that Empire; Though it was the Policy of its enemies then, to clap
all the Commotions that arose upon other accounts, upon the back of the
Christian Doctrine; It was the popular cry: These are the men that have turned
the world upside down. And when the Judgments of God broke out upon them for
their persecutions, still to clamor: Tollit^ Impios: Christianos ad Leones!
Away with such Fellows, it is not sit they live a day! Nay it is evident that
many Nations have prospered both in war and peace, by land and sea, who never
knew the Ceremonies, and none the better for them; 2. Such things which are
grateful to the greater or more considerable part of the subjects: Those are
such things which counterballance tender Consciences, and the peace and safety
of his Dominions. I suspect the Enquirer to be a raw Statesm^n, as well as a
crude Casuist: what would he have a Prince destroy one half of his subjects to
graetify the other half? The Apostle has offered a rational expedient, that the
one may be gratified, and yet the other not destroyed. 14. Romans. 3. ^et not
him that eats, despise him that eats not: And let not him that eats not,
judge him that eats. They to whom Ceremonies are so grateful sauce, may have
their fill of them, and must they needs compel squea^ish stomachs to feed on
the same Dish? The gratefulness of Ceremonies to some men's fancies, is no solid
Reason, why a cons^rable, though not the more considerable part, should be
undone, tempted to sin, deprived of Communion in what they have a clear right
by the Constitutions of the Gospel.

Nor are the measures of Considerableness, to be taken from outward advantages
that such a one is Rich, a Dignitary, a Canon, a Prebend, a Dean, an
Archdeacon, Chancellor, Bishop or Archbishop, for he that is most
inconsiderable in these respects, is too considerable to be ruined either in
his temporal, or Spiritual concerns for a Ceremony.

And when all is done, it is a question whether the Ceremonies are so grateful
to the greater and more considerable part? many learned and pious Ministers,
many sincere and sober Christians make a rubbing-shift to get them down,
accounting them tolerable, though not eligible; to these they are not grateful,
but as a burden of which they cannot fairly discharge themselves, may be
grateful; and leave but them at Liberty, and it will soon be visible, that the
matters of our differences are not grateful either to the greater, or more
Considerable part of the Nation.

(3) It becomes the Magistrate (says he) who governs Men not Beasts, to afford
means of instruction, and competent time for those instructions to take place.
I am glad however, to hear that Subjects are not Beasts, but Men: the rather,
because he told us just before, That it is the duty of a good Magistrate to
drive as the Cattle can go. But for answer. 1. If there must be time afforded
for instructions to take place: Then such Competent time must be allowed to
every generation, for New days will produce the same doubts. It was a true
observation of a learned Person: that leave English Men to their English
Bibles, and there will a new offspring arise in every Age that will have the
same apprehensions about these matters, that Non-Conformists now have. 2. The
time of these instructions, that it may be competent to work upon our minds,
will be a Considerable Circumstance. I have read of one who being asked, What
God was? Desired a days time to consider of that important question: and when
that was expired, he desired two, then four, still doubling his time, as he had
doubled his diligence in his study of the Point: I am verily persuaded the more
impartially, and sedulously any one shall examine the matters in Controversy,
the more Reason he will find to crave more time for his satisfaction; and if he
arrives not at a Plerophory that the things are sinful, he shall never be able
to reach a full assurance that they are Lawful: But yet time to consider will
be acceptable; As he that undertook to make an Ass speak, in time; thought
himself pretty secure, notwithstanding the impossibility of his undertaking;
because he might dye, the Ass dye, or his Enemies dye, in the interval. 3. The
means of instruction are to be considered, that apt mediums be used for
conviction; for if Scripture, and plain Deductions from thence, if Reason, and
the practice of the Apostolical Churches are not produced for our satisfaction,
a few scraps, and shreds, old ends, and fragments, out of Livie, Tacitus, and
Cato, will never do it. 4. And the persons who are to instruct us, are no less
material. They must be equal, and unbyassed persons, who are not engaged by
preserments, Dignities and great Revenews to uphold an interest; It must not be
such whose wi^, and Rhethorick make a slutter in the air without Reason, that
will probably convince Gainsayers, and therefore we Humbly beg that he may be
instructed from the word of God, the practice of the purest and primo primitive
times, and the instruction managed fr^ the writings of the first Reformers of
the Church of E^ Till this instruction be given: We hope, and pray (...)
expresses it) there may be a suspension of Rigorous (...)

What now i^ after all this the people will not be^ (...) (And what is after
all this, and a great deal more to (...) purpose, they have no Reason to alter
their judgment) Why then there is no way but one with our Enquirer. -- I see no
Obligation upon the Magistrate either to for^ear to make, or execute such Laws
as ^e apprehends for the good of his Government. No more do I neither: only
hope that he will not apprehend penal satutes, made upon the account of
Ceremonies with their execution, (or rigorous execution) will be for the glory
of God; the peace of the Church, or the good of his Government, though that was
our Authors insinuation; And thus we have the short, and the long of the
compassionate Enquirer.

I must for a conclusion entreat the Reader to Recollect himself, and remember
where abouts his lesson is. In Part. 2. Chapter 1. He had mentioned three ways for
the cure of Church Divisions. The first Toleration, the second Comprehension,
but these were either impracticable, or Remedies worse then the disease it
seems, something or other amiss in them that turned his stomach at them: At
last he fixed upon a third method, and that was this of Instruction: under
which course of Physic we have been disciplined all this while: strange
Chimaerical inconveniences we have heard to be in separation: How very little
stress God lays upon his (...) positive institutions: what an imaginary Name
Christian Liberty is; what a silly Ridiculous thing a Tender Conscience is;
what a transcendent Power Christ has entrusted the Magistrate with, to make
what Terms of Christian Communion he pleases, if not expressly prohibited in
Gods word. In these things we have been indoctrinated without reasonable proof,
and we are, or have Reason to be as far from satisfaction as we were before,
and somewhat further: Why then have amongst you my Masters! -- I can see no
Obligation -- Well! It Is no great matter whether you can or no! If Princes saw
with your ^ctcrical eyes, that can see nothing but Ceremony; If they should
handle Dissenters with your rough Esaus hands, lined with the down of
Porcuspine; did they hear with your ears which chime to the Music of the
Cathedral, I perceive it would go very hard with these poor wretches.

Many Clergymen measure the Wisdom, Grace, Mercy, Tenderness, and Bounty of
Princes to their Subjects, by their own narrow, and incapable hearts; Thus when
one told Alexander, that his bounty was too large to bestow upon a subject; He
answered; Tell not me what is meet for him to Receive, but what is fit for
Alexander to give: Princes are called Gods, and they then most eminently answer
their Names, when they imitate him who Commands the Sun impartially to shed
abroad his beams upon the habitable world, not taking the proportions of his
Goodness to his Creatures, from the malice, and envy of some, or the little
merits of others.

The Story of Augustus Caesar is as remarkable as common: Ve dius Pollio had
once invited this Emperor to a Treat; whilst they were in the Gallery, comes
in a poor Slave, with death in his face, and Hope in his have, cast himself at
the Emperors feet, and humbly begs, he might suffer a less cruel death, then
his Patron Pollio had doomed him to: Augustus was surprised; and upon enquiry
into the matter, understands, that this Boy had accidentally broken some of his
Masters Crystal Glasses, wherein he greatly delighted, for which fact his
furious Master had inhumanely condemned him to be thrown into a Pond, there to
be devoured by the Canibal Lampreys: And this was the Reason of his so
confident Application, to the grace of Sovereign Majesty: Augustus transported
with the novelty of so Barbarous punishment, commanded the rest of the Glasses
to be broken, and the Fish Pond to be filled up: That there might either be no
occasion for such passion, or not the means to execute it.

Let therefore the Enquirer know, who with his smooth Praelatical Charity has
given up Dissenters to the Rods and Axes, that they will Honor and obey the
King, under all those penalties which it shall please his wisdom to inflict;
And if they cannot be so serviceable in well-doing, will endeavor to suffer
for well-doing, with a heart so submissive, and a conversation so inoffensive,
that shall make their enemies more repine at the Glory of their sufferings,
then the eyesore of their indulgence;

Nor yet dare they despair of the clemency of their Sovereign, who having
suffered hard things in his own sacred person, has learnt to pity them who do
suffer: But if this Compassionate Enquiry be all the instruction they must
expect for their Satisfaction, the Non-conformists may have Reason to say, they
are illfed, and worse taught.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the Enquirers insinuated Detractions are refelled, some little
Artifices discovered, Calvin vindicated, and the whole concluded.

DEtraction differs from Contumely, just as Theft from Robbery by the Highway.

The Slaunderer is but a Pickpoket; the Reviler a Padder: the one can
dexterously do the feat, and carry of his prize with a cast of cleanly
conveyance, but the soulmouth'd Rayler attacques the repute of the innocent ^i,
and Armis, and pleads his Commission to plunder.

The Serious Enquirer, in some of his former Chapters, has with downright
Oblequy assaulted the credit of Dissenters, but in this he proceeds more
discreetly, undermining their Reputations by oblique infinuations and indirect
suggestions: whereby he has gained this singular advantage, that whilst he lays
before the Malicious sufficient matter to seed, and furnish their malice, yet
lies close under the covert of this excuse, that he affirms nothing positively,
at once taking from the aggrieved party all possibility of just defense, and
sheltring himself under the Politic plea of not being Dogmatical.

The design of all which, (as of his whole elaborate discourse) he could not
more fully instruct us in, then in those few words of his, page 221. It was an
effectual course Haman took. Esth. 3. 8. When he designing to ruin the whole
Church of the Jews, first undermines the Reputation of their Prosession,
delates their Religion as not fit for the Protection of the Prince, and that it
did contain Laws contrary to all people, and that they would not obey the Kings
Laws. So solemn and sacred is that practice to love the Treason, and hate the
Traitor, to imitate the Policy, and yet decry the Politician. But sure our
Enquirer is quite out in one thing; for though Haman's Policy was subtle, yet
it proved not effectual, unless he account a pair of Gallows such great
success: and therefore I hope the Enquirer will accept it as a specimen of my
Charity, if I pray that he may never take an effectual course. Examples indeed
are numerous, and obvious which prove that wicked Counsels have most
perniciously recoiled upon their Authors; and Phaleris (in this one thing most
just) taught Perillus the sweetness of his own Brazen Bull, by giving the
Artificer the first handsale of his ingenicus contrivance. -- Nec lex est
justior ulla,
Quam necis Artific^s art perire sua.


. 1. Now his first ins^nuation is, that the N. C. stand out only upon a Point
of Honor.

I cannot see (says he) what should be able to perpetuate our Distractions,
unless, it be a point of Honor, that some men think themselves obliged to
persevere, because they have begun: which sly Method of Detraction, as it may
safely be contemned by the innocent, so as easily retorted by the confident:
for others perhaps cannot see what should be able to perpetuate their
persecutions, unless it be a point of Honor, that some men think themselves
obliged to persevere in their rigorous impositions, because they have begun,
and had rather justify an error, then have it thought they have been in one so
long: It Is a most unrighteous procedure to charge any man with base and
unworthy designs, further then pregnant overtures will justify such a charge,
and yet A. B. Whitguift has given the world too great occasion for such a
jealousy, that it was a Point of honor that obstracted a Reformation, when his
great Argument, to defeat the Pious intentions of the Parliament, was, that it
would tend to the slander of the Church, as having hitherto maintained an
error. Nay I have read in the Grand Debate Sect. 6. That the Reverend Prelates
authorized to Reform the Liturgy* insist upon this as one Reason of their
non-condescension to more alterations: That it would be a virtual Concession,
that the Liturgy was an intolerable burden to tender Consciences.

But a few considerations would rout a Legion of such ungrounded suggestions.

As. 1. That the applause of inconsiderable persons must needs be very
inconsiderable: and that credit small, which is gained amongst those who are of
small credit in the World. Ad 2ly, That the temptation lies visibly on the
other side: He that would drive a gainful Trade for Credit, and Honor, must
settle his Factory where such Commodities are native, and staple: He may gape
for Dignities, and Honors till he is Chap fallen, whose Conscience shall cast
his lot amongst the Dissenters, and when he has Angled all day., may come home
with a Diverbe, I have fight fair, and caught a Frog. And. 3. Sure no wise man
would purchase honorable scars, with mortal wounds; nor incur the displeasure
of Armed power, only to wear the Cognizance of foolish valor in Black, and
Blew. It Is a slender alleviation of those loads of reproach which they feel,
besides those greater severities which they may fear, to wear a Feather in
their Caps, and the aerie plume of popular applause. Nay. 4. Let this Gentleman
make it his own case, and learn to judge more moderately: Suppose it were
enacted by Law. That to practice the Ceremonies should be punished with
suspension ab officio, and beneficio, would he upon a point of Honor espouse
their quarrel? or would the waxen wings of Fame support his courage under those
penalties? Why then should he judge that corruption colodge in the breast of
another, which he would not harbor in his own?

And yet I must needs say, that the good name, and moderate Repute of every
Christian, much more of every Minister of the Gospel, ought to be of that value
to him, as not to prostitute it to every three half penny temptation, nor to
render it cheap by Levity, and inconstancy, when no more cogent Reasons are
offered for an alteration, then mere will, and pleasure: nor has any one thing
more debased the honor of Christianity, nor weakened the success of the
Ministry, then that some of those who wear those glorious Liveries, have either
fullied them in the dirt, or turned them wrong s^de outward, wheeling about
like Weathercocks, with the smallest breath of flattering preferments, or
however, with the more violent gusts of threatened persecutions.

A good man is (...), one of a cubical figure, that falls upon his Basis of
Conscierce, which way soever the providence of God shall throw him; though some
men's practice would make us believe, that the plain English of that hard word
is to fall on his legs like a Cat: which an old hyperbolical proverb tells us,
will wriggle her self into her true perpendicular, though shot out of a Canons
mouth.

Such persons, I consess, do not want their specious arguments, to prove
themselves constant, under the greatest demonstrations of inconstancy. For (say
they) we have settled our ultimate end, and fixed our main design, which is to
assecurate our Revenews, our ease, our splendor, and if the Terms of enjoying
them vary, yet we never vary from the ecliptic line of preferments; let
contingencies appear in multiform shapes, we can press all Accidents into the
service of our unum necessarium. Such was that Quadrangular Doctor, a zealous
Protestant in Edw. 6th days, a Papist in Q. Mary's, and upon the advancement
of Qu Elix faced about, and read the Service in English: O come let us sing a
new Song! Thus let the exterior face of Religion receive more shapes then
Proteus, yet, he abides constant to his principles, and resolves to continue
Vicar of Bray.

Yet that we may not prove sturdy Oaks, but flexible Willows, the Enquirer has
two weighty things to say to us.

(1) That it is no real dishonor, but a manly generosity, and a Christian
virtue to change our minds upon mature deliberation, and the evidence of better
Reason. Very orthodox! I hope then he will allow it to be a manly generosity,
and a Christian virtue to keep our minds unchanged, to assert our own
convictions, till those evidences of better reason shall appear which may
change them, and that it would be a childish pusillanimity. to change our
practice, till better reason shall oblige us to change our minds: but I am
fearful, though upon mature deliberation we fix our minds according to the
dictates of the best reason we can get, yet shall we not avoid trouble till we
conform them to the public reason. But (says he) the very temper which our
Savior requires of his Disciples, and which is the great preparatory
disposition to the entertainment of Christianity, especially consists in a
simplicity of mind, and an indifferency to comply with whatsoever shall best
recommend it self to our faculties. Well! Dissenters say they have already
complied with that which has best recommended it self to their faculties, shall
they be secured from vexation upon such compliance? They resolve never to be
Non-conformists to their own faculties! Still I doubt that they who have
invented a public wisdom, a public reason, a public Conscience, will set
their wits on work once more to contrive a public faculty wherein those
public powers may reside, for it is but congruous that the public Treasure
should be deposited in a public Treasury.

I am all this while at a loss where our Savior has required this same
indifferency, unless perhaps where he says, He that will be my Disciple, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me. An indifferency of
spirit toward every thing is an excellent preparatory toward just nothing.
And the best temper ((...) seems) to entertain the Christian Religion, is to be
of no Re^. As the eye is the better prepared to receive the species of all
Colors, because it is of none; and the imaginary first matter is therefore
capable of all forms, because it is tinctured with no form.

Such has been the Policy of our Romish Emissaries; To endeavor to reduce the
dissenting world to Atheism, that they might be prepared to receive the
impressions of their Catholicism; and upon this Maxim was the Counsel founded
their great Boverius gave to a greater person fortified with more grace then to
take it. Ut quoniam v^ra Religio tibi inquirenda est, antequam ad eam
investigandam accedas, omnem prius Religionem suspectam habeas, lubeatque
tamdiu a Protestantium Fide, and Religione animum, and voluntatem suspendere
quamdiu in very investigatione versaris. That seeing your Majesty is now going
to search for the true Religion, before you fall upon the work, you would first
suspect every Religion: and that you would be pleased so long to suspend your
assent, and consent to the Faith, and Religion of the Protestants, as you are
engaged in the disquisition of the Truth.

(2) The second thing he has to say to us is, That the Honor of our Religion
is of more value then our personal Reputation, Still orthodox! but the Honor
of Religion is very little secured by the Professors adapting themselves to
that which has the vogue, and carries no other advantage but that of power to
second, and back it: Christianity will shine with it is own native beams,
without sinful complyances: Nor need we fear but that Christian Magistrates
will cast a benign aspect upon the Religious, though the Religion was never of
their Composure: They like it the better, because their Savior made it, and
not they: And how high soever God has set them above their subjects, it is their
greatest glory to stoop as low to a Redeemer, as the meanest Peasant.
Christianity in it is naked simplicity, and most modest attire disturbes no
forms of Government, but is admirably suited by the wisdom of Christ to all
modes of Civil Policy: And if we may speak according to the best evidences of
the reason, and own that which recommends it self to our faculties, a Monatch
may be as absolute without the Ceremonies, and other unnecessary Additions, as
with them:

. 2. A second insinuation is, That Non-conformists are turbulent,
unperswadable, ungovernable; That their principles have a malignant influence
upon Government; And for the more dexterous management of this suspicion he
tells us, That it is a great blot in the writings of Calvin, that after he had
discoursed rarely well of the power of Princes, and the duty of Subjects, he
undoes all again with an unhappy exception in these words: De privatis
hominibus semper loquor. I see if Calvin has but one blot, the Enquirer will
hit it, so quicksighted he is, that none must Hope to take him with a why not?
I meet indeed with an Eagle-eyed Jesuit, who to palliate the villainies of
their own Society, would gladly pick a hole in Calvin's Coat, but the Reverend,
and Protestant Bishop Bilson roundly takes him up thus: Calvin is so well known
to those that be learned, and wise for his great pains, and good labors in the
Church of God, that a few suarling Friars cannot impeach his good Name, though
you never so wretchedly pervert his words. And yet the Bishops book came sorth
cum Privilegio, and was dedicated to Q. Elizabeth, by one very tender in the
point of Supremacy, and Prerogative. Dialog. p. 509. But Calvin's greatest crime
was his Syncretism with the Doctrine of the Church, and not his enmity to the
Civil Government. And because a shred cut of from the whole piece of his
Discourse may easily through ignorance be misconstrued, or through malice
misrepresented to his prejudice. I shall present his words at large to the
Reader.

Institut. lib. 4. cap. 20. parag. 31. Nobis autem interim summopere cavendum,
ne illam plenam venerandae Majestatis Magistratuum authoritatem, quam Deus
gravissimis edictis sanxit, (Etiamsi apud indignissimos resideat, and qui eam
sua nequitia, quantum in se est polluant) spernamus, aut violemus: Neque enim,
si ultio Domini, est efraenatae dominationis correctio, ideo protinus nobis
demandatam arbitremur; quibus nullum aliud quam parendi. and patiendi, datum
est Mandatum. De privatis hominibus semper loquor; Nam siqui nunc sint
populares Magistratus ad moderandam Regum Libidinem constituti (quales olim
erant qui Lacedaemoniis Regibus oppositi erant, Ephori; aut Romany Consulibus,
Tribuni plebis; aut Atheniensium Senatui, Demarchi; and qua etiam forte
potestate, ut nunc res habent sunguntur in singulis regnis tres Ordines, quum
primarios conventus peragunt) adeo illos, serocienti Regum Licentiae pro
officio intercedere non veto; ut si, Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and
humili plebeculae insultantibus, conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria
perfidia non carere, affirmem; quia populi Libertatem cujus se Dei ordinatione
tutores positos, norunt, fraudulenter produnt.

I think we may safely venture to translate them: In the me^ while we ought
studiously to beware that we neither despise, nor oppose the Authority of
Magistrates, so full of Dread and Majesty, which God himself has established by
most severe Decrees, (although possibly it should reside in persons most
unworthy; and such as by their personal wickedness do defile it, as much as in
them lies.) For though the Divine vengeance be the Restrainer of unbridled
Empire, yet must we not the^e imagine that the Management thereof is committed
to (...). I speak always of private persons: For if there should be any such
popular Magistrates Constituted to Moderate the Arbitrariness of Princes, (such
as of old were the Ephori, who balanced the Lacedaemonian Kings. The Tribunes
of the people, who moderated the Roman Consuls, or the Demarchi, who were the
same to the Senate of Athens; And which power (as things go now) the three
Estates in each Kingdom, when they are convened in full Parliament, do
peradventure enjoy, I am so far from forbidding them to intercede according to
their duty, with the furious Licenciousness of Kings, that if they shall
connive at them when they passionately harrasse, and trample upon the poor
Comonalty, I may affirm that their silence cannot be excused of sinful breach
of trust, s^ing they falsely betray the peoples Liberty, whereof they knew
themselves to be the Guardians by Gods institution. Reader! These are those
dismal lines which have raised the clamor against poor Calvin, wherein thou will observe these particulars. 1. That private persons have no warrant from
God to restrain the exorbitances of Governors, but are left to the only Remedy
parendi, and patiendi, of submission, and patience. 2. Yet he supposes that
some Magistrates may possibly have a larger power then bare suffering, or
passive obedience. 3. This power which he supposes may possibly be entrusted
with them, is but serocienti Regum licentia pro. officio intercedere: dutifully
to intercede with the Prince to redress grievances, humbly to represent the
invasions made upon propriety, or perhaps (if called) to counsel and advise a
Redress: which is a power far greater then that of bare suffering, and
enduring the evil, and yet infinitely short of Rebellion against deposing,
banishing, or murdering Princes. 4. This is only upon a supposition that there
be such persons so qualified, and entrusted by the constitution of (...)
Government, and known Laws of the Land, si qui sint populares Magistrat^s
Constituti. Such he supposes indeed the Ephori at Lacedaemon, the Tribunes at
Rome, the Demarchi at Athens to have been; but he is not sure, it is but a
peradventure, there were any such in his time, qua etiam forte potestate (ut
nunc res habent) sunguntur in singulis Regnis tres ordines. For he knew pretty
well how their own little Commonwealth at Geneva was Governed, but the Models
of France, Spain, and other Sovereign Monarchies he had but a guess at; he had
heard perhaps of Les Etats Generaux in France, but he was not very certain
whether they had any such interceding Authority, or no; however or whatsoever
it was, it could not be exerted but in full Convention of the Estates in a
general Diet. Cum primarios Conventus peragunt, and then was the time to
petition, to make addresses in a submissive way for the redress of grievances.
And 5. the guilt he charges upon these popular Magistrates for betraying their
trust, arises from this alone, that they connived at the miserable harassings
of the Comonalty, they took no notice at all of the invasions upon the Subjects
Rights, and proprieties: which they might have done, and never have mingled
heaven and earth together with civil broils. And what can an ordinary eye espy
hence, that should justify the Enquirers outcry a passage (says he) of that
ill Aspect upon Government, that it is suspected by some, and not altogether
without cause, that most of the Confusions of Kingdoms, that have happened
since, and especially the troubles of this Nation, have received encouragement,
if not taken rise from hence.

If this Enquirer (or any other) has formerly contributed to the confusions and
troubles of this, or any other Nation, and received encouragement from this
place of Calvin, he ought first to be deeply humbled before God, that he should
draw such desperate conclusions as those of Rebellion out of an innocent
sentence, and give more essential proofs, and signal marks of repentance, then
accepting a benefice of three or four hundred per annum; and secondly, be
ashamed that he ventured to read Calvin, before he could well construe a piece
of plain Latin, for I cannot understand that Calvin, though he was bound to
write true Latin, was also bound to help every one to a construing book; no no,
God obliged to prevent all the evil consequences which an evil heart, and base
lusts might draw out of the most inoffensive expressions.

He that will give scope to suspicions, may easily conjecture where the
Enquirer might drink in those principles which have such an ill aspect upon
Government; he needed not have traveled to the Lake Lemane; his own
incomparable Hugo could have furnished him with Maxims of that Tendency:
Ignatius Loyola himself might have been Scholar to such a Master: I shall
refer the Reader only to his famous piece de Iure Belli, and Pacis. Lib. 1.
Cap. 4.. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. A place containing many passages of that ill
aspect upon Government, that it is suspected by some, and upon good grounds that
most of the Civil War which have happened since in Europe, have received
encouragement if not taken rise from thence: Let him try if he can find in
Calvin, such a passage as this: Potest Rex etiam suam Imperii partem am^tters:
or this: Regi in partem non suam involanti, vis justae opponi potest. Or this
other: Qui Principes sub populo sunt, sive ab initio talem acceperunt
potestatem, sive postea ita convenit, ut Lacedaemone, si peccent in Leges, ac
Rempublicam, non tantum vi repelli possunt, sed si opus sit, morte puniri. But
I shall spare loyal ears, and only leave this Caution. Quiescat porr^ mone^,
and desinat Lacessere, malefacta ne noscat sua.

I had almost forgot his creaking triumph, what glorious exploits he has
achieved in his former adventures: but the Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy
will doubtless be as civil to him, as he was to the Author of the Friendly
Debate (not that between Sir Satan, and Master Skerlock) and take some handsome
occasion to claw him with a Congratulatory Epistle, and rejoice with him in his
great successes. Having (says he) as I think (that was an useful, and modest
parenthesis) demonstrated the sin, and mischiefs of separation, and evacuated
all the excuses, and palliations of it from the plea of Christian Liberty, and
pretense of Tender Conscience, I cannot see what should remain able to
perpetuate our Distractions, etc. Wherein I can thus far agree with him, that
he has evacuated all the excuses of Schism from the pretense of tender
Conscience; for none will be very forward to pretend a tender Conscience (of
his making,) least he be begged for an Idiot, and sent to the College of all
Fools: But for his boast of evacuating excuses and palliations, it is but the
Rodomontado of Seignior di Medico Campo. He that fetched Prester John's Head from
China, after it had been a fortnight burried, and set it on his shoulders
again; He that Cured Shirley in the Grand Sophies Court, when he had been twice
shot through with Ordnance, and had two Canon-bullets in each thigh; He that
gathered up the vomited fragments of his friend, eaten by the Canibals, placed
them together, and restored him to a perfect Man again; But I shall leave the
Enquirer to the pleasing Dream of his heroic Victories.

His Argument from the danger of introducing Popery by our Divisions is
seasonable, and his Counsel thereupon grateful, only we could wish he would
prescribe it to those whose Circumstances enable them to remove our differance,
by removing their true and proper causes. And let me remind him for a farewell;
That whosoever shall deny us the Liberty to judge of the Lawfulness of our own
Acts, or shall teach us the Art to rub on with a doubting Conscience, has paved
a broad Causway for, and reared a triumphant Arch to entertain his Holiness, if
the wisdom of our Superiors (not imposed upon by such tri^ling declamations)
did not obstruct his entrance.

FINIS.

