Good Counsel AND ADVICE TO ALL THE Friends of Truth, To be Read throughout
all their Families, by them whom the Lord has Called, and is Calling into his
everlasting Covenant.

Written from Amsterdam by William Ames.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and mouth near
Aldersgate, 1661.

Friends, the Lord has put it into my heart to write unto you concerning those
things which are most needful to be witnessed by you, and brought forth in you,
and amongst you.
MY Brethren, Sisters and Friends, the Almighty God has visited you in his
everlasting love, and in a time in which you were without the true peace did
the Lord reach unto you, and called you into the way where peace is found; Then
did the Lord touch your hearts, and begot in you a Hunger, Thirst and breathing
after himself, and he opened the way unto you, which before you knew not,
wherein you might find rest and be satisfied; and the Almighty has shined
amongst you, and the brightness of his rising did break forth in you, by which
your hearts were enlightened that you have seen and comprehended all the worlds
ways, in which you also did walk; And the Lord has watched over you for good,
even unto this day he has preserved you in many difficulties and dangers which
appeared against you, he rebuked the proud for your sakes, and the Mighty who
contemned you brought he into cotempt, he preserved you in the midest of the
fiery rage of men, and has not suffered the flame to hurt you, Salvation has
been your defense round about, and life did spring up within you, the virtue of
the Almighty attended you, that you might feed upon it, that the Immortal
virtue might be your daily bread, the power of his Arm reached unto you to bear
you in the way that you should walk, that thereby your hearts might be purged
from all uncleanness, that you might have fellowship with your God.

The glory of his power broke forth in you, which gave you courage and
dominion, the eternal inheritance was opened unto you to draw your affections
thither, that your portion might be with your God, and that he might be your
lot for ever, that your minds might be redeemed from the Earth, and your
affections from things that perish, that you might know your life to be in God,
and your strength to be the power of his Arm, that the light of his countenance
might be your delight, and the brightness of his glory your joy, that his
Righteousness might be your covering, and his wisdom a fountain within you,
that in his counsel you might dwell to praise his name for ever.

You dear Children whose rejoicing is in the Lord, who dwell in his power and
his eternal Counsel and wisdom, your dwelling is glorious, you seek not the
favor of men, neither do you seek to be esteemed by men above others, but your
peace is to know that you are esteemed by the Lord; you are poor, but the Lord
is to you riches, you are weak, but the Lord is strength unto you, your delight
is not to flourish in knowledge, therein to appear before men, to gain a great
name, and to be looked upon to be the greatest, but your delight is to know the
Tree of life flourishing in you, and you love not your lives unto death for the
love of God who has called you, and you are content to be esteemed fools, and
do not seek by the wisdom of words in the exalted knowledge, or any
disobedience to fly the reproach of men.

You delight in the least appearance of God in any, and you despise it not,
because they in whom it appears are not so wise as you, you look not upon the
poor with disdain, but the love of God flows from you to the needy, you delight
to deal your bread to the hungry that they also might be partakers of your
refreshments, and the poor in spirit you cherish with delight, because you
judge not with respect of persons, for the spirit of true Judgment is within
you.

You are not offended when another is esteemed above you, neither for that
cause (nor any other) does evil lodge in your hearts; you strive not to rule
over others, but you rejoice to be ruled by the Lord, whose power is in your
inward parts, and the glory of his rising is the light in which you walk, your
day shall never be darkened, neither shall the night overtake you who keep the
word of life, the proud shall not prosper in their way, neither shall the
mighty prevail against you, your way has the Almighty Established, and his
eternal and outstretched Arm shall guide you therein, and therewith will he
overcome your enemies whenever they shall rise against you, that his Name
might be glorious amongst the Heathen, and that his renown might spread to the
ends of the Earth, and that you might dwell with him for ever in the Kingdom
prepared for you.

Therefore you that have a quick and a large comprehension, take heed that when
your understandings are opened and knowledge increases, that that part which
delights in knowledge without the power of God get not up to live in
exaltation there, for in that state you deceive your own Souls which should be
nourished by the Power and Presence of God.

And although you shine in appearance as Stars of Heaven in that state, yet
(you being without the power of God by which you should be kept) there has the
Dragon power over you, and he will bring you down to the Earth in the day of
trial; for many aspire thither, and though they have a zeal for God, yet they
themselves being exalted in knowledge above the power and wisdom of God, they
are without the true feeling fellowship or discerning; And thus many times they
disdain the appearance of God in others, who are meek and poor, and appear not
in that excellency of wisdom and knowledge (in the thoughts of the conceited
wise) as they do, and to such spirits the Declaration of truth by our dear
Brethren declared (though in the power and wisdom of God) becomes as an old
thing, if it appear not in that excellency of the wisdom of words, which may
suite with their spirits, and so that by which the poor and the meek who truly
fear God are refreshed, is to them a loathing, because of their fullness, of
which they ought to be empty, and by such spirits my dear Brethren do often
suffer by back-bitings and secret reproaches, besides the burden of that Spirit
it self.

And although such in the general may have in their understanding how God ought
to be worshipped, and what is his way and in that knowledge be exalted, yet the
secrets of the Lord they know not, neither is his Counsel the place of their
dwellings; and although they may have a zeal for the Lord and his way, yet they
themselves are out of it, and being without the power of God, they cannot
overcome their lusts, and this is the cause that many times through the evil
practices of some, the way of truth is evil spoken of, and although they have a
form of Godliness, yet are their hearts unsanctified; therefore watch all that
you be not overcome.

I say unto you all watch that you may not be overcome, and when you feel any
thing rising in you against another, because (as you think) he does not respect
you as he ought to do, take heed that that prevail not over you, for if it do,
then from thence as a stream will evil thoughts, prejudice, and had surmisings
against others flow forth, until you are consumed in it; Therefore be sure to
watch against that part in you, which would rise up in prejudice and evil
thoughts, that the simplicity of the Gospel might abound in you, in that, in
meekness and long suffering to bear, that they who walk otherwise might be
ashamed.

For many there are who surmise evil, and conceive prejudice in their hearts
against others without a cause, and this is a cursed thing; therefore every one
watch that your hearts may be kept from being overcome with it.

And you that have attained to a measure of stability, let the wisdom of the
Almighty be your guide, that you might cherish the fainting and help the needy,
encourage the tender and them that are weak, let your tenderness in staidness,
wisdom and gravity appear unto them, for a friendly behavior cherishes the
simple, comforteh the weak and encourages them who are of a fainting heart,
when a strange, and stern carriage may discourage, oppress, and in some beget
prejudice.

But have not familiarity without the wisdom of God, as many have to the
giving liberty to vanity, or to the letting up of a light spirit in any, or to
the letting in of an unclean spirit over you, either so to become your burden,
or otherwise to captivate your hearts into evil, as it has been with many, who
for want of the watch to the light to be guided by the true wisdom, have been
familier with unclean spirits, and have been defiled with them; but be ye
patterns of Righteousness, Holiness and Purity by your wise walking in the fear
of God in all your conversation.

And walk in love toward all men, in wisdom and fear, and toward them who
have received the Testimony of truth, let the manifestation of your love be
such, that nothing in them thereby may be raised up to expect that from you,
which you intend not toward them, which they ought not to except from you; for
thus many have been snared and have fallen, that when love in familiarity has
been manifested to them, the contrary part in them, thereby has taken occasion
to look out after, and to except that which was not intended toward them; So
the wrong desires and expectations being raised, becomes a snare to the Soul;
Therefore in the true fear, wisdom and discerning, let your love be
manifested, that all occasions of evil may be avoided.

And when any of you feel any thing rising in you, that is discontented at any
time, because another (as you may think) is esteemed above you; watch against
that, for that is Cains nature by which the world is guided, who seek every one
to be greatest, and if that get Dominion in your hearts, then envy and
emulation which proceeds thereout, will lodge within you, and that will break
your unity with God and his people, and cause swift destruction to come upon
you; Therefore watch that through the power of Gods Spirit working in you, that
nature may be utterly destroyed and rooted out, that you may be content to be
esteemed the least, and whatever man esteemed you to be, (whatever man he may
be) your peace may abide in this, that you know that you are esteemed by the
Lord.

And when any of you feel any thing that desires fleshly liberty, keep that
down, and let the fear of God possess your hearts, for if that be given way
unto in one thing, it thereby recovereth strength to prevail over you, to lead
you to another, and this it will do until it has estranged you from Gods
Spirit, and have made you to be as other men, Children of wrath and
condemnation; Therefore in the light watch against it, and give no liberty to
the lust of the flesh, but let that be (through Gods spirit) crucified in you
that your liberty may stand in the eternal Kingdom of God.

And if there be any thing in you that longs for revenge, or the destruction
of them that have harmed you, that proceeds from the evil root, and you are not
to be of that Spirit, and if that prevail over you, it will destroy your peace
with God, and break your unity with his people; And although you may deny to
act outwardly against your enemies, yet if such a Spirit has place in you
which do desire the destruction of their persons, that will become a snare unto
your souls, except in the Light and power of God you wait, that thereby it
might be overcome, that you may truly know what it is (and also do it) to love
your enemies, to bless them that curse you, and to pray for them that
dispitefully use you; And in so doing you will heap coals of fire upon their
heads, and approve your selves the Children of God, and abide in peace with
him, and in the time of trial you will possess your souls in patience; but if
the other spirit has dominion over you, when your enemies increase, you will
fret your selves and be impatient, in desiring their destruction, you will
destroy your own peace, and the Lord will not regard you.

And all friends take heed that you are not filled with the cares of this life,
to gather together worldly goods to provide for the time to come, least your
hearts are taken up with it, and you be overcome with Covetousness, and so
forget the living God, that Created Heaven and Earth, and the treasure of this
World become your God; but wait in the light that your hearts may be kept out
of evil to worship God in Spirit, casting all your care upon him, having found
his Kingdom and Righteousness; Yet to be diligent every one in his place and
calling in the true fear of God, that you may be a holy people peculiar unto
God, and ordering the Creation in his fear and wisdom, to his glory every one
in his place; But make not the corruptable things your Treasure.

And you that are Parents of Children, let not your minds run into the Earth,
there to strive to heap up, that you may get portions for your Children, but
let the fear of God possess your hearts, and then with content you will indeed
know, that God cares for all his Children, who trust in him, and not in
uncertain riches, and stand single in the Counsel of God, that you may know his
will, him in all things to obey, casting your whole care upon him, that you
fall not into the snare of he Devil; for he that striveth to heap up the
Treasure of this life, runs into a snare and will fall into a pit; Therefore
wait that in all things whatever it be, you may be governed by the Spirit, and
in the wisdom and Counsel of God, that your peace may flow as a River.

And you that feel that assaults of the enemy, seeking to prevail over you,
take heed and in the Light watch, that that nature get not up to prevail over
you, which will despair of the victory, for if it do, that will cause you to
yield unto him; But in the fear of God dwell low in patience, believing in the
light that God will preserve you, and there he will give you power against that
dispairing nature and all the powers of death; And this faith is only in the
light, in which in patience wait (through true obedience) for the power of God
to give you the victory.

And you that see the Cross and are afraid of it, whilst you are looking
out, your Condition is miserable, and fear will be the snare of your souls
because you have regard in your hearts unto that which you must loose;
Therefore turn your eyes to the lord, that in the leadings of his Light you may
freely give up that which is to be crucified, and then your fears will cease,
and your strength in God will abound.

And take heed you that are wise, that high thoughts of yourselves prevail not
over you, for that ought not to be, for that will lead you into
self-exaltation, to think your selves to be wise when indeed you are without
the true wisdom, and then there will be more hope of a fool then of you, if
that should prevail over you; Therefore let the fear of God possess your
hearts, that self may be kept in no reputation, that the Lord may be exalted in
you, that so you may dwell in peace; for a servant of the Lord must not exalt
himself, but keep low, that the true God may be exalted, for whatever he has
which is good it comes from the Lord; Therefore not unto us, but unto his Name
be the praise for ever.

And you who are called to suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, let your dwelling
be in the Power, Wisdom and Counsel of God, that your desires prevail not over
you, and cause you to bow for your liberty, or at least take away your peace in
your bonds; for when you are bound, if you desire liberty, your dedesires
working in you make your bonds grievous, for where desires have liberty, and
are not satisfied, that is a state of grievous bondage; But if you are bound
and desire not your liberty, but are given up in the will of God, your bonds
are not grievous, but you are in the glorious freedom of the Lord; Therefore
watch against your desires, and in stead of desiring liberty, by the Spirit of
God wait in the Cross, that those desires which would captivate might be
destroyed, then shall your liberty be glorious, though you are outwardly in
bonds, then you will not be hasty for your deliverance, but will be willing to
wait the Lords time, in patience and with rejoicing.

And my dear Friends, let your bodies and all that you have be given up a
Sacrifice unto God, that in the time of trial you may approve your selves to be
the peculiar people of God, being willing to deny your selves, and all outward
enjoyments for the name of God, and such a people God will Crown with eternal
life; Therefore my dear Friends, let none have occasion to say, that for the
love of your goods, your liberty or your lives, any of you have forsaken the
way of truth, which the Lord has called you to, for it is through sufferings
that the God of Heaven this day will glorify his people; Therefore fear not
the rage of man, neither be ye dismayed because of the Mighty flood, for the
Lord God who loves his people with an everlasting love, has set the bounds
thereof, and for trial it is (that they that are approved may appear) and not
for the destruction of his people; Therefore fear not, but be valiant for the
truth of our God.

And take heed that when at any time you have outwardly suffered loss for
truths sake, that not any of your minds be drawn out to expect an outward
recompense, but rather to rejoice that you are accounted worthy to suffer for
the Lords sake, then you shall have your reward, which is eternal life; for
many when they suffer murmur at their outward losses, and have an eye out after
an outward recompense, which if they obtain according to their desire, verily
they have their reward, but if they obtain not, they are offended, and stumble
and reproach them from whom the did expect it, and so they become a burden to
the Lords people, and a dishonor to truth; But learn every one in all
Conditions without murmuring to be content, and whatsoever you do, or whatever
you suffer let if it be singly unto he Lord.

And you that have this worlds goods, set not your hearts upon it, to bind up
the bowels of your love, from them who are in want, for if you do your treasure
will be the snare of your souls, and the Lord will not hold you guiltless.

And you that are outwardly poor, let not your minds run out after relief from
others to depend there upon, and so neglect your own diligence, as many have
done, for that mind prevailing in you, if it be not satisfied it will break
forth into emnity, but let the fear of God possess your hearts, that you may
keep the truth in humility, meekness and contentedness to walk, and your trial
will not be beyond your ability, and herein (though to you is distributed of
the temporal things according to your need, yet) you will not be burdensome to
Gods people, for it is the desiring and the craving spirit after those things
which is a burden to the just.

And all friends take heed that that spirit prevail not in any of you which
will lead you to watch for evil with an evil eye, and although the good appears
it regards it not, but watches for the evil, thereby to take an advantage,
this will beget strif and emulation; But my Friends where any thing of Good
appears in any, although there may be yet much of evil, yet let your
tenderness, patience, meekness and love be exercised toward such in the
wisdom of God, that the good which appears may be cherished, that you might be
Instruments of Salvation unto them.

And whenever you are called to suffer for the Lords Testimony, take heed
that the hasty fiery spirit in a fiery zeal be not exalted in you, for that
will endure but for a season, but keep low to feel and enjoy the meek quiet
suffering and patient spirit of the Lamb, to bear you through, and therein you
will have peace in your sufferings, and in the end obtain the victory.

And the eternal God will establish your goings, and Crown you with honor,
glory and everlasting dominion above all the families of the Earth.

I am your Brother in the fellowship of the Eternal Gospel. W. A.


