AN ACCOUNT OF THE General Nursery, OR COLLEGE of INFANTS, Set up by the
JUSTICES of PEACE FOR THE COUNTY of MIDDLESEX, With the Constitutions and Ends
thereof.

LICENSED,

October 13. 1686. R. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed by R. Roberts. 1686.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE General Nursery, OR COLLEGE of INFANTS, etc.
THERE is a large House at Clerkenwell, built near the Fields, which cost the
several Parishes within this County of Middlesex, at least 5000 l. Building,
which House is by the Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, set a
part for the Reception and Breeding up of poor Fatherless or Motherless
Infants, left to the Parish care, and for the Instructing them in Religion and
Virtue, and making them Capable of getting an honest Livelihood by their Labor.

1. There is a Governor, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
County of Middlesex, to whose Care the said Justices have committed the General
Nursery.

2. There is a Minister residing constantly in the Place, who Reads Prayers
twice a day, before Dinner and Supper; he Catechises on Sundays, and sometimes
preaches in the Afternoon; he sees that the Schoolmaster and all Inferior
Servants do their several Duties, and that all the Children are well provided
for, and instructed in true Religion and Virtue.

3. There is a Physician, an Apothecary and Chyrurgion, who attend weekly,
every Thursday, in their several ways, to take care of, and provide for the
Children.

4. There is an excellent Writing-Master to Teach all the Children to Write,
who also Registers the Names of all Children admitted and disposed of, and
keeps all the Accounts of the House.

5. There is a Schoolmaster, who Teaches all the Boys to Read, say their
Prayers and Catechism; there are several other Persons of several Trades, to
Teach the Children several sorts of Works, and bring them up therein.

6. There is a Porter, who looks to all the Children at Play, attends the Door,
and Rings the Bell to Prayers, Dinner and Supper.

7. There is a Matron or Housekeeper, who takes care for Provision to be
brought into the House, and Dressing thereof, for the Family.

8. There is an Assistant to the Matron, who takes care of all the Childrens
Clothes, and of the Beds and Sheets, that all be mended and kept in good Order.

9. There is a School Mistress for the Girls, to Teach them to Read, say their
Prayers and Catechism.

10. There is a Semstress, who Teaches all the Girls to Work, and make all the
Linen used in the House.

11. There is a Cook to Dress all Provisions according to the Matrons Order.

12. There is a Landress also, belonging to the House.

13. There is an old Nurse, to take care of all Sick and Weak Children, this
Nurse has her Assistants if need requires.

14. There are several Women to look after the Chambers, to Wash and keep Clean
all the Lodgings, make the Beds, and to do other necessary Work there.

15. The Books are constantly made up every first Thursday in every Month, and
all Officers and Tradesmen, and others, who are concerned in the House, are
cleared off.

16. There is also a Register Book, kept to Register the Names of all Worthy
Persons who shall be Benefactors to this good Work, and the same laid by for a
time, to put the Children out with it, to Trades, as they grow fit; and the
Justices of the Peace, once every year, at the Quarter Sessions, next after the
Feast of the Birth of our Lord, yearly have constantly an Account thereof.

A Proposal for the better Education of Infants.
Although many good Provisions have been heretofore made by the Charity of
well-disposed Persons, for the Maintenance and Education of Youth: Yet no
Convenience or Education has yet been thought on, or taken care of, for poor
Infants, who can least provide for themselves, or be provided for.

For want whereof, many great Evils and Inconveniences are daily found, by the
wilful and careless causing, or suffering many Infants to perish, or to Suck in
wicked and debauched Principles, to the Ruin, as it is to be feared, often of
their Souls, as well as Bodies.

Now for the remedying thereof, a General Nursery, or Infantory, is recommended
by His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, at the Quarter Sessions for Middlesex
and Westminster, to the Inhabitants therein, as by their Orders at their
several Sessions may appear.

And for that purpose, the Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex,
have already disposed of, and appropriated a great public Building, at
Clerkenwell (whose good Examples, it is hoped, will soon be followed by others)
and such Orders and Provisions are there already made, that Infants shall be
there Received and Provoided for, with all manner of Necessaries, and be Taught
to Read and Write, and be bred up in true Religion and Virtue.

And it is supposed, that when Persons are satisfied of the great Conveniences
and Advantages of this Infantory or Nursery, many Charitable and Religious
Persons will be Liberal Benefactors thereunto, whereby the Charge of the
Maintenance and Education of the Poor may be at least eased, if not wholly
taken off.

But the Children first brought in, must first be provided for, out of such
Charities.

Those who intend to give or leave any Sum of Money for the Provision of any
Infant or Infants, may at the House be very well satisfied of the Fund of Land
for the securing thereof, and for the putting out of such Children, or
providing for them, when and in such way as shall be thought for their
Advantage, or according to such Directions as the Charitable Benefactors shall
direct.

For 50 l. a Child will be wholly provided for, bred up, put forth Apprentice,
and 10 l. given him, when out of his time, toward setting him up, besides the
benefit of the House.

For 120 l. a Child will be wholly provided for, bred up, put forth to a very
good Trade, and have 100 l. given him to set up withal, when out of his Time.

And according to the Sum or Sums of Money, that shall be given or left for, or
toward such Charity, the same being secured as above to their Satisfaction, the
product shall be accounted for yearly, to the Justice of the Peace, in your
Michaelmas Quarter Sessions, if no other Person or Persons be appointed by such
Benefactor, to Oversee, and take such Account.

The great Conveniences and Advantages by this Nursery will be,

1. To the Fatherless and Motherless.

2. To the Poor; the Trouble and Charge of Breeding up such Infants, taking
them much off from earning their Livelihoods.

3. To all such whose Employments require, or cause their Absence from their
Dwellings, as Seafaring Men, users of Fairs and Markets.

4. And to all such as would not otherwise keep Houses, unless it were for the
Looking after, and Breeding up their Children.

It is also believed this Provision may prevent the great Trouble and Charge to
all persons, by Children left and laid in the several Parishes.

Or that at least it may ease the Parishes, and their Officers, in Providing
for, and Breeding up of their Parish Children.

And by this Education, we may be assured there will be better Subjects, better
Masters, and better Apprentices and Servants, for all persons that shall need
them.

And as this good Work takes, many other Proposals shall be made for the taking
off, and wholly providing for Infants, for small sums of Money, which shall be
secured by certain and sufficient Funds.

The Rates proposed for such Maintenance and Education are,

Twenty Shillings Entrance, which is for new Clothes and Bedding.

And 3 s. a Week, for Meat, Drink, Clothes, and all other things, for the
future.

The Days to receive them, are Thursdays weekly, from Nine till Noon, at the
Nursery or Infantory at Clerkenwell, etc.

But the Place and Accommodation being so much approved of by all that see it,
and the Confluence of People thither on those days being great, for the greater
ease and dispatch to the business, It is desired that all Persons approving of
the Undertaking, will come and bring in their Children on the Mondays before,
and leave the Name and Age of the Child with the Officer, who is appointed to
attend there on those days to that purpose.

Note, That you may take the Child away at any time, when you have an
Opportunity of a better Provision for it, and the new Clothes with it.

A COPY of the several ORDERS of SESSIONS, made at MIDDLESEX and WESTMINSTER,
for the better Encouragement of the General Nursery or College of Infants,
lately Established at Clerkenwell. With a Copy of a Letter written from the
Justices to the Ministers and Churchwardens of the several Parishes within the
said County, after they had been to view the same, since it was put in Practice
this last Quarter Sessions.
Middl. ss. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Com. Midd. apud
Hicks-hall in St. John-street in com, praed' die Lunae scil. Vicesimo secundo
die Februarii Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. secundo.
THe Justices of Peace for the County of Middlesex having observed great
Inconveniences for the loose way of breeding up of Parish Children, whereby
very few of them come to good; for the remedying whereof, they have at their
Quarter Sessions, ordered a great part of the Corporation-Workhouse at
Clerkenwell for their Reception, and the same is fitted up for that purpose,
and excellent Rules and Methods are there taken for their Education in true
Religion and Virtue; and the care thereof is committed to Sir Thomas Row
Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the same County. And
that the Benefits and Advantages thereby may be seen and found, for the putting
the same in Practice (having considered the Extent and Condition of the several
Parishes) they do hereby Order the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor in
the several Parishes here undermentioned, on or before the 18 th day of March
next ensuing, to send the Proportion of Children hereafter specified, out of
such Parish Children as they now have in their respective Parishes. St. Giles
in the Fields, Five. St. Andrew Holborn, Five. St. James Westminster, Five. St.
Margaret Westminster, Five. St. Martin in the Fields, Six. St. Paul Covent
Garden, Four. St. Clement Danes, Five. St. Mary le Savoy, Three. Roles Liberty,
Two. St. James Clerkenwell, Five. St. Giles Cripplegate, Five.


Per Cur. Smith.

Westminster. ss. Ad Generalem Quarterialem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent, apud
Westminst. pro Libertat. Decani and Capituli Ecclesiae Collegiatae beati Petri
Westminster. Civit. Burgi ac Ville Westminster. in Com. Middl. and Sancti Martini le Grand,
London. die Mercurii scil. Septimo die Aprilis, Dom. Anno Regni Regis Jacobi
Secundi, secundo.
UPon the reading of the Order mentioned on the other side of this Paper, and
upon Consideration thereof, this Court are of Opinion, That the Method and
Means to the purpose within specified, are very commendable, and ought to be
encouraged for the better Education of Parish-Children in the Knowledge and Fear
of God; and therefore they do concur with the Order already made on the other
side; and further, they do Order that there be a further Proportion of
Children, as hereafter specified, sent out of the Parishes here under
mentioned, and do recommend the speedy doing thereof, to the care of the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Parishes. And do further
Order, That all other Churchwardens send out of the Parishes within their
Liberty, such their Proportions as are enjoined them by the said Order, without
delay.

Per Cur. Hardisty.
The Parish of St. Ann Westminster, Five. The Parish of St. James Westminster
more than on the other side, Three. St. Margaret Westminster, more Three. St.
Martins in the Fields, more Three. St. Paul Covent Garden, Two. St. Clement
Danes, Two. St. Mary Savoy, One.
And as many more as the Churchwardens of the several Parishes within this
Liberty shall think convenient to send.

Hardisty.



Middl. ss. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Com. Middl. apud
Hicks-hall in St. John-street in Com. praed' die Lunae scil. Tricesimo die
Augusti Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. secundo.
UPon reading the Return made by the Justices of Peace of the Tower Hamblets,
and upon their approving of the usefulness of the General Nursery at
Clerkenwell in this County, and upon their desire that His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace here assembled, should nominate a Proportion to be sent out of the
Tower Hamblets; and the said Justices of Peace here Assembled, having inspected
the said House of Nursery; and being more and more satisfied, not only by their
view, but by the general Approbation and Charracter of every Person that has
seen and tried the same. It is thought fit, and ordered by this Court, That the
Inhabitants of every Hamblet and Precinct in the said Tower Division, does send
five Children at the least, and as many more as the Justices of that Division
shall appoint, and the Churchwardens and Overseers of every respective Hamblet
and Precinct in the said Division, are required to send the same accordingly.

Per Cur. Smith.

Middl. ss. Ad Generalem Quarterialem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Com.
Middl. apud' Hicks hall in St. John-street, in Com. praed' die Lunae, Quinto
die Julii Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. secundo.
THis Court having considered of the Advantages to the public, by a General
Nursery, or College for Infants, and therefore appropriated a great part of the
County Workhouse at Clerkenwell; and did also for the putting the same in
Practice, appoint several Children to be brought thereinto, out of the several
Parishes within this County near adjoining to the City of London; and it being
found by experience a very useful and advantageous Design for the public Good,
and very well liked and appoved of by all Persons that have been to see the
same: This Court does therefore Recommend the same to His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, of the several Country Divisions in this County, desiring them to
impart the Convenience thereof to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor
of their several Divisions, and that they do send two at the least out of every
Parish without the Weekly Bills of Mortality within this County, and such
further number of Children out of every Parish in their said Divisions, as to
them the said Justices shall be thought most meet and convenient.

Per Cur. Smith.

Diverse of the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the several
Parishes, having according to the Orders sent in their Children; have
subscribed this Address to the Bench of Middlesex.
Midd. ss. WE the Churchwardens and Overseers of the several Parishes
(appointed by the Sessions of Peace of this County to send some of our poor
Parish Children to the Infantory or College of Infants at Clerkenwell) do find
it not only a great Convenience to our several Parishes, but a very great
Advantage to the poor Children, they being provided for, and Educated much
beyond the Imaginations of any Persons that do not go to see them, and to the
great Satisfaction of all that do; And we return our humble Thanks to the
Sessions for the Encouragement they have already given to this good Work. And
as much as may become us, do humbly desire the further Assistance of this
Court, for the promoting and supporting thereof; And we likewise find that the
Matron of the said House does very diligently and carefully perform her Duty.

Middl. ss. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Com. Middl. apud
Hicks-hall in St. John-street, in Com. praed' die Lunae scil. Tricesimo die
Augusti Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. secundo.
WE the Grand Jury at Hicks-hall, Sworn this present Sessions for the Body of
the County of Middlesex, going to see this public House, or the General
Nursery, or College of Infants, did examine and inspect into the Methods and
Rules thereof, and we find that all the Children there, are well Lodged, well
Clothed, kept Neat and Clean, taught to Read and Write, and well instructed in
the Religion of the Church of England, as it is now Established by Law. And we
find that by such Education, both the Bodies and Souls of many Infants will be
preserved, and many great Evils prevented, which daily happen in this County.
And we find it a great Advantage and Convenience to the several Parishes, and
that it is a very charitable and exceeding good Work. And we return our humble
and hearty Thanks to the Justices of the Peace for this County, for the
Encouragement they have already given it. And we humbly desire the further
Assistance of this Court for the supporting and promoting thereof.

William Holden, Foreman. William Davis William Sanders William Munden John
Ilford William Loughton Charles Munden John Thorley Hugh Buxton Henry Barret
Robert Drinkwater Thomas Brumwick Davenant Sherborne Lawrence Wright Thomas
Rayner Robert Munden.


Middl. ss. Ad General. Quarterialem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Registent. per
adjornament. pro Com. Midd. apud Hicks-hall in St. Johnstreet, in Com. praed'
die Martis scil. tertio decimo die April. Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc
Angliae, etc. secundo; coram Roberto Clerk, Mil. Joh. Reresbey, Mil. and Bar.
Jacobo Dewy, Willielmo Bridgman, Carolo Bonithon, Simone Parry, Thoma Hariot,
Richardo Price, Carolo Hinton, Francisco Knollys, Petro Lugg, Thoma Smith,
Galfrido Nightingale, Armig. and al. sociis suis Justic' dict' Dom' Regis ad
Pacem. in Com. praed' conservand' necnon ad diverse. felon. transgress. and al.
Malefacta in eodem Com. perpetrat. audiend' and terminand' assign'.
HIS Majesty's Justices of the Peace abovementioned, having observed the loose
and idle way of breeding up of the Parish Children in this County, and that
very few of them come to good, by reason that in their first beginning of Life,
they suck in wicked and debauched Principles; for the Prevention whereof, and
that for the future they who are bred up at the public charge, may be
instructed in true Religion and Virtue, they have at their General Quarter
Sessions appropriated a great part of their Corporation Workhouse for their
Reception, where there are Rules and Methods used for the better Breeding up of
those Children which are sent thither. And the said Justices having been to
view the same this present Sessions, do very well approve thereof, now the same
is put into Practice. And whereas the said House has been fitted up at the
great Charge of some few Persons to make trial for the receiving of such as
shall be sent thither; but if the said House shall Increase, as they the said
Justices have reason to believe it will, it may conduce much to the public
Good: For the better Encouragement thereof, it is commended by the said
Justices to all Persons whatsoever in this County, to give their Assistance
toward the carrying on of this good Work. And the said Justices do desire the
Ministers and Churchwardens of the several Parishes, Hamblets and Precincts in
this County, to commend the same in their respective Parishes, Hamblets and
Precincts.

Per Cur. Smith.
To the Ministers and Churchwardens of the respective Parishes, Precincts and
Hamblets, in this County of Middlesex.
FINIS.
June 30. An. 3. Jacobi Regis.
The Grand Jury having been to view the College of Infants, made this
Presentment.
Midd. ss WE the Grand Jury sworn for the County of Middlesex, this present
Midsummer Sessions, do present, That the General Nursery or College of Infants,
is one of the best and most charitable works that has for these many years been
set on foot; and we find by what we now see, and by the Character which is
every where given of it, That the Children are well educated in Religion and
Virtue, and provided for with all things necessary; and we are convinced that
this way of Education will prevent many great evils which are now daily
practiced by breeding up of youths; and we are of opinion that the
Churchwardens and Overseers cannot do a more Charitable deed with their
public money, than by sending their Infants to that place; for encouragement
whereof we humbly thank the Justices of Peace: And we desire, That they will in
their several Stations and Places order their Officers of their several
Parishes to send their Infants to the said Nursery to be maintained at the
public Charge.

Richard Robins, Foreman. Edward Hamstead Thomas Smith Thomas Lord Thomas Long
John Coep Robert Harridge Richard Savidg John Dodd Thomas Barker Thomas Harris
George Stead William ^hild John Farmer Matthew Horton William Clapshaw John
Hartwell.
The Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex upon many Complaints
taking into their Consideration the loose and evil way of the breeding up of
the poor Fatherless and Motherless Children committed to the public Care, and
that few or none came to good, did appropriate some part of their Corporation
Workhouse for their Reception, that an Experiment might be made of a more
regular method and better way for the breeding up, and disposing of these poor
Infants:

And according as they found it good in Effect and Practice, either to dissolve
it, or carry on the same.

To that purpose by their Order at their General Quarter Sessions they
appointed a small proportion out of every Parish to be sent thither, that they
might see whether the Proposals when put into practice were in themselves good
and advantageous for the public; and Westminster Sessions made the like Order
upon proposidg of it there.

Now all the Parishes did comply with the said Order, and do very much approve
the same, but St. Clement Danes, whose proportion being but 5 Children which
charge would have amounted but to 2 s 6 d. per week more than now they pay, for
that reason only did absolutely refuse to obey the Order of the Quarter
Sessions, and would send none thither, tho they at discretion gave away 2708 l.
16 s. 05 d. in the 7 years. Upon which this Order was made.

Middl. ss. Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis Dom. Regis tent. pro Com. Middl. apud
Hicks-hall in St. John-street in Com. praed' die Lunae scil. Sexto die
Decembris, Anno Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi nunc Angliae, etc. secundo.
WHereas the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the Parish of St.
Clement Danes, in this County, have been summoned to attend his Court this
present Sessions to show how many poor Children of the said Parish they have
put out to be Apprentices at the charge of the said Parish for the space of
seven years last past, and their names, as also the names of the persons to
whom they put them Apprentices, and the places of their abode, and what money
they gave with them, and what is now become of the said Apprentices: And the
said Officers have attended this Court, but have not given any satisfactory
Account to this Court, in the Premises, but desired time; It is therefore
thought fit and Ordered by this Court, That it be, and it is hereby recommended
to Sir Thomas Row, Knight. John Phelips, Esquire, Tho. Done, Esquire, Simon Parry, Esquire,
Richard Price, Esquire, and Peter Lugg, Esquire, his Majesty's Justices of Peace of
this County, or to any two or three of them; to cause the said Churchwardens
and Overseers of the poor of the said Parish, and such other persons as they
think convenient to come before them, and examine the said Officers and Persons
concerning the disposal of the said Parish Children for Seven years last past,
and what is now become of them. And the said Justices are hereby further
desired to make a Report to this Court, in Writing under their hands, how they
shall find the true state of the Premises, and how they shall find the
Muster-Roll of the Parish Children in the said Parish, at the General Sessions
of the Peace to be held for this County, next after Hillary Term now next
ensuing.

The Report. Whereas by an Order made at last Christmas Quarter Sessions, it
was desired and referred to Sir Thomas Row Knight, John Phelips Esquire and
several other his Majesty's Justices for the said County to Examine what
Children the Parish of St. Clements Danes have had under their care for Seven
years past, and how many of them have been put forth Apprentices; and what
charge the Parish has been at with the said Children, and how many of them now
are in being.

We the said Justices do Report as follows, That we inspected the said Books,
and do find that in the year 1679. there were then at the charge of the Parish,
89 Children; of which 16 were Foundlings, all Clements: And we find there has
been added to the charge of the Parish 110 in the following Six years, in all
199. of which 51. are Clements, Children laid in the streets.

We find that of these 55. has been put forth to Apprentice, and that there
are now in being 32 of the said 55. only.

And we find that there now remains of Children at the charge of the Parish,
58. of which 13. are Clements.

And of the Apprentices living, 32, of which 3 are Clements. In all 90.

We find that the Officers have expended for Nursing these Children, in the
Seven years last past. 1943.l. 09.s. 0.d.

And for Binding forth the Apprentices 0109.l. 08.s. 0.d.

In all. 2052.l. 17.s. 0.d.

And we further find that they have given away on Extraordinary Charges at
their pleasure, some of which are for the Children. 2708.l. 16.s. 05.d.

All which we submit to this honorable Court. Tho. Row. Jo. Phelips. Peter
Lucy. Sim. Parry.

1. Note that Seven years ago, the Parish had 89. Children; and that 110. have
been since added, in all 199. of these Apprentices accounted in, there is but
90. left. So that 109 are lost and dead, in the said Seven years, or never were,

Though paid for in their Books.

2. Note that of 55. bound out Apprentices in these Seven years last past,
which cost the Parish 109. l. 8. s. there is only left 32.

And how many of the 32. will stay to serve out their Time, is to be enquired
further off.

3. Note that 51. of the 110. were Foundlings, all Clements, laid in the
Parish, in Six years last; and so take the name of Clement, from the Parish,
and 16. were then there, in all 79. the first year of the Inspection, in all
97. now only 3. are bound out Apprencies, and 13. are left, the first number
16. and 51. all Clements addded, are all lost and dead; now the Parish-Books
have been searched how many were Christened of these Foundlings, or Clements, or
buried; and very few appear upon the Register: It is questionable if they ever
were all there, though paid for.

It is much that 51 should die out of 67. in Seven year.

The particular Money paid for Nursing of these Children, is 1943. l. 9. s. 0.
d. in Seven year. Now judge if well disposed.

October the 15. Anno. 30. Jacobi Regis. Midd ss
WE the Grand Jury sworn for the Body of the County of Middlesex, this present
Michaelmas Sessions, having been to view and inspect the College of Infants,
set up by the Justices of the Peace for this County, do present, That it is a
very advantageous and an exceeding Good work useful to the Public, and a thing
that will give much ease to the several Parishes of this County, if they send
their Children thither, and prevent many evils which daily increase by the Ways
and Methods as the Officers now use; and it will prevent many Cheats put upon
the several Parishes by paying for Children which have been a long time dead,
and for many which never were, and give a great satisfaction to all persons, in
passing the Officers Accounts of the several Parishes; and it will be a great
ease to the Officers, for there they may at any time see them together, which
when placed at a distance, and in several places, it will take much time and
expense to perform; it will be a great ease in the Charge, for these Children
placed in the General Nursery, will be taken from the Parishes without charge,
for their Education sake; and the Parishes will save 3.4 or 5 l. a piece, by
giving Money to Bind them Apprentices, and providing Clothes for them, and by
giving an Addition of Money when any are sick, all which is by this Provision
saved to the several Parishes; and we do for our selves and the whole County
whom we represent, give our humble thanks to the Justices of Peace of this
County, for their setting a foot so good a work; And we give our hearty thanks
to Sir Thomas Row for his great care in the prudent management thereof, and
desire that they will encourage the same by sending thither so many of the
Parish Children as the House can receive, for we conceive the Officers of the
several Parishes cannot better provide for their poor Infant Children, nor can
the Public Money raised for that purpose, be better employed, than by paying
for their Infant-Children in that place.

Francis Brown, Foreman John Smith Henry Anger John Sharp William Watkins
Thomas Merriot Thomas Harding Amor Oxley Thomas Woodward Thomas Knight Thomas
Friar John Jordan Christopher Ingleton John Houshaw Thomas White John Bowden
Richard Piggat.
The advantages that all persons will receive by this College of Infants.

1. By breeding the Parish Children in this way, they will be taken for
Apprentices to very good Trades, or Servants for their Education sake; and the
Parishes save the Money they now give with them, and the Clothes they provided.

2. There is no accidental Charge, can be charged upon them by the Officers of
the Parishes either for Sickness, Clothes, or any other accident, the 3. s.
per Week, being the whole charge in the College, and thereby the accidental
Book of the Parish will be much lessened.

3. No Child can be paid for, that is not, nor any longer than they are alive;
and the Officers of the Parishes will with much more ease and satifaction
adjust their Accounts when they produce an Acquittance from the House for a
Voucher.

4. There will not be so many Children exposed to the Parish as now are, for it
is believed that one half of the Children left to the Parish in the Streets,
are more to save credit and trouble given by Parish Officers about security,
than for want of 3 s. per Week to pay for them, had they a convenience as in
the College.

Here the Widower may settle his Children, and go to the Indies for a Soldier,
or any place where he pleases.

The Widow may do the like.

The young man who by Folly is extravagant, may, having placed it here, be free
from the opportunity of further Folly, by the Woman's coming after him for
Maintenance, which many times is the occasion of getting more and greater evils.

The Tradesman may leave off Housekeeping, having here provided for his Child,
and may see it every Day without trouble or more charge.

The dying man may be sure of a Provision for his Child, for leaving 50 l. to
the House, his Child is taken care of, put forth Apprentice, and shall have 10
l. out of the 50 l. to set up withal; what more he leaves, is to be accounted
for every year to the Justices at every Christmas Sessions, if he by Will
leaves no body else, and the Interest made Principal, and a good Fund in Land
is now settled for the performance hereof, and at the house they may be
satisfied therein; and a man may find many persons who will see this done, to
whose care if the Money and Child were left, the Money might be lost and spent,
and the child come to the Parish.

And for such as are not willing to engage any person for Security, they may
leave a caution of Money in the House, and have the Fund settled for Security,
the Surplusage returned when they take away the child, the usual Rate of the
House being first paid, and no Questions asked whose the child is, or whence it
came.

FINIS.

