A CONFUTATION OF Some of the ERRORS OF Mr. Daniel Williams. By the Reverend
Mr. Uincent Alsop. IN A LETTER To the Reverend Mr. Daniel Burgess.

LONDON Printed for John Marshal, and Sold at the Bible in Newgate-street, and
at the Bible in Grace Church street where is to be had the History of the Union
between the Presbyterian and Congregational Ministers in and about London; And
the Causes of the breach o^ it. School.

TO THE READER.
THough, in the ensuing Letter the Reverend Mr. Alsop is brought in Confuting
some of those Errors, which are in Mr. Williams's Writings, and have been
Countenanced by his Subscription, and the Defense he has written for him; yet
it ought not to surprise thee. For, it is Probable, he may plead Prescription,
and upon this Foundation lay a claim to the Privilege of contradicting
whatsoever himself says, or does. His subscription to the Testimonial before
Mr. Williams's Book, Entitled, Gospel Truth Stated, in these words, We Judge,
that our Reverend Brother has for the substance, Rightly Stated the Truth and
Errors mentioned as such; then thus to it, that he has in all that is
Material, Rightly and Fully Stated them; And again his Declaration in the
presence of Dr. Bates, Mr. How, and others, that he subscribed only to the
Right stating of the Truths and Errors, thinking or believing, or not doubting,
that there are Errors amongst what he calls Truth; and some Truths Represented
by him to be Errors and yet an Error as well as a Truth may be rightly Stated;
These contradictions, as well as his Approving and Recommending the First
Paper, then subscribing it, and yet with the greatest virulence exposing it;
may serve instead of a Demonstration, that how surprising soever they may be in
another, they ought not to be so in him: And that his late seeming
Tergiversations, Windings and Turnings are not so much to be heeded, but that
still his Judgment is to be measured by what he has in his Anti-Sozzo, and must
be so, until he Retracts and Answers it.

To which I will add, that I am of Opinion, the Author of the Letter does not
urge Mr. Alsops Authority, but his Reasons, which are, it must be owned, a
Solid Confutation of those Errors, in Mr. Williams's, to which they are
opposed. For Mr. Alsops Acting the Part of a Fickle man in forsaking the Faith
he once Preached, cannot in the least weaken those Arguments, whose strength
lies in their Conformity unto, and Agreement with the sacred Text. But
notwithstanding the many different shapes he seems to have assumed, I Will hope
the best of him, that he has not Abandoned those Principles so freely owned and
strenuously proved by him, in his Anti-Sozzo, and that therefore the Letter is
justly Styled, A Confutation of some of Mr. Williams's Errors by the Reverend
Mr.

VINCENT ALSOP.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Author being perfectly unknown unto me, I can give no other Character of
him than what he has given of himself in this Letter, However, I must do him
Justice in desiring thee to Correct one considerable mistake in page 8. line 3.
and for, [what has Infatuated an Alsop,] read [what has Influenced an Alsop.]

To the Reverend Mr. Daniel Burgess.
SIR,
THE Matters in Difference between Mr. Daniel Williams, and his Opposers, as we
gather out of his Books, compared with what has been Written against him, is
not as has been Represented to us, merely about Words, and Different Modes of
Expression; but about Things of the Nearest Concernment to our Salvation: And
the Menage of the Contest, on our part, so odd, that unless our Brethren in the
City, do Directly, and with Great Plainness, Testify against the Errors found
in his Writings, the Scandal, under which we shall all fall, will, with its
Consequences, be much greater than the Wisest of us can Foresee; Though, God
knows, it is already such, as makes us sink in the Esteem of Men of Good
Learning and Sobriety. For, Sir, the Errors he has vented if they are not the
same with, they are so like to the Impious Opinions of Socinus, in several
Points, that the more Exact our Examination is, the more apt we are to take 'em
for Socinian; or, at least, for what is Adjusted to Prepare the Way for their
more Kind Reception and Entertainment. And to speak Impartially, He has, with
an Industry Unparallel, and with all the Art and Cunning, together with an
Heretical Freedom of Saying and Unsaying; of Subscribing and Renouncing, as it
is for his Purpose, one while appearing in the Light, and again taking his
turns in the Darker Shades; Gained; he has, Isay, gained such an Interest
amongst our Brethren in Bishops gate-street, as to Conciliate some to his
Notions, others to his Person, and all of 'em to Act, as if they were entirely
of his Mind: And is it not wonderful to observe, how almost all of you are
wheedled into a Silence, and Consequently into a Tacit Approval of what you
Abhor, by a Man, that Exceeds not his Brethren, either in Learning, or Virtue,
or any thing else that can, without a Blush, be so much as mentioned; and who
is no more, nor no longer ours, than his Interest, which made him to be so,
does Influence; For He is as much, and no more a Presbyterian, than the Present
Controversy is about Church Discipline, which Representation, he has made of
it, is as Remote from Truth, as his Heart was from Union with the
Congregational Brethren, when he declared, That whilst he Lived, he would have
nothing to do with them. For, although he has got an Advantage from the
Independents absenting themselves from the Monday-Veeting in
Bishopsgate-street, which he has Improved to the Persuading Diverse of our
Number to believe, that they have wickedly Designed, and are Craftily
Endeavoring the Subversion of our Church Government, yet it is as manifest as
the Light at Noon, That He is most Incessant in his Labors to Possess us with
an Opinion, That He is a Presbyterian, for no other Ends than to take you off
from a Severe Examination of his Writings, and from your giving a Just and
Necessary Testimony against his Errors; wherein he has been so successful as
to Prevail with most of you to Join with him in the Cry, that the Differences
amongst you, are only about some Late Invented Terms and Phrases, or Peculiar
Modes of Expression, or Methods of Explaining the Truths, in which you are, as
to the Substance, Agreed; Or, at most, about Tything the Mint, Anise and Cummin
of Religion, so Remote are they from affecting the weightier matters of Faith,
whence it is commonly Demanded, To what purpose is there so much Noise and
Pother made? What has Mr. Williams done? Of what Nature are the Errors, with
which he is Charged? Why are they not Assigned? They have been Assigned, first
by six Independent Ministers in a Paper sent to your Meeting in
Bishopsgate-street; Then by Mr Chaunc^y, in his Neonomianism Unmasked;
Afterward by Mr Lobb, in a Paper delivered to several of our Brethren, as in
the late History of the Union, p. 28. But that you may see what provokes me, I
will, without Exaggeration, set down some of his Erroneous Opinions, in his own
words; Show their Agreement with the Tenets advanced by the Enemies to Christ's
Truths, and how strenuously the Learned and Reverend Father Alsop, has, in his
Answer to a Socinianizing Gentleman, I mean in his Anti-Sozzo, confuted Mr.
Williams.

Sect. I. About the Eternity of the Death threatened against Sin.
The Notion Mr. Williams has Espoused about the Eternity of the Threatened
Punishment, is such as the Disciples of Episcopius, and Men of the Racovian
Twang, have, in their Attempts to subvert the Doctrine of Christ's
Satis^action, Advanced. For, as these Gentlemen do make the Threatened Death, in
its first Consideration to be Eternal, as such; so does He; whence it follows,
That Christ could not suffer the Punishment, we Deserved, because that was
Eternal Death; and Christ's Sufferings were but for a Time. So Socinus, in
Crellius, Id quod nos pati merebamur erat mors aeterna, quam Christus nec
sustinuit, nec sustinere, Decreto Divino obstante Potuit. Crel. Respons. ad
Grot. Cap. 9. Partic. 1. And Curcellaeus, Christus non est Passus mortem
aeternam, quae erat Poena Peccato Debita. Nam paucis tantum horis in Cruce
pependit, and tertia die Resurrexit ex mortuis, quod nullam cum aeternitate
Proportionem habet. Relig. Christo Instit. lib. 5. cap. 19. Sect. 16. And so,

Mr. Williams. The Threatening of the Law was Eternal Death, as Eternal,
Eternity was an Ingredient in the Misery of Every Sinner-Man made Right. p. 14.


Father Alsop. Let none say, if Christ bore the Punishment due to sin, he must
suffer Eternal Death, seeing no less was due to our Transgressions: For, (1.)
The Eternity of Punishment, is only due to Sin by Accident, as it is found in a
Finite Person, who being not able to bear at Once, or in the Longest time, that
Wrath, which his Sins have Demerited, Divine Justice Exacts of him an Eternity
of Suffering. (2.) Whereas sin is only Infinite, or of Infinite Demerit,
Objective, as committed against an Infinite God: The Sufferings of Christ are
also Infinite Subjective, being the Sufferings of that Person, who is God, tho
not as God; and therefore Christ in a Finite Time, was Able to give Infinite
Satisfaction. Anti-Sozzo, p. 596.


Sect. II. The Next Point is about a Change of the Penal Sanction of the Law.
An Error of such a Nature, as has a Fatal Influence on our Ministry, and the
Lives and Conversations of Men. For, if the Penal Sanction of the Law be
changed for another, an Evangelical, and less Severe Threatening, then it must
unavoidably Follow, that the New Threatening cannot be against any but such as
are Transgressors of that Law, to which it is Annexed, and the Eternal Curse
only against them, who do not so far Obey it, as to get a Right and Title unto
Glory; so that Original Sin, which was committed Antecedently to the giving of
this Law, falls not under its Lash, and the Old Sanction being Vacated, we who
are only under the New, not a Man of us is liable unto wrath upon it is Account;
Nor does any other Sin but Final Impenitence, Regnant Hypocrisy and Unbelief
expose the Soul to Gods Curse. The Drunkenness, the Adultery, the Murder of a
David, the Hypocrisy, the Lying, the Perjury, the Envy, the Malice, and what
sin soever else is, in Mr. Williams's Opinion, consistent with the Truth of
Grace, tho in the Lowest Degree, falls not under the Curse of the Gospel. If
these Abominations are Committed by some of his Saints, they cannot make 'em
liable to Gods Wrath, nor to any Curse at all, if what he says be true. For
the Preaching of the Old Law, for Conviction of sin, is a Crime; As if the
Apostle Paul, when he said, Cursed is every one, that continues not in all
things, which are Written in the Book of the Law, to do them, Gal. 3. 10. And
when he Cried out, Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once, but when the
Commandment came Sin Revived and I Died; had been at that time, under the Old
Jewish Dispensation; For we have, with Mr. Williams, no other Law to Preach for
Conviction of sin, but the New Gospel Law.

Sir, that I abuse not this Haughty Leader of our Brethren, I will Prove, that
Crellius, and He are one in this Opinion; and that he differs from Father Alsop.

Crellius, Mr. Williams. I. Crellius, That under the Gospel there are
Abatements of Gods Anger against sin, that most direful Sanction, Cursed is
every one that continues not to do all things, as in Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Is taken away, and that softer one, He that Believes not, shall be Damned, set
up in its Place Sub Evangelio sustulit severissimam illam Legis, Mosaicae
sanctionem, Maledictus omnis, etc. Gal. 3. 10. etc. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Loco ejus
hanc Reponens, qui non credit, etc. Mar. 16. 16. John 3. 18, 36. Crel. de Deo
Lib. 1. Cat. 23. But secondly, Mr. Williams expresses himself as cleverly in
his Pref. to Gospel Truth Stated. The Gospel has another Sanction to the
Preceptive Part of the Law, than the Covenant of works had. Tho nothing be
Abated in the Rule of Sin, and Duty, yet Blessings are Promised to Lower
Degrees of Duty. He also tells us, that the Threatening is not against Every
Degree of Sin; so in the Defense of Gospel Truth, p. 30. The Gospel Law does
not Denounce Death for the same sins, as Adams Law did; That Law threatened
Death for the least sin, yea, for one sin. But the Gospel Threatens Death not
for every sin -- Most of the threatenings in the Bible, that refer to the State
of Souls are Evangelical threatenings. They are not by the Sanction of the Law
of Innocence, but of Gospel Grace -- Every Threatening used by God as an
Argument to Conversion, is a Gospel Threatening. Gospel Truth, p. 133, 134.
There is a Legal Preaching, which is opposed to the Gospel; and this indeed is
a Crime; And to that this Chapter Refers -- Then he sets it down as a Truth,
That the Legal Preaching, which is a Crime, is to Preach the Law as a Covenant
of Innocence, or Works -- The Real Difference between Doctor Cr. and himself,
is, Whether it be Legal (in the Culpable Sense) to threaten such Penalties, as
are short of Damnation, against such Offenses as are Consistent with Sincerity,
and yet avoidable by Serious Care and Diligence. This he denies. It is not
Legal Preaching (says he) in a Culpable Sense, to threaten such Penalties, as
are short of Damnation, against such Offenses as are Consistent with Sincerity.
But to Threaten these Sins with Damnation, that is Legal Preaching, which must
not be endured; And why must not the Sins which a Believer, consistently with
Sincerity, commits, be threatened with Damnation? The Reason is Manifest. The
Sanction of the Law of Innocence, which did threaten the least Sin, Every Sin
with Damnation, is vacated, and made void: And the Gospel threatens Damnation
against none but them who Die in Final Unbelief, and Impenitence. But what Sins
are, or rather, what Sins (does he think) are not consistent with Sincerity? I
presume he cannot be of Opinion, that Lying, or False Accusing, Reviling, or
Reproaching his Innocent Brethren, or acting the Part of a Delator, or Irish
Evidence, are inconsistent with Sincerity; and therefore it must be a Sin to
threaten Damnation against these Harmless Abominations, if committed by himself.


Sir, This is such a Piece of Antinomianism, a Doctrine so Licentious and vile,
yea, such a Consecration of the most Villainous Practices, that it Amazes the
most Solid and Grave Divines amongst us, to understand, that not a man of you
has the Courage to Witness against this Man's Abominations. What! when the
Foundations are struck at? To look on, be silent and revile them, who are hardy
enough to write against this Man! What can the Orthodox Divines of the Church
of England, Scotland, and beyond the Seas, or what will Posterity think of
these things? What is it that shuts up the Mouths of our Grandee's, of a Bates,
a How, a Veal, a Glascock? And what is it that has Infatuated an Alsop,
together with the whole Assembly in Bishopsgate-street, that they must become
Advocates for a Man who Publishes such Licentious and Libertine Principles as
these? No wonder our Ministry is no more successful, when we make the Preaching
of the Law void; I mean, the Old Law, under whose Curse all that Remain in
unbelief, still are; and which makes the Sins of the best on Earth to be
Obnoxious to Damnation. Upon which Account we may, yea, we must threaten the
sins of Believers themselves with Damnation, assuring them, that unless, when
they sin they Flee to Christ, their sin will be their Ruin. For there is no
change of its Threatenings, no Mitigation, or Abatements. The least sin is as
much of a Damning Nature as ever, which makes it necessary for him, who commits
the sin, Exercise Repentance toward God and Faith in our Lord Jesus for
Pardon. The [Do this and Live; Sin and Dye] is so much in Force, that without a
full satisfaction to the Threatening Part of the Law, and a Righteousness fully
Answering the [Do this] there can be no Life attained unto by any of us, and it
is our Duty to Preach the Law of Innocence, and Denounce its Curse against all
that abide in Unbelief, and against the Sins of Believers themselves. This is
the Doctrine of Protestants, of the Fathers and Blessed Apostles. But I will go
on to show the difference there is between Mr. Williams, and Father Alsop
Distinctly, in these Points.

Mr. Williams. The threatening of the Law was Eternal Death, as Eternal.
Eternity was an Ingredient into the misery of every Sinner, and can be removed
by nothing but the Lawgivers Dispensing therewith; upon Considerations equally
Vindicating the G^ory, as this Eternity of Sinners Torments would do. Man made
Right. p 14.


Note, the Dispensation is of the Penalty to be suffered, and not only as to
the Person suffering.

Father Alsop. I would observe, That he supposes God to have Dispensed with
the Moral Law: which is News to me, and I confess I do not believe it, nor
shall I, till I have it confirmed. Some Errors, though Speculative, are
Damnable, and such may this Prove: For, if we, like Fo^ls, Goggled in with the
Rhetorical Divinity of this Age, should Trust to Gods Abatements of bis Law;
and at last it should Prove, That God Loved Righteousness, and Hated Iniquity,
as such, we were in a most Wretched, Miserable and Undone Condition* merely by
Trusting to Indulgence -- How much of this Law God will Dispense with, what
Part of it, or what Degrees of the Violation of it, is to me unknown; and i^
with any, whether he may not Possibly Dispense with the whole by the same
Reason, is more than our Author's Principles can inform me. He that may
Dispense with One Part of it, may with an other, and so of the Rest. For, where
to stop, or put Bounds to such a Dispensation as comes from the Grace of God,
is very Impossible to Determine, unless we knew the true Bounds of God's Grace.
Anti Sozzo, p. 687, 688.


Mr. Williams. Though Nothing be Abated, in the Rule of Sin, and Duty, yet
Blessings are promised to Lower Degrees of Duty. Pref. to Gosp. Tr. p. 6.


Father Alsop. I do not find that God has Abated any thing of his Law, but is
as Peremptory as ever; For, [Do this and Live.] Nothing will p^ease God, less
than Exact and Perfect Obedience; tho in the Covenant of Grace, He is pleased
to admit another, a Mediator to do it for Believers: I would rather he would
hear the Reverend and Learned Bishop Reynolds, upon Psalm. 110. p. 492. In point
of Validity, or Invalid^ty, there can be but and five things said of the Law. 1
Either it must be Obeyed, and that it is not Romans 3. 23. Or, 2. It must be
Executed upon Men, or the Curse, and Penalty thereof be inflicted; and that it
is not neither, Romans 8 1. Or, 3. It must be Abrogated, or Extinguished; and
that it is not neither, for Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away. -- Or, 4
It must be Moderated, and that it cannot be neither; For, it is Inflexible, and
one Jot, or Tittle m^st not be Abated Or, Lastly, The Law it self Remaining;
the Ob^igation th^reof notwithstanding, m^st toward such, or such Persons, be
so far forth Dispensed withal as that a Surety shall b^ Admitted -- both to Do
all the Duties, and to Suffer all the Curses of the Law, in behalf of that
P^^son, who in Rigor should have done, or suffered ^ll; so that ^he Law, not
One Jot, or Tittle thereof is abrogated in regard of the Obligation, therein
contained but they are a^^ Reconciled in Christ. Thus far Father Alsop in his
Anti Sozzo, p. 216, 217 who has c^e^red it, that there are no Abatements in
the Law, no Dispensing, either with the Commandment, or with the Penal^y, but
only as to the Person. And Grotius has Evinced, That though i^ be ^ss^ntial
unto Punishment, that it be for Sin, yet is it not Essential unto it, that it
be on the Person, that sinned; and the Learned Bishop adds (as I have it, page
396, 397.) That in the First Covenant we were to do it in our own Persons; in
the Second Christ is appointed, and allowed to do it for us. He ^ullfilled All
the Obligations of the Law; the Duties thereof by Active Obedienc^, in his
Life, and the Curses thereof by Passive Obedience in his Death. One more,
Father Alsop. Though God has not Abated of his Law, yet he has Admitted a
Surety, called, therefore the Surety of the Covenant. Anti-Soz. p. 699.


Mr. Williams. The Gospel-Law does not Denounce Death for the same Sins as
Adam's Law did, that Law threatened Death ^or the Least Sin, yea, for One Sin;
but the Gospel threatens Death, not for Every Sin. Def of Gospel Truth, p. 30

Well then, seeing the Gospel-Law does not threaten Death against Every Sin,
and the threatening of Adam's Law is v^cated, or at least Dispensed with, Every
Sin deserves not Death. For though the Des^^t of, and Obligation to Punishment,
are Distinct; and the Obligation may be (...) there is no Desert, yet wherever
the D^sert is there the Punishment is due, and the Person obliged to undergo it
till by an Ap^lication of Christ's Blood, that Obligation be D^ss^lv'd. ^he
Sins which are Committed, and Deserve Punishment, if they Oblige not thereunto,
there is no need, if t^ere is no R^^m for Pardon, which lies in a Dissolving
the Obligation, For, where there is no Obligation, there can be no Dissolving
it; and where no ^hreatning, there no Obligation; for an Obligation to
Punishment, is by Virtue of the Threatening of the Law. Thus, he must hold That
no Sins but Final Vnb^lief, and Impenitence, falling under the Threatenings of
the Gospel-Law, can need a Pardon; and these he allows shall never be Pardoned,
or at least those Sins, which are consistent with Sincerity, or the
Imperfections of our Faith, Repentance and Obedience, need not a Pardon,
because they fall under no Law. Threatening, against which Notion I may Justly
set down what has been Asserted by,


Father Alsop. God is by Nature a Holy God; as he is Governor of the World, he
is a Righteous Judge. Sin is both contrary to his Holy Nature, and his Holy
Law; And therefore as a Holy God he cannot but hate Sin; as a Righteous Judge
he cannot but Punish Sin: And because this Sin is Inherent in, and Committed by
Man, God hates the Sinner upon the account of his Sin; his Person, and his Best
Services are an Abomination to the Lord. From Hence it follows, That Sin being
a Transgression of the Law, in its Preceptive Part, renders the Sinner Guilty,
that is, Obnoxious, and Liable to the Law in its Sanction, to the Punishment.
Now this Righteous Judge will certainly Charge the Guilty Sinner with the
Penalty due to his Sin: But there is a way found out, That he may not Impute to
Sinners their Traspasses, -- which is by Christ; and, as he adds, by his being
made Sin for us. Anti-Sozzo, p. 631.


Mr. Williams. That Legal Preaching, which is a Crime, is to Preach the Law as
a Covenant of Innocence, or Works -- Every Threatening used by God to Conversion
is a Gospel Threatening. Gospel Truth stated, p. 222, and 133, 134. So that it is
sinful to endeavor to Convince Men of their Sin and Misery, by Preaching to
them the Law of Works, that is to say, Adam's Law; but we must confine our
selves wholly unto the Gospel Law, the very Error held by Agricola Islebius,
the Antinomian, and Confuted by Luther.


Father Alsop. The Law is God's Law, and when it witnesses to a sinner, it
witnesses home, convinces him of the Perfect Holiness of that God, who gave the
Law; of the Peremptoriness of God, in not Abating One Jot, or Tittle of the
Law; of the sinners utter Inability to come up to the Demands of the Law, and
therefore the utter Impossibility of being Justified by the Law; of the
Severity of God's Justice in Punishing the Violaters of his Law; and therefore
unless he can find another Righteousness, he must utterly perish. It Is true,
the Law speaks its Old Language still, Do this, and live? but then it speaks it
only to those who are upon the Bottom of Innocence; for to a Transgresser, its
Language is, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, Anti-Sozzo,
p. 544 In Romans 7. 13. it is said, I had not known sin, exc^pt the Law had said,
thou shall not covet. From whence I Argue: By that Law, which says, Thou shall
not covet, comes the Knowledge of sin; Therefore by the Moral Law comes the
Knowledge of sin. The Major is the Apostle's own, in the place last Quoted; The
Minor needs no Proof, but that a Man be able to Read the Ten Commandments,
which is the Sum of the Moral Law, the Tenth whereof is, Thou shall not covet.
Anti-Sozzo, p. 538.

The Knowledge of Sin being by the Law, which says, Thou shall not covet, and
which says, The Man that continues not in all things is Accursed: That we may
Convince Men of their Sin, and Misery, and of the Necessity of Believing in the
Lord Jesus, that they may, by his Righteousness, Received by Faith, be
Justified; We must Preach to them this Law, and Denounce the Threatened Curse
thereof. This is the Doctrine of Protestants, this the Doctrine Taught us by
the Holy Apostles. On the other hand, if with Mr. Williams, we must confine our
selves in our Attempts to convince sinners unto the Gospel Law, how can we
charge them with the Guilt of Original Sin, or Threaten Death against them, for
any other sins, than their Unbelief and Impenitence? An Error so Gross, so
Absurd and Pernicious to the Souls of Men, that it becomes Every Good Man to
Express his Abhorrence of it.

But, as if the Design was, That Men of our Way may Deservedly fail under the
Reproach and Scandal of Sheltering, supporting, Aiding and Abetting a Real
Antinomian, who, that he may cover his mischievous Purposes, makes a frightful
Outcry against Antinomianism, not a Man of our Number but your self, that I
know, Opposes them, so far as to lie under the Rage of these snarling Scriblers.


Sect. III. Of Procuring and Purchasing the Covenant of Grace.
One Great Point in Controversy between the Reformed Churches, and the
Remonstrants, was, Whether Christ by his Death did Procure, Purchase and Merit
a New Covenant of Grace? The Remonstrants Positively Affirmed, That Christ did
by the Merit of his Death, and Satisfaction, Procure and Enact a Covenant of
Grace with sinners. The Reformed Churches, in Opposition unto them, were as
Express, That Christ did not Merit the New Covenant of Grace, but that he was
the chief Blessing of this Covenant, Promised in Genesis 3. 15. from whom all
other Covenant Blessings, such as Reconciliation with God, Remission of Sins,
and Eternal Life did as from their Fountain flow; That God in Renewing this
Covenant with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and the other Patriarchs and
Prophets, in the Old Testament, did first make mention of Christ, as the Seed,
in whom their Posterity, together with all Nations, are Blessed. That in regard
hereunto it is, that Christ is called a Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 8.
6. chapter 9. 15. chapter 12. 24. For the Mediator of the New Testament, and the
Promise of this Mediator, must belong to the New Covenant of Grace. Judic.
Theol. Exteror, de quinque Artic. Synod. Dordrech. Exhib. an. 1619. page 117,
118.

Now it must be yielded, That a Great Deal turns on this Point; for from this
Notion of the Remonstrants, it does, says the Learned Voetius (Select. Disp.
Theol. Par. 2. (not page 133. as Mr. Lobb, in his Defense, p. 23. cites it) but
page 233, etc. follow, That Christ was not truly our Sponsor; That he did not
suffer in our Place and Stead; nor did he in a proper sense Purchase, Merit, or
Procure any Blessings for us: which, is, we know, Socinianism all over;
notwithstanding which Mr. Williams falls in entirely with it; but Father Alsop
as bravely Opposes it.

Mr. Williams. Still remember, that the Merits of Christ are the Cause of this
Gospel Ordination; [viz. of this Covenant of Grace] Pref. to Gosp. Tr. stat. p.
9. Christ by his Righteousness did not only Purchase a Conditional Grant of the
Saving Effects; (viz.) that Proposition, He that believes shall be saved.
Gospel Truth, p. 39. And, in his Man made Righteous, p. 103. Christ by His
Blood Purchased the better Covenant with all its benefits.


Father Alsop. We have heard of Procuring, Meriting, Founding a Covenant, but
not a Syllable of Evidence. Anti Sozzo, p. 716. I find frequent Assertions of
this Doctrine. That the Covenant of Grace is Owing to, Procured by, Founded on
the Obedience of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death: -- and yet I
cannot find any Proof; and therefore (till I see Evidence to the contrary) I
shall take it for granted that the Covenant of Grace is owing to, founded on,
and given forth by that Free Grace of God, from which it is Justly Denominated
a Covenant of Grace, though the Intervention of a Mediator, such a Mediator,
was Absolutely necessary to put us into the Actual Possession of those Rich
Mercies Designed for us by God in the Covenant; which Mediator himself is owing
to, founded on that Covenant of Grace; and therefore the Covenant of Grace is
not founded upon him. Auti-Sozzo, p. 586. See Page 705, from line 15, etc. And
p. 718. Christ cannot be the Foundation of the Covenant, because Christ himself
is Promised in the Covenant, as the Great Comprehensive Blessing of the
Covenant. Esa 49. 8. 9. He tells us, That God for Christ's sake has entered into
a Covenant, made a Covenant, his Righteousness and Obedience have procured a
Covenant, are the Meritorious cause of a Covenant; when the total Sum of all
is no more than this, that God has Promised to Pardon, and save us if we
believe and obey the Gospel, tho we obey not Perfectly, p. 695.


Sect. IV. Of the Nature of the Covenant of Grace.
Mr. Williams, tho he has sucked in Arminian Notions, could never possess
himself of Arminian Accuracy and Learning, and tho he was given to Books ever
since he was five Years Old, and Regularly Admitted into the Ministry at
eighteen, so Great his Proficiency in Divinity as not only to Atone for what
would have been in another an Irregularity, but to make it very Regular, yet it
must be acknowledged that, in his have to the Theological English System, he
skip'd over his Logic, as is manifest from the Description he has given of
the Covenant of Grace, which he does with a great Deal of Formality, and Pomp.
For Placing himself in his Doctors Chair, He very Gravely Asks;

Q. What is the Covenant of Grace? And in Answer he says, By Covenant of Grace
I mean, the Way that God has Ordained to Apply to Sinners that Salvation,
which is Prepared by Christ, and which he will Enable the Elect to Comply with;
which being to the Question Qaid Sit. one might reasonably Expect to find in it
somewhat of the Nature of a Covenant in General, and what does in special
constitute it a Covenant of Grace. But not a word of these things; not a word
of the Genus of the thing defined; nor of it is Specific Difference, or of what
is Proper and Peculiar to the Covenant of Grace, Distinguishing it from other
Covenants. It is (says he) a way Ordained of God to Apply Salvation unto
Sinners. But does the Word [Way] denote to us any thing of the Nature of a
Covenant, or what word in the whole Answer Import what is Peculiar to a
Covenant of any kind or sort? Here is a Covenant, which, so far as we can Judge
of it, is without any Parties Covenanting, yea, without any Pact, or Agreement,
or Terms and Conditions; and may as aptly Contain in it the Nature of what is
Distinct from a Covenant of Grace, as well as the Nature of such a Covenant.
And if I Guess Right, the Account he gives of the Covenant of Grace in
Particular is much the same with what the Gentlemen at Racow, give of Religion
in General, which is in these words, Religio Christiana est Uia a Deo per Jesum
Christum Monstrata, vitamaeternam Consequendi, and who can with any tolerable
Appearance of Reason say that the Christian Religion is not the Way, that God
has ordained to Apply to Sinners that Salvation, which is Prepared by Christ;
and which he will Enable the Elect to Comply with? The same may be said of
Preaching the Word, of Faith in Christ, of the Blessed Sacraments, and the like
things of another kind. For, these are ways, Ordained of God to Apply salvation
unto Sinners, and according to this Definition (seeing cui convenit Definitio,
ei Convenit et Definitum) they must all of them be Covenants of Grace. Now, if
Faith be the Covenant of Grace, what is it is Condition? If the Sacraments be
the Covenant of Grace, what are it is Seals? This is one Specimen amongst many
of Mr. Williams his Profound skill in Logic; I say amongst many other which in
Faithful Rebuke's, High Applauses of the man, and Rude Demands, may Provoke
some one or other to expose; and and the rather, if Possible, to Provoke the
more Learned and Grave Fathers of our way, to Consider what manner of man it
is, to whose Conduct they have tamely submitted themselves.

But to make the most of what he says of the Gospel Covenant in this chapter,
it amounts to no more than that the Remission of Sins is Promised to Faith and
Repentance; or that the Benefits of the Covenant are Promis^d to all that
submit to the Terms of it. Gospel Truth. p. 68, 69. That the use and Interest
of Gospel Conditions is, but in a Degree from the conformity of them to the
Praeceptive Part of the Law, but chiefly from their Conformity to the Rule of
the Grace of the Promise, p. 58.

How to Explain this Distinction between the Rule if the Precept; and the Rule
of the Grace of the Promise, I cannot see how it can be done better than it is
by Wolzogenius, one of the Fratres Poloni, who has very exactly Delivered the
Socinian (which I take to be Mr. Williams his) Sense, to this Effect. In every
well constituted Government there are Laws, or Rules of Two sorts. The First
are such as show the Subjects Duty, what he must do, and what he must not do.
-- Then there are Rules, by which Rewards are Proposed for the Encouragement of
Obedience. -- Haec duo Legum genere reperiuntur etiam in Regni Christi -- For
Christ (says he) is our King, but so that he is at the same time our Father
and Faithful Pastor. His Promises are Limited by certain Conditions; and yet
these Conditions are not over-rigidly insisted on in those Cases, where
somewhat of Ignorance, or other Infirmities intervenes. The Promise of Eternal
Life Requires an Observation of his Commands; but he knowing our Frailties will
not Impute to us our Daily Sins, if so be there Remain in us a Sincere and
Upright Heart, True Repentance, and a Certain Purpose of Amendment. Wolzog.
Instruct, ad Util. Lect. lib. N. T. cap. 4. and 6.

That this is Mr. William's Sense appears clearly on an Observing how much he
Insists on the Rule of the Grace of the Promise, as it accepts of our Faith,
Repentance, and sincere Obedience for the sake of Christ, notwithstanding our
many Frailties, Failings and Infirmities.

Mr. Williams. The main of our Ministry consists in pressing Men to Answer the
Rule of the Gospel, etc. Pref. to Gosp. Tr. p. 9. The Blessings promised on the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, are merely of Grace: They be for another's
sake, and not our own, p. 57. The Gospel Promise being the Way which Christ
Appoints to Dispense Saving Benefits to Sinners, must have the same Rules with
the Covenant of Grace: -- This Gospel promises its Benefit to such as do
Believe -- It Invests Believers in those Saving Benefits. -- p. 65, etc. This
Convenant is the War, etc.


Father Alsop. His Description of the Covenant is this; A Promise of the Pardon
of Sin, and Eternal Life to those, who believe, and obey the Gospel. [A more
full Description than Mr. Williams gives in his Answer to the Question, What is
the Covenant of Grace? yet says Father Alsop] A Description so liable to
Exceptions, that it Describes neither the whole of the Covenant, nor a New
Covenant, nor (upon the matter) any Covenant at all.

1. This Description gives us little, very little of the True Covenant of
Grace: For, (1.) Tho he thinks to put us o^t with a Promise of Pardon, and Life
to those, who believe and obey, the true Covenant of Grace, has given us a
Promise of that Faith, whereby we may believe, and of that New Heart, whereby
we are Enabled to obey the Gospel. And first we have a Promise of the Right
Faith, made to us in the True Covenant, John 6. 37. Ephesians. 2. 8. -- We have a
Direct and Express Promise too of the New Heart, Ezekiel. 36. Heb. 8. 10. --

2. As it Describes not the whole of the Covenant, so it Describes not the
Nature of a New Covenant, etc.

3. Upon the matter it is no Covenant of Grace at all. For, (1.) A Promise of
Pardon and Life upon Condition of Believing and Obeying, is neither better, nor
worse than a Threatening of Condemnation and Death, to them who Believe not, and
Obey not. It may with equal right be called a Threatening of Death; as a Promise
of Life: It Is no more a Covenant of Grace, than a Covenant of Wrath.
Anti-Sozzo. p. 580, 581, etc.


There are other Notions in the Writings of Mr. Williams confuted by what is in
Father Alsop's Anti-Sozzo, which at this time I Forbear to mention, tho a
Small Invitation will draw them out, and a great deal more in Some Points of
weight wherein he Differs from the most Emiment Reformers; under whose shadow
according to his Deceitful ways he Endeavors to shelter himself, whilst it is
his Vnwearyed Labor to subvert the common Faith of Protestants. In the mean
time I do solemnly Protest (to use Father Alsop's own words) That as I have no
Personal Quarrel with this Gentleman, so I have not willingly wronged his
Discourse in the smallest Instance: The worst I wish him, is, That he may
Seasonably Repent of his Injurious Dealing, and his Unworthy Treatment of those
Persons, who have Deserved well of Religion and the Commonwealth of Learning,
and not ill of himself, particularly of his Ungenteel, not to say Unkind and
Unchristian Carriage toward that Learned, that Holy, that Modest and Humble
Mr. Sylvester, between whom and Mr. Baxter he Sneakingly, and with Unmanly
Flattery, worm'd himself into the Good Old Gentleman's Opinion, and by
unwearied Begging, Prevailed to be the Man to supply his Absence at
Pinners-Hall Lecture, to the End he might make his way the more Plain and Easy
for the thrusting himself into the same Lecture on the Decease of that Great
and Good Man, and have the better opportunity to play those Pranks he has since
done, to the breaking once an Hopeful Union; and according to his Irish
Practices, cause Divisions amongst you to the great Dishonor of God, the
Reproach of Religion, the Ruin of Men's Souls, as well as to the Grief of the
most Godly, and Triumph of the Wicked and Profane.

All that remains, were to do Right to your Merit, and to Testify the Esteem I
have for your Learning and Piety, tho wholly unknown to you, but that I am
informed there is a Person, who has out of Duty to God, Veneration for Holy
Ministers, and Kindness to the Generation of the Righteous, undertaken it; and
who I doubt not will express the same concern for the Vindication of your
Pastoral Wi^dom and Conduct, as might be expected from,

SIR, Your Unworthy Brother, and Servant.


