A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ASSIZES HELD AT LEICESTER, For that COUNTY. On the
Twenty third day of March, 1681/2.

BY NATHANIEL ALSOP, B. D. Rector of Church-Langton in the County of Leicester.

LONDON, Printed for S. Carr, at the Kings Head near the West End of St.
Paul's. 1682.

To the Right Worshipful RICHARD ROBERTS Esquire; High Sheriff of the County of
Leicester.
SIR,
WHen you pleased to lay this piece of Service upon me, of Preaching at the
Assizes, I bethought my self how to discourse seasonably and profitably, under
the present State of Affairs, and at such a general Assembly of the Country;
and soon came to a Resolution, That to oppose something, what my poor Talent
could furnish out, against the spreading of an Epidemical Evil, too visible
upon us, could not be an improper Undertaking: And certainly he is but an ill
Member of the Public, who at the time when a dangerous Fire appears breaking
out, will not bring his Bucket to the quenching of it. If any shall except
against my meddling with Political Matters in the Pulpit, they ought to reflect,
how our People are of late made all Statesmen; and that to treat them as such
at some times, is become necessary to their Edification. In the Public Places
of Conversation you shall have the Men of Trade arrogate as much Knowledge of
Politics now, as heretofore their Representatives could arrive unto: So that
what is here touched upon as to these Matters, is no ways meant ad Magistratum;
I presume not to instruct them therein; but ad Populum still: And to rectify
some Notions in them, which might have a mischievous Influence upon Christian
Practice, I trust, will not be thought foreign to the Business of a Divine.
The Sermon happened to find a favorable Reception with its Audience, and I never
intended it should have gone further; but some, whose Judgments I ought to
subscribe unto, thought it might be more serviceable, if made more public; and
others, whose Authority I shall never disobey, were with some Importunities
desirous to have it so: And these are the true Causes of this Publication;
whereof I need not inform you, Sir, who your self are my best Voucher to the
World, for the Reality of this whole Matter. And now, Sir, it begs leave to
come forth under the shelter of your Name, not only for the common Reason of
such Dedications, but chiefly because the subject Matter and Design of this
Discourse requires the Protection of one like your self, whose clear and
disinteressed Zeal for the Public is so exemplary among us. And then the many
Favors which I have received from you, bind me to all Opportunities of
Gratitude, and to own it to the World how much I am,

SIR, Your most faithful and obedient Servant, Nathaniel Alsop.

EXODUS XX. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long upon
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


THE Law of the Decalogue recorded in this Chapter, has one pre-eminence above
other parts of the Scripture; if they were dictated by the Spirit of God, this
was also written by his Finger; which may serve as a nota been, a Hand in the
Margin, to direct and engage our Observation. That part of it which I have
read, is also recommended unto us by its singular Circumstances; St. Paul
observes it is the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. And among the
Moderns, Grotius notes, how fitly it stands in the front of the second Table,
agreeably to the method of the Roman Laws, which in the first place secured the
Sanctity of the Government; so this here containing the Nerves and Force of
those special Laws, which are the preservatives of Humane Society, deservedly
takes precedence of the rest. As to the sense and meaning of the words, the
Jewish Interpreters and Christians do generally consent, that the duty of
Subjects to their respective Civil Governors, is more than by Consequence and
Reduction here intended: Imperium sancitur, praecipitur obedientia, says
Melancthon upon the place: And Calvin goes about to assign the Reason, why a
name of Nature is here given to a Political Relation: It is, says he, to
soften the savage disposition of Man, who is naturally impatient of Subjection;
to bring the stiff-neck, and Iron Sinnew of corrupt Nature, to the yoke of
Obedience. The Truth is what Zophar replies to Job, Man is born like the wild
Asses Colt, all restraint is against the Grain, every one naturally goes big
with Caesar, and cannot brook a Superior; or else, it may be, the tang of our
first Parents aspiring, still ferments in the Blood, to be tanquam dii, equal
to them that are called Gods. It was therefore upon necessary considerations
that St. Paul lays his Apostolical Injunction upon Titus, the Man of God, chap.
3. v. 5. to put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to
obey Magistrates.

It is not enough this be taught and known, but for the great moment of its
practice, it ought to be pressed and inculcated, put them in mind. If the
Doctrine of Subjection, which is as demonstrable as any Theorem in Euclid's
Geometry, was also as much abstracted from the Interests and Passions of Men,
as they are, then might it expect as free and easy a passage; but when this
Nail must be driven against the inward resistance of Pride, and Ambition, of
Envy, Avarice, and Revenge, and such like impenetrable Opposites; no wonder if
a greater Force, and better Skill be required, and repeated strokes: and it
were to be wished, that some one, a Master of Assemblies, had undertaken the
fastening of it at this time; in which vacancy the forementioned Causes have
wrought with me also, the meanest of my Brethren, to attempt this part of my
Office and Duty; especially being stirred up with the great and crying Sin of
the Times, which is plainly a wantonness under the gentle Yoke, a surfeiting
upon the blessings of Government; and I fear there is but too much cause to
complain, that it is fairly drawing on to an Open Contempt of Authority: and
who then is so hardy, as not to dread the Event? If such provocations as these
should awaken the Vengeance of Heaven, and move God by his immediate Arm to
assert the Honor of his own Institution; the Image of our distempered State
any one may behold in the Glass of the Israelites. It was at the time when
their Supreme Governor was one of the meekest and most merciful Men upon the
Earth; it was not long after their deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage,
where they had smarted by the Impositions of the most cruel Taskmasters that
ever an ingenuous People groaned under; and yet upon every little Discontent,
if all things went not according to their own Hearts wish, immediately they
grow sick of the Government, and quis est iste Moses? Why does this Moses, and
the Priest his Brother, take so much upon them? They grew weary of Manna, and
nauseated the Bread of Heaven, because it was constant, and ever provided for
them at hand; but instead thereof asked Meat for their Lusts. It was not enough
to satisfy their natural Appetites, and real Wants, but their wandering
Fancies, and their various Dissenting Pallats must be humoured also; and upon
such distates like these, they fell into frequent Mutinies and Associations
against the Lord, and against his Vicegerent; insomuch that Moses was forced
to declare freely, in that his Farewell-Oration, which Josephus has left
penned unto us, in the Fourth Book of his Antiquities, That he was more often
in hazard of his Life from them, than from any other of his Uncircumcised
Enemies. I shall not stay to adjust the Circumstances, nor set the Members of
the Comparison in joint; but only to show how far we have sunk from the Rule of
our Duty, and still are falling? give me leave to point you back, up as far as
to the Source and Fountain of all Political Sanctions, the Basis of Government,
the Cement of Societies, the Princes heavenly, and unforfeitable Charter,
comprehended in this short Precept, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc. In
which Words I shall observe no more Particulars, than what are obvious unto
every Eye: As,

1. The Style or Title here given to the Supreme Magistrate, of a Parent.

2. The Debt belonging unto him, Honor.

3. The enforcement of the Duty by a Promise, but with the implication of a
severe Threat, that thy days may be long upon the Land, etc.

1. The Style here is a Name full of Obligation and Endearment; we find God
himself often calling his People to reflect upon it, to hold them fast to their
Duty; for I am a Father to Israel, says God, Jer. 31.9. he pitieth as a
Father, Psalm. 103.13. with all the bowels and tenderness that can be showed; he
corrects as a Father, Prove. 3.12. always within measure, and less than our
Offenses deserve; and upon the same score he also claims the observance of
Sons, Mal. 1.6. And no doubt but this Title here given to Kings and Sovereign
Powers is very apt to move Obedience, to becalm the strivings of the People,
and to smooth the Yoke of Government, which some Belialites will always spurn
at; but what does Moses then, or rather the Lord himself, thus speak unto us,
merely because of the hardness of our Hearts? Does he condescend to such mean
Artifices, to treat us by the Popular courses of Ambition, which is wont to
stroke and sooth the Beast which she designs to ride? No, I suppose the soft
and endearing style here used, is more than a Color of Rhetoric, and shall
therefore take the occasion, which is fairly offered, to reflect upon the
Original of Civil Government; and the rather, because if it shall appear to be
founded in the Natural Right of Paternal Authority, as the most judicious do
affirm, it will prepare the way for that which follows, and the Duty of the
Text will be inferred by a necessary Logical deduction.

The style of the Text, being a Name of Nature and Authority too, suggests unto
us, in all our researches after the Rise and Birth of Dominion, to have one Eye
to the Order and Course of Nature: so that to understand the Original of Civil
Power, we must ascend to the true Original of Mankind; and this Method will
bring us to acknowledge the Truth of that Aphorism of St. Irenaeus, Cujus jussu
nascuntur homines, hujus jussu Reges constituuntur. There have been perhaps as
many Opinions concerning the Origin of the World, as concerning the Origin of
Government, and all of them wide of Truth: But then, as Tatianus, from a
malicious Adversary of Religion, confesses himself to have been converted to
the Faith of the Holy Scripture by that satisfactory and consistent account
which it gives of the Creation of the World; so the beginning of Civil Power
and Dominion, which the same part of Holy Writ accounts for also, if duly
considered, may as well convert the seditious underminers of Government, and
turn the hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; when it shall
appear that it was neither blind Chance, nor steep Ambition, nor prevailing
Usurpation, nor Pacts and Covenants, nor any happy Occurrence, nor the longest
Sword, nor most Voices, which made the first distinction betwixt King and
Subject.

That the first common Parent of Mankind was invested with a Sovereign Power,
and acted as Monarch of the World, there are few will question, that will not
also call in question the History of Moses. When Adam, who had Dominion given
him by God over all the Creatures, disposing of his Sons, to one committed the
Tillage of the ground, to another the care of the Flocks and Herds, where then
was the Equality of Persons, where the Community of Goods? And if the World was
at length peopled by the Offspring descended from this Stock, it will be
difficult to conceive, how and when such a state of Natural Freedom should be
introduced. The great Master of Politics, Aristotle, saw this without his
Bible; and although, for want of the Divine Oracles, he was forced to wrap his
head in the dark and inextricable Clouds of Eternal Successions, yet he saw a
necessity of asserting a Natural Subordination, where there was a Natural
Succession, and came at length to conclude, that the greatest Kingdom in
process of time grew from a single Family, as a large spreading Branch shoots
from a slender Stock. It may be the style of Royalty was not heard of 'till the
World was well on toward 2000 years old, that came in with the other Trappings
and Ornaments, when Monarchy became magnificent and pompous in the Eyes of the
People; but if we look after the Essentials of Power, we shall find them lodged
in the first Parent of Mankind, and transmitted as an Inheritance by the
Firstborn of the Family. And to deduce this, there is no better Clew than the
Sacred History it self, which leads us down from Adam the Universal Monarch, by
the Patriarchal Line, unto the first Plantation of the World after the Flood,
when several Colonies were led out by their respective Heads, and became
distinct Kingdoms, whereof the Sons or Grand Children of Noah were Kings by a
Fatherly-Right Right, as appears at large from Genesis 10. and among Humane
Authors, most accurately from that barbarous Writer at the end of Eusebius's
Chronicon, whom for the sake of the Subject which he handles, the great
Scaliger thought worthy to be joined with those renowned Pieces of Antiquity.
If we follow the Abettors of this Hypothesis, and travel farther by the same
Thread of Scripture History into the Land of Canaan, we shall find there, in a
Country of no great Compass, above 30 Kings at one time in that little Land.
And at this day they tell us, if we look into the state of Affairs in the
Indies, and those Countries of late and new discovery, where they live by the
Dictates of simple and untaught Nature, without the invented Models of Policy,
we shall find a multitude of petty Kingdoms, and the Power of Governing
descending for many Generations, and no other account but that it ever has
been thus, by a Succession whose beginning they know not; which seems fairly to
point up to the Original of Civil Government, and to give us Cause from the
Premises to Conclude, that the Paternal and Regal Authority are the same in
Nature, not differing in Kind, but in Extent only, (...), as Philo expresses
the same thing.

But I design no more than the opening and explaining the Notions; it has been
sufficiently strengthened and guarded against all the feeble Encounters made in
opposition to it, by a Learned Writer of our own, [Sir R. Filmer] in his
Observations touching Forms of Government; only because the best illustration
of a thing is by setting to its Contraries, I shall therefore beg leave to
glance upon some things which are offered by those persons, who are pleased not
to admit of this Account of the Original of Government, which in it self is so
easy to be apprehended, so agreeable to the nature of Things, and Scripture
History, so honorable to God and his Providence, and so conducive to the Ends
of all Authority and Rule.

And here, first, I cannot but observe, how patient and complying our
Republicans many times are, that the Epicurean Hypothesis should take place;
Whether Promotion comes from the East or the West, or yet from the South, they
are content, whatsoever Wind blows it, so that the Lord be not in that Wind; as
wholly unconcerned how things go, as the God of Epicurus himself, as Tully
jeers them of old: And all is, only to keep out the suspicion of a Divine
Institution in the matter. And indeed it seems fully as consentaneous to
Reason, that the Fabric of the World should arise from the fortuitous Hit of
Attoms, (as that Philosopher taught,) as that Order and Government, the
Strength and Beauty of the Universe, should proceed from any thing but the
Disposition of a most Wise Creator. Can these Men believe themselves, who are
wont to call upon the People to follow Providence, according to their
serviceable Doctrine of Ownings and Outgoings when time was? Or indeed, do they
believe any thing of Providence at all? who can tell us now, That God is no
more a Favourer of one Family than another, no more than he is a Respecter of
Persons. Nevertheless, we trust that he is a Respecter of Causes; and if the
just and righteous Claim of any Family or Person shall engage his Favor at all
times, then how much more in the greatest and most weighty Affairs of Mankind?
Our Savior has taught us, That the very Hairs of our Heads are in the
Accounts of Heaven; and shall the Crowns of Monarchs be neglected and
forgotten? If there be no Affliction upon a Person or People that may be said
to rise out of the Dust, then sure an unjust and cruel Ruler, which is one of
Gods severest Scourges, is not set up by Chance or Fortune; and if not an
usurping Tyrant, who is a common Plague, then certainly no just and lawful
Prince, who is a public Blessing, without the Appointment of God.

If it be left to Men to constitute Governors, it is to be feared, that Fraud
or Violence will have the greatest stroke; and that is another way whereby they
would have it believed that Empire and Dominion might take its rise. But this
sure is a very improper Ground whereon to found a just and rightful Power,
unless it should be industriously so contrived, to leave an Original Flaw in
the Conveyance, to the end that Subjection shall be always precarious, and,
when occasion serves, renounced with a Justification.

Force or Fraud the beginning of Empires! It seems so jealous are the Party we
have here to deal with, lest God should be thought to have any hand in the
matter, that they choose rather entirely to ascribe it to the Devil; for he is
the original Liar and Murderer too; And if the way to a Throne be to wade
through Blood, and make the slaughtered Carcases of all Opposers so many Steps
of Ascent to mount them unto Greatness, I see not but why every such exalted
Head may call him Father, whose Name in the Greek Tongue is (...), The
Destroyer, Rev. 9.7. And then what a hopeful Exercise of Power must attend such
a Beginning? The Sword must needs maintain its own Title; and if the Coronation
Robes be dyed in Blood, any one may foretell what Complexion Justice
thenceforth is like to appear in. An Usurper brings along with him a necessity
of renouncing all Humanity, and Religion too: He must hate all those whom he
has injured, and must punish whatsoever his own guilty Fears present, as if
they were manifest Crimes; he must tolerate all manner of Disorder and
Confusion in the Worship of Heaven, for the sake of those which himself has
brought upon the Affairs of Earth; he must give up the Word of God to mercenary
Tongues and unhallowed Hands, to be Tentered, and set upon the Rack, till, with
the Heathen Oracles of old, it can (...), cant something in the favor of his
Pretensions. And who can be so vain, as even to dream of Property or Liberty
under such a State? Who can hope for the enjoyment of a rightful Possession,
whilst the Government it self is but a splendid Robbery? I shall pass over this
Particular, with that Observation of the wise Historian Tacitus, Imperium
flagitio acquisitum nemo unquam bonis artibus exercuit; which may bear this
Construction, The worse the Title, the more intolerable must the Tyrant be.

But because the Deduction of Government from its true Original, makes so fair
for the Natural and Divine Right of Monarchy, above all other Forms or Models
whatever, hence the implacable Enemies thereof have another Reserve, in which
indeed they place their greatest Strength and Confidence, and that is, by a
kind of awkward Courtship to the Multitude, by a most fulsom Flattery of the
People, to insinuate into them an Opinion, That all Sovereignty and Power, all
Honor and Authority, as to the first Ownership, is theirs, and where they are
pleased to lodge it. A most pernicious Insinuation, enough to prompt any People
to seditious Attempts; which, in stead of Obedience, (which is the farthest
thing in their thoughts) only sets their Heads on work how to recover the
Governing Power, which they are told to be withheld violently from them. Now
how disagreeing this is both to the tenor of Gods Word, and of his Works also,
we shall briefly consider.

1. To the Word of God. As we find mention but of One sort of Government there,
so we find Obedience always pressed a quite contrary way than is here supposed,
viz. as to an Ordinance of Heaven, not a Contract on Earth; as descending from
above, (so Christ tells Pilate) not arising from below; the Royal Unction being
in this respect like that of the High Priests, which was shed upon Aaron's
Head, and did not creep up from the Skirts of his Garment. We never read our
Savior or his Apostles enforcing the Duty of Obedience upon People from their
own Act and Deed, but from the Institution of God, from the Sacredness of his
Authority, which is so closely involved in that of his Vicegerents: St. Paul is
peremptory in it, Romans 13. That Governors are sent unto the People; are Gods
Ministers, that notes their Original; for the good and welfare of the others,
there is the End. Nay, the Holy Ghost speaks of Governors as of Earthly Gods;
and would it not be a gross piece of Idolatry for any People to be the Makers
of their Gods? I think we may suffer them, as the World now goes, to adore them
if they please; but surely they ought to be admonished to hold Hands off, and
not presume as if they could make or unmake them at pleasure. It was a pretty
childish Conceit, that of Lucian's, which he reports of himself, That being
young, he was set out by his Father to learn the Art of a Statuary, and
wondrous jocund and mighty forward he was, having taken great delight in
forming little Images of Horses, and other Beasts, and sometimes of Men; but
that which pleased his Imagination most, was the hopes and expectation that in
time he might carve Gods also. I appeal, whether the Multitude are not made
such Children, as often as Ambition cringes, and Popularity buys their Breath,
contrary to all other ways of Bargain, by setting a prodigious overvalue upon
it? The Power of the People must be extolled, and harangued in their Ears, even
to Omnipotency; and they so dull, as to believe at length, that Majesty it self
is nothing else but a swollen strutting Pageant, which the Breath of their
Voices has extended to that Dimension.

I look upon it as no difficult Undertaking, to show how false and groundless
that Doctrine is, of an Implicit Covenant in every Kingdom, betwixt God, and
the King, and the People; according to which, say they, if the King fall away
from God, the People may do the same to the King. This is that which Junius
Brutus, and he the first of any Man that I know, broacheth in the beginning of
his Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, and lays down as the Foundation of that his
Treatise. This is the true Mother which has brought forth those Covenants,
Holy Leagues, and Associations, which have at several times threatened Confusion
unto Kingdoms: And if some Accountants be not out in their Computation, it is a
Doctrine which has shed more Christian Blood than now runs in the Veins of
living Christians: But I must not enter upon the discussion of it at present.

If the Notion of a Popular King be no ways agreeing to the tenor of Gods Word,
we shall next examine it by the Rule of his Works; and as to its Existence, it
will be found there no better than a Chimera in Nature. The World, as God made
it, acknowledges no such Conveyance of Power. When was it, in what Age did the
People at first consent thus to make a Deed of Gift of their Natural Freedom?
We challenge all true Histories to give us an Account of this matter, and have
hitherto had no satisfaction. All that has been found, is, That upon the
Dissolution or Dismembring of some Ancient Monarchies, People have been forced
to enter upon Agreements and Contracts, and to patch up an Association in stead
of a just Government, and when favorable concurrences fell in, have a
considerable time continued in that preternatural state; but in this case we
may say as Christ did of some of the Mosaic Dispensations, from the beginning
it was not so. Plato indeed among the Ancients is thought to speak pertinently
to this matter; that Philosopher offers something with a perhaps, how some
Remnants of People might be left upon the tops of Mountains, after a general
Inundation, but then it is after his manner of beating dark and doubtful
Conjectures in quest of Truth; and alas it was his ignorance, or at least the
want of a distinct knowledge of the true Original of Mankind, which forced him
and other excellent persons upon such extravagant Suppositions; when as the
Vpstart Plato is the most positive man in asserting, that the first Inhabitants
of the World did for some time try the Experiment of the brutal life in a
Common, like Beasts in a Pasture, and were driven at last by necessity to
accept of Government; which to assert at this time of the day, (now the
Scriptures are unlocked, and in every hand, and the other Records of time have
been examined,) is a strange presumption upon Mankind, as if all were Levellers
in Understanding. We are sure and certain, that God ordered all Humane Race to
descend from one man as the common Parent; which Bellarmine himself, who was no
great Friend to the Power of Temporal Princes, says is a sign that God rather
approves of the Government of one man than of many. But why may not we use it
for an Argument, that no other could possibly take place, whilst there was that
known subordination of Children to Fathers? unless there was such a juncture
when the Natural Rights of Persons were shuffled and confounded, and it was
impossible to make out a Claim to the most ancient Fatherhood, which can never
be supposed at the first Plantation of Countries, and beginnings of Kingdoms,
when the Earth was peopled by several Families under their distinct Heads, as
Moses by Divine Authority does assure us. So that what they speak of an
Original Independency, and state of Natural Freedom, must be a mere Fiction; or
at most only an Artificial Supposition, to understand the force of Contracts
and Common Leagues made betwixt Equals, but can have no Foundation in Nature.

There was offered to the World not long ago, an Hypothesis of Prae-Adamites,
men before Adam, upon which a new System of Divinity was raised, and that in
the end was found to carry a tendency to Atheism and Irreligion; it will
concern our Commonwealth Politicians to oblige us with an Hypothesis of
Praeter-Adamites, men of another Race and Lineage, who derive not from Adam, a
Generation like that of the Dragons Teeth in the Poet, where they may find both
their state of Equality, and state of War also; and when their utmost is done,
its possible all may be found to tend to Anarchy and Confusion.

But let us, as it becomes good Christians, still adhere to the Word of God;
let Holy Scripture, which is every where the adequate Measure of our Faith, be
here the Rule of our Obedience also; the tongue of men and Angels cannot speak
more fitly of Sovereign Earthly Princes than it does; nor more loftily with
respect to the Original of their Power, nor more obligingly and with greater
condescension, to sweeten and engage the Duty of Subjection. Witness the
expression of my Text.

And so I pass from the Style and Title, unto the second thing asserted, viz.
The Duty it self, which was Honor; Honor thy Father, etc.

Honor was always accounted as something inherent in the person honoring, and
so it may perhaps seem to be altogether at his own free disposal; but the truth
is, this may become a Debt as well as any thing else, and not to pay it where
it is such, is as direct a piece of injustice, as to rob a man of any thing
which is called his own. Honor to whom honor, says the Apostle, Romans 13.
where he speaks of rendering unto all their Dues. If I be a Father where is my
Honor, says the Lord God. This Honor does naturally look upwards, and is
thought to comprehend all those Duties which Inferiors owe to their
Superiors; as Love looks on every side, and is called the fulfilling of all
the Duties to our Equals. Now if God, who is infinite Perfection and boundless
Excellency, be the Object more of our Admiration and Ecstasy, which is the
excess of Reverence, than any thing else, then our Honor must ascend in
proportion to those degrees of nearness which any Object makes in its
approaches to the Deity, and so we shall come at length to rest in that
primitive gage which Tertullian acknowledges in the Name of the Christians of
his time, colimus Imperatorem tanquam hominem, a Deo secundum and solo Deo
minorem; We honor, says he, the Emperor as a man, but next and immediately
unto God.

For the full import of the Duty, we may draw it forth in three Notions of the
word; viz. Reverence, Maintenance, and Obedience.

The First is Estimation or Reverence, which is that signification of the word
which bears the stamp of common usage; and this is addressed to the Person of
our Civil Parent.

The Second is Maintenance, which I think is a sense almost proper to Holy
Scripture, and respects his Regal state.

The Third is Obedience, with relation to his Laws and Decrees.

But I must not discourse of it in this latitude; should I pursue these
severally, I must of necessity entrench too much upon your patience, and the
succeeding business of the day: I shall therefore confine my self unto the
first of these at present, but may chance to consider it as a Transcendent
which is interwoven through the other two, as they shall fall in mention.

But, 1. Honor does primarily denote the expression of our Estimation and
Reverence for some Excellencies in our Superiors, and can never be so fitly
placed as when we direct it to our Supreme Governor. It is a shame we should
have mean thoughts of the Person whom God has thought fit to be his Deputy and
Representative upon Earth; is he worthy to bear the Impress and Image of the
Almighty's Power and Majesty, and not deserving a reverent Idea in our thoughts
and minds? There was never any Nation that owned a devout sentiment for their
Gods, but paid a proportionable Honor to their Kings, the Persians yielded a
Divine Adoration to them both. The Primitive Christians gave Reverence to the
very Statues of their Emperors, until Julian set up the Images of their false
Gods by them, with a design by that means to trepan them into Idolatry. The
Heathens, generally, for the Blessings of Peace, Plenty, and Protection which
they enjoyed, thought it not enough to give the highest Reverence to their
living Princes, but after death, by an Apotheosis, did bestow a kind of
Divinity upon them; and to serve and worship these was the sum of their
Religion. But come we to the People of God, God's own People the Jews, and
behold there how the holy Oil used in their Inaugurations, did by its fragrant
odor make the Royal Head on which it was poured, as delightful and dear to
them as the breath of their Nostrils; and the mortality of a Prince was
lamented among them as the quenching of the very Light of Israel. Behold also
among them, what submission and deference they used in their Addresses to
Majesty, speak thou unto us, and we will hear, and do it, is their voice in one
place; and it is noted for their usual ordinary temper, 2 Samuel 3.36. that
whatsoever the King did, that still pleased all the People; although it is
confessed, upon the fret and ferment of Sedition they were as turbulent as any;
yet never was there a more strict Law given to secure the Honor of Sovereign
Powers, than God gave unto them, which laid an Obligation not only upon the
outward man, but upon the words and thoughts also, curse not the King, no not
in thy thoughts; and certainly with the highest Reason, for when the Honor of
a Prince lies open to be invaded without fear, his Authority is near wounding,
and his Person no ways secure; Reputation both guards his Life, and supports
his Throne, and they are ever the most dangerous Enemies to both, that
undermine him in the good opinion of his Subjects, and render him cheap in
those Eyes which should look up with the greatest Veneration; a slanderous
Tongue is a more speedy Instrument of Murder than a Sword of Steel, and a
virulent Libel of more certain dispatch than Gunshot, by how much it is easier
to reach the Fame of a Sovereign Prince, than to hit his Person. In our
Judicial Proceedings, the common Accusation of Criminals lies for Offenses
against the Dignity as well as the Crown of our Sovereign Lord the King;
reckoning every violation of his Laws may stick reproach upon his Government;
but there are some Offenses which strike at the very root of it, the malicious
Arts of lessening him before his People, the levelling attempts to lay the
Sovereigns Honor first in the dust, knowing the whole Fabric of the
Government must follow after it. And these are the Crimes which before Earthly
Tribunals deserve severest Censures of all others, not but that other sins in
some respects may be found more sinful at the last day, but because these are
most destructive of Humane Society, and most repugnant to the good and welfare
of Mankind: The Tongue, says St. James, c. 3.5. is a very small Member, but
being set on fire from Hell; being well warmed with that (...), which a little
after he speaks of, it can easily put the whole course of Nature into
combustion, and a short speech may contain that essential Poison and Rancour of
Malice in it, as may impregnate the whole Sphere with infection and mischief.
These are usually the Springs and first Movers, which bring on greater
Revolutions. And when Confusion and Desolation shall follow as a Flood, and the
Sword shall march in Triumph over the Land, and Ruin like a mighty whirlewind
shall throw all into heaps, then if perhaps you look for the kindly Fruits of
Repentance from the Authors of such Calamity; all must be, only the
acknowledgment of a little improvidence, and that they never expected matters
would have run on to that pass: Whereas it is a most natural and necessary
progress, from the Defamation of a Government to its Dissolution.

And then again, if there be in Scripture a peculiar notion of the word, to
Honor with our Substance, and if the Holy Ghost instructs us there, that to
supply the wants and necessities of our Parents be another Branch of the Honor
we owe unto them; as our Savior most expressly in St. Mark 10. and St. Paul
also brings it under the same head, Romans 13. where he informs those Christians
of their non-exemption from Tribute, and implies it to be an act of Justice, by
his word then used, (...), render ye, or restore, tribute; not so much a Gift
as a Debt. And it is but a very reasonable return indeed, for our secure nights
and our useful days, for our peace and protection, and all the opportunities
serving unto life and godliness; I say it is but a very reasonable return, if
we contribute to the necessary support of the Government; yet still this ought
so to be, as in a way consistent with its Honor and Reputation. The Boundaries
and Stations of Nature can never be altered, and a contumely offered from a Son
cannot be commuted for, by the performance of any other part of his Duty. You
will not much commend the Obedience or dutiful Regards of that person, who
shall offer to relieve the Necessities of his distressed Father, but withal
shall read him a petulant Lecture upon the ill management of his Estate, and
his spendthrift courses, that shall exact accounts with all the rigor and
scrupulosity of a Tasker, and tie him up perhaps to such terms and conditions
as shall be most grievous and burdensome, if not impossible. There seems to have
been more ingenuity, if not less wickedness, in those Pharisees of old, whom
our Savior reproves upon this score, in the 7th of St. Mark; they fairly dashed
out this part of the Divine Law by their own Traditions, and did not delude the
wants and the expectation of their Parents, with a Subsidy in one hand, and a
Remonstrance in the other; by their Vow of Corban they put an issue to the
matter, and never let it come to a business of bargain and sale betwixt them,
or such vile higgling, as can never show with any decency, unless betwixt an
unbelieving Christian and a broking Jew.

Lastly, The great and infallible Test of our Honor, is Obedience; Then are ye
my Disciples indeed, says our Savior, if ye do whatsoever I command you: All
our Hosanna's and hails, without this, are downright mockery. And yet I must
confess also, there is a sort of Obedience which has little or nothing of
Honor in it; that which is forced and extorted by the fear of Penalties, and
that which is picked and chosen for Convenience, and to serve an Interest; and
such is the restive and disputatious Obedience, which will go not one step
farther than a direct Precept of Scripture shall press it, although it be in
matters relating to the Public welfare, and where there is no Divine Precept
to the contrary. The Reason is, because all this may be done where there is no
Respect had to the Authority of the Lawgiver; and it is that alone which gives
the formality and true stamp to Obedience. Now if many shall be found wanting
and defective in their Duty, who yet keep the Law, then where shall the
Disobedient appear? Nay in what Form of the Kings true Honourers, and right
Faithful Subjects, must they be placed, who not only violate the Laws, but also
teach men so to do; and teach it not only by Example, but by Precept, by
Institutes of Libertinism, by distinguishing men out of their Loyalty, and
stating of Cases and Questions, whereby the Law it self is made the only
Criminal, and suffers accordingly? Among all the hellish Machinations and
Devices which the Enemy of Mankind, in the shape of an Angel of light, has
hitherto used for breaking the Order, and disturbing the Peace and Quiet of the
World, perhaps there has not been a more dangerous one than that which of late
has appeared among us, and is not unsitly called The Reign of Conscience. I
would not be thought to go about to expose so sacred a thing, whilst I only
express my resentment of those abuses, which it suffers by the folly and
wickedness of them who most delight to have the word in their Mouths; and it is
the greatest abuse certainly, to Idolize it, and so become Worshippers of our
own selves, to ascribe the supremacy and power of determination unto every man's
private Conscience, which the Law has placed elsewhere, for a known and
public resort. The Oceanists are wont to tell us of an Empire of men, so they
call Monarchy; and an Empire of Laws, and that must be their own dear
Commonwealth, but here is an Empire of Conscience which outs them both. This
must needs be the most Arbitrary of any other, since men have learnt the
artifice to manage Conscience, like those Prisms or Mathematical Glasses, which
with a slight turn shall present any Color, which fancy or affection calls
for; that Reign must also be most tyrannical, which knows no milder Punishment
for every transgression than the pain of damnation; and what Form of Polity
must we call it, when every man is a King at least, being unaccountable for
whatever he does? If this be the reign of Saints, I see not but why the
greatest Sensualists in the world may be reconciled unto it; for Conscience at
the most, and where it is alleged with the greatest sincerity and truth, is
but an act of my own Practical Judgment, which may be corrupted by Interest and
Passion, and as often as by following this I decline from the Rule and Measure
that is set before me, I do in effect make the last Appeal unto my
Understanding Self. And what is there in the world so grateful to a proud
unmortified Spirit? It Is one of the most luscious pieces of Sensuality which
any carnal heart can wish for; and what can the consequence be, should it go
on, but the evacuating the use of the Law, and all Judicial Proceedings, i. e.
in short, the ruin of a Kingdom? We sure, the People of this Nation, above all
others in the World have infinite Reason to acknowledge it with all gratitude
to Almighty God, for assigning us our Lot in that Country which of old was
called, and still is (would our little Discontents but let us know how to value
it) the Fortunate Island, not so much for its temperate Climate, but for that
happy temper of the Constitution we now live under, both with reference to the
Concerns of our Souls, and outward Estate. Our Religion as to its Substance
Divine and unalterable, and as to its Mode and Exercise is established and
settled with the concurrence of all the Wisdom of the Nation, and by the
Authority of the greatest Power under Heaven, and cannot be changed or
controlled by the Will or Arbitrary Imposition of any man. The Bounds of our
Liberty and Property are sacred also, and not to be invaded, so long as there
shall be any Reverence had to Law or Justice among us; we must dissolve this
Order, or sin our selves out of the Protection of the Government, before we can
be miserable; unless with Jeshurun, growing fat and pampered, we shall run
headstrong down the Precipice of Ruin, nothing else can bring it upon us. Nay,
we seem so free from any present Grievance, that we must call in imagination to
help us to anticipate Misery, and be astonished at a dreadful painted Scene,
which only our affected Fears and Jealousies represent unto us. And next unto
Almighty God we must render unto his Majesty the Honor due unto him, in all
the forementioned Instances of the Duty, for our Peace and Plenty, for our
Shelter and Protection from Foreign Enemies, and for the wise diversion of the
sad Effects of our own Animosities, for the repeated assurances of maintaining
the Protestant Religion, which should be dearer to us than our Lives; for the
continuance of His Clemency and Paternal Care over this our Reformed Church,
which renders her equally the Envy of Papists and Dissenters, but a Sanctuary
unto all such as flee unto her, with any sober Persuasions of Religion. And
where now are our Returns for these Blessings, for which the very Heathens
would have been building of Altars, and preparing Sacrifices, upon like
occasion? Whither is our Love and Reverence of Authority fled, or lost among
us? O my Countrymen, where is that Old-English Loyalty for which this Nation
has been of old so deservedly renowned? Alas! the New Plantation seems at
length to return the Pest back again upon us, that was formerly the Sink and
Drain into which the noxious Humors of our State were wont to be discharged;
and now (I know not by what Infatuation) we seem to be fond of, and willing to
cherish them in our own Body; as if These could be any Defense to the
Protestant Cause, which are the professed Enemies of the best Protestant Church
upon Earth; and if ever the Peace and Settlement of our Israel chance to be
disturbed, it will be (in all Humane Probability) by an Eruption from the
Confluence of These, when ever they shall be ripe for Mischief: Nay, the fresh
Experience of our Sister-Kingdom of Scotland, puts it out of question. But
blessed be God, the Wisdom and Vigilance of our State is awake, and
sufficiently apprehensive from what Quarter the Danger threatens; and it is
hoped the whole Nation will be sensible for what these Coals of Fire are kept
alive and glowing hot within her Bowels, merely by those various Winds of
Doctrine which blow from the Caverns of Schismatical Conventicles. To these it
is our Nation ows her Lankness and Ill-thriving under the plenteous Means of
Grace and Goodness; and without Gods extraordinary, abundant, and overflowing
Mercy, it is morally impossible that the Regular Ministry of the Gospel should
have any the least considerable Success upon the Souls of Men among us, under
such strong Prejudices, whilst the strange Fires of Nadab blazing upon
unhallowed Altars, shall dazzle and misguide the Weak, and the Wilful be
suffered to persist in the Contradiction of Corah. If that Paper-Draught and
Scheam of an Association, which was lately brought to light, be justly thought
worthy of the Abhorrence and Detestation of every Loyal Heart and Hand, you
will not spare those Assemblies of Schism, those Garrisons of Sedition, which
are but so many little Models and brief Essays of the Association in act.
Neither your Peace nor Religion are consistent with them. Our Princes Power in
Ecclesiasticals, after the Example of the Religious Kings of Judah, is one main
Article of our Reformation; and what a mighty Influence this has upon our
Civil Union, no Considering Man can doubt: both which are twice contradicted
and everthrown; first, by the Fact it self, of Assembling, so notorious and
daring, in contempt of Authority; and next, by those Seditious Doctrines which
are but too frequently disseminated among them: Nay, if Pregnant Causes should
not sometimes miscarry in their Productions of evil as well as good Effects,
such Practices as these, so scandalous to Christianity, persisted in, and
vouched for, with the Pretenses of Conscience and Religion, were enough to make
the Names of Conscience and Religion to stink upon the Earth. As often as the
Language of the prostitute Press, and Common Places of Conversation, shall be
undutiful and reflecting upon Authority, that only argues an ordinary itchy
contagious Evil running upon the Vulgar; but when the Greatest and Justest
Power upon Earth shall be confronted with a pretended Commission from Heaven,
and a Public Exercise of Worship set up, in opposition to that which with the
greatest Wisdom and deliberation is established, and Conscience brought to
vouch for one, which is the strictest Tie and Obligation to the other, this
shows a Diabolical Contrivance to sham Religion, and make her turn the Point
back, and stab her self. Yet this, and many other Distempers we labor under,
would meet a speedy Remedy, were we persuaded to put the Duty of my Text into
practice. A settled Reverence for Authority would breed an Affection to the
Persons of our Governors, and that would produce a Trust and Confidence in the
Public Management, and this would be a means to banish those ill-boading
Jealousies and sinister Interpretations which are put upon every Occurrence,
and perhaps is the worst Symptom of our Misery. And can there be any thing more
equitable, than what is now recommended unto us, to pay that Tribute of Honor
to our Supreme Civil Parent, which is exacted, and not denied, in all other
Relations whatever? The Master of a Family will not suffer his Power of
ordering the Affairs of his own House to be disputed or encroach'd upon by any
other; and if it be the Lord of a petty Manor, how absolute will he expect to
be in his little Territories? What a rigid Account shall be exacted of those
Bylaws which his Worship shall dictate? and sometimes shall vaunt it more with
that one molted Feather of the Crown, and look for more Observance, than what
himself will pay to the Sacred Head which wears the Diadem. One should think
the very Love and Sense of Duty toward our Natural Lord and Sovereign, should
be as prevalent at least with us, as the Dread and Terror of a cruel Usurper:
And shall this depress us to the basest degrees of Servility, and the other not
enlarge our Souls with great Propensions to Honor and Obedience?

But perhaps there is nothing will make us altogether Christians in this great
Branch of Christianity, but the proper Motives of Religion; and therefore,
after the Equity of the thing, let us next consider what Godliness there is in
it: And here we shall find such a strict Alliance betwixt the Fear of God and
the Honor of the King, that in Holy Scripture they are commonly joined
together, and in Practice can never be divided. The Name of Piety is properly
given to that Duty which is owing unto Parents, by the best Classical Writers;
and the Honoring of a Prince, I have read in a Learned and Reverend Author,
called an Elicit Act of Religion, meaning, I suppose, such a Worship of God, as
the Image Worship of the Romanists would be, were there no Divine Precept in
bar against them, rendering their Practice unwarrantable and superstitious. But
we need not strain a Point to that nicety; If Loyalty be a Duty indispensible,
and an important Act of Christian Religion, we have a considerable Advantage
against our Adversaries on both hands, when we dare join Issue with them upon
the Observation of one of the Chief of Gods Moral Laws, as to which our Papist
Adversaries, and Dissenters also, are notoriously defective. It Is Honor
enough, that our Reformed Church of England has been here acknowledged the
sure Conservatrix of the Principles of Loyalty, and was never wanting in the
Practice of them in the worst of Times; and this is it that makes her the Butt
of all the Factions, at which they shoot their bitter Arrows: This draws upon
her those Loads of Calumnies and Contempts which the Subtle Underminers of the
State stir up, and unwary Persons are loud and clamorous in, they know not why:
Otherwise, what reason is there imaginable, why some that pretend an Agreement
in all Doctrinals with her, and would go further, should yet labor her Ruin,
and would rejoice to see her laid waste and desolate, but only because she is
known to be an impregnable Defense to the Monarchy and lawful Government of the
Nation, and cannot, as others do, give a Dispensation for Resistance?

We may see it by experience among our selves, how the Honor of God is
promoted and carried on in the same Company, and by the same Proportions, with
that to the King. Who are they that frequent the Places where his Honor
dwells, and that set forth the Glory of God, and declare his Majesty and Mercy,
by Acknowledgments, Praises, and Confessions made unto him, with due Solemnity
and Reverence, and make a Conscience of these things? of offering these
Sacrifices to his Honor, as of old they offered their Goods and Cattle? Are
they not such generally as pay a dutiful Respect unto his Representative on
Earth? such as are polished and refined by Education, and know the Laws of
Observance and Regard? And it is agreeable to the Genius of a Gentleman, if not
biased by some Fanatic Interest, to assert the Public Rites of Worship;
whereas the Lower Part of Men, especially where they have received any Factious
Impressions, are not sensible of any the least touch of Conscience for these
Matters, neither for Gods Honor nor the Kings.

I shall add but few Words more: What remains shall be, according to my
proposed Method, to show the Obligation to this Duty, from the Argument
contained in the last Clause of my Text, which is the Promise of a very
desirable Blessing; but it implies a severe Threatening in case of Disobedience,
no less than an utter Abscission and Cutting off from the Land of Promise: And
this must needs have a mighty Influence upon that People especially, and all
others in general. The force of the Inference lies chiefly in the Threatening.
Thus God elsewhere invites them with a gracious Promise, Isa. 1.19. If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land; but he drives and
compels in the next Words with a terrible Threat, But if ye refuse and rebel,
ye shall be devoured with the Sword. The Curse of God hanging over the Head of
a contumacious and rebellious People, is enough to reduce them, if there be any
fear of God in the Place. This is the proper Season for God himself, the King
of Kings, to appear and interpose, when his Vicegerents here on Earth shall be
set at naught: Here is dignus vindice modus, a proper Care for the All-ruling
Providence, and a Recompense worthy of a Divine Revenge; and it has seldom
failed upon such Exigencies, although it has been sometimes slow. I shall
leave but one Example with you; but it is such an one as I think we may
challenge all History, Sacred and Humane, to match it; it is in the 16th. of
Numbers, in this very People of the Jews, and not far from the time when this
Law was given them. At the beginning of the Chapter Corah and his Company rise
up against Moses and Aaron, the Chief Magistrate and Chief Priest, As Religion
and Loyalty are still found in Conjunction, so the King and Priest have the
same Common Enemies. And what was the Cause that stirred up these Men to
mutiny? It was plainly the Levellers Grievance, the Imparity of Gods People,
the hated Eminence of a Superior, and the heavy Yoke of Government: For thus
they vent their Discontents against Moses and Aaron, ver. 3. Ye take too much
upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy, every one of them; wherefore
then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord? Here Is now the
Masque of Sedition, with all its Paint and Varnish on: It is the Lords Cause;
it is for freeing the Congregation of the Lord from the Slavery, which Moses
held them under, for asserting the Liberties of an Holy People: And as if the
mere joining with the Faction had been Holiness it self, it is alleged, they
were all holy, every one of them. Moses looks upon this Face of Affairs as of a
dangerous presage, and makes his Appeal to God, the Ordainer of Powers, and the
Revenger of Kings; he joins Issue with the Mutineers upon the Point, and is
content the Divine Right of Government should be tried by the Success which God
should give to the Sacrilegious Enterprise of these Men. And what was the
Event? Why, the Question under debate received a dreadful Decision, by the
Overthrow and Destruction of the Rebels; and the Righteous God described as it
were the Nature of their Sin, by some Lines of the Punishment, as appears by
the Sequel of the Story. Here is now an Example of Gods appearing for his own
Institution: and let any one of them who have used to talk so loud for Gods
owning their Cause, and Outgoings with their Arms, match it if they can. It Is
confessed, in common Proceedings, and the ordinary Course of Providence, an
Argument from Success is very fallacious; but in the Case as it was here, when
the very Point under Trial was the Divine Right of Superiority and Rule, and
this put upon the Issue, to be maintained by God by Miracle, or else to fall;
and when God shall answer to the Appeal in such an extraordinary manner; here,
I take it, in such a Case as this, Gods Works are as instructive and infallible
as his Word; and in all such Events we may say, as Pharaoh's Magicians did,
This is the Finger of God; a Finger by which he writes his Will unto us as
plain and legible, as ever he did upon the Tables of Stone to Moses; as legible
as is the Precept it self, for whose sake I have alleged this Example.

Now therefore, knowing the terrors of the Lord, let us all, my Brethren, be
persuaded and exhorted to have a care that we never provoke Almighty God, by
our crying Sins, to send forth his Judgments any more upon this People and
Kingdom. Let us, who value our selves in being thought the Loyal and obedient
Subjects, endeavor by a godly and upright Conversation to redeem the
Profession of Loyalty from the evil Slanders of such as seek occasion to
reproach it: Let us serve and honor our King with the greatest Zeal and Duty
that we owe, but our God infinitely more: Let us endeavor to live, as far as
is possible, without the suspicion of Vice, as well as free from its contagiou;
that so we may break and discredit that most false, ill-natured, and
uncharitable Distinction which the Pharisees and Hypocrites of the Times have
taken up, when they set the Kings Loyal Subjects on one Hand, and the Sober
Godly Party of the Nation on the other. And let them who have been defective in
this kind, show forth the Fruits of Repentance, having enjoyed a Pardon and
Indemnity for their Crimes past, let them learn at length to be ingenuous,
and, if it be possible, to convert their Rancour into Duty; let them but begin
now to love, honor, and obey the King much, because much has been forgiven
them: Let them never cast a Thought back upon Egypt, or its Fleshpots, nor
chew the Cud upon those luscious Morsels of Rapine and Sacrilege, which, for
the ease and health of their Consciences, they have been forced to disgorge:
And above all, let them ever mind it, not to relapse into their old Folly, of
turning Faith into Faction, and Religion into Rebellion: From which, and all
the Plagues and Punishments attending it, Good Lord deliver us, by the Merits
of thy dear Son; To whom, with thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor
ascribed, the Kingdom, Power, and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

