Decus and Tutamen: OR, Practical Godliness

THE ORNAMENT and MUNIMENT OF ALL RELIGION.

Being the Subject of several SERMONS Preached at WESTMINSTER, UPON TITUS ii.
10.

By V. Alsop Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Barnes at the Crown in the Pall Mall, 1696.

To all that Love the Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, especially to those who
attend upon his Ministry, Grace and Peace.
Beloved Brethren,
WHAT was once preached to your Ears, is now presented to your Eyes,
accompanied with fervent Prayers that the God of all Grace would powerfully
impress it upon your Hearts. The importunity of Friends is a common Apology for
publishing some Pieces, which if Affection had not more prevailed than
Judgment, might as well never have seen the Light. How much of this I might
plead to justify or excuse my appearing in Print upon this Subject, many of you
do know, but I shall willingly wave those Reasons: The Weight, the Worth, the
Necessity of the Argument, as they have been my strongest Inducements, so are
they all I shall offer for my Vindication.

The Age into which Sovereign Providence has cast our Lot, does much boast of
Light, I wish that a proportionable measure of holy Heat had accompanied that
Light; that Grace, Truth, and Peace might have been the Glory of our Times. But
here we must bitterly lament that the holy Flame of Zeal for the Concerns of
Jesus Christ; that fervent Love to all that bear his Image in Righteousness and
true Holiness, has degenerated into, or been expelled by another Fire, not
kindled from Heaven, but if we may judge of the Cause by the Effects from a
contrary Original: The Spirit of Envy has almost eaten up holy Emulation; and
we have disputed so furiously about Truth, that we have almost lost the other
half of our Religion, Charity. The noise of Axes and Hammers in building the
Temple has been as great, as once it was in destroying it; this Clamor has
drowned the softer whispers of the Spirit of Holiness and Peace; our
Speculations about what is too high for our Reach, and our Quarrels about what
is too low for our serious Regard, have insensibly worn out Practical
Godliness, and in the mean time Religion suffers, its Enemies triumph, its few
Cordial Friends mourn over it, and suffer with it.

The Gospel of our blessed Savior if it might have been heard, would easily
have compromised all our Differences; but it has fared no better with Religion,
than with that charitable Person, who interposing between two Friends engaged
with drawn Swords, was in the heat of passionate folly wounded by them both for
an unkind Reward of his Kindness.

It is much to be feared that this will be the undeserved fate of whoever shall
undertake to reconcile contending Friends, to make them both his bitter
Enemies; for in an Age of Fiery mistaken Zeal, he that is not Scalding Hot,
shall be censured for Lukewarm, and not to be a Bigot, will be to be reputed
not a Christian.

The only Expedient I can recommend to you, my beloved Brethren, in this sad
Case is; To maintain Innocence in your own Souls, Peace in your own
Consciences, to keep close to your Duty; and if for endeavors of Love, you
must be so unhappy as to contract Enmity, to retire with the Psalmist to your
God, Psalm. cix. 4. and give your selves unto Prayer.

But as the Holy Go^pel of God our Savior suffers unworthily by our Divisions,
and Contentions; it suffers no less by our unsuitable Conversations: which yet
is but the evil Effect of an evil Cause, the bitter Fruit of that poisonous
Root. For as when one part of the Natural Body grows great beyond its
Proportion, it robs the rest of their due Nourishment, and Growth; such is our
deplorable Case; we have furnished the Head so plentifully with Notions, that
we have starved the Members of their proper Supplies, that they cannot perform
their proper Operations. We have laid out so much of our Zeal, and Vigor, upon
Controversies, that there is little left to support the necessary things of
Practical Religion, Holiness toward God, Repentance from dead Works, and the
exercise of good Works, and a heavenly Conversation.

I Bless God, from my Soul, that most of you are of another Temper, and
Character; though I cannot deny, that the Enemy has studied to sow Tares among
you; and while we slept, his Emissaries and Instruments, have watched, to bring
in among you some Doctrines and Practices which would have Wounded, if not
mortally Stabbed, our Holy Profession. But blessed be the Great Superintendent
of his Church, who faithfully watched over you, and against them, and has
prevented, and defeated their subtle Malice.

It Is for the sake of humble sincere Ones principally, that I have drawn up,
and sent forth these Papers; who cannot perhaps wield a heavy Argument for the
Cause of Christ, and against its Opposers; and yet their Integrity and
Uprightness keeps them secure; and the Grace of God on which they humbly and
securely depend, enables them to Live down all the Objections of Atheists,
Deists, and Profane Persons, by a regular and exemplary Conversation.

We Read of a Philosopher, who when a subtle Sophister disputed zealously, that
there was no such thing as Motion in the World; said nothing, but rose up and
walked. You may possibly meet with such Profane Wretches, who with great Noise
and Clamor, would bear you down that there is nothing real, nothing solid in
Religion; that its an empty ineffectual Notion, a curious airy Speculation,
that has no power upon Men's Hearts, no command over their Lives; now if you
shall meet with this importunate Clamor, which is the best Argument they have;
say you nothing, but rise up and Walk. Let Men see your Holy, Heavenly
Conversation, and this will silence all their Cavils, and stop the Mouths of
all their Objections, better than you can do by fine force and Dint of Argument.

And indeed, let us Dispute, Write, what, and while we please, nothing will
vindicate Religion from the Reproaches thrown upon it by impudent Atheism, but
the Holy Walking of those that profess it. And it is a thousand pities that
false Doctrine should be credited by a severe, morose and rigid behavior,
while Truth it self is blemished, and brought into Contempt by a loose one.

Let me therefore Anticipate the following Discourse thus far, as to assure
you, that the Credit of our Holy Religion can never be recovered without

1. A more Conscientious Sanctification of the Lord's Day: all practical
Religion Rises, Falls, Ebs, Flows with that. When a Generation of Men removed
the Observation of that Day from Divine Institution, and laid it upon the
Churches Tradition, or the Civil Sanction, the repute of it sunk presently, and
the observation of it dwindled away to nothing.

2. A more constant fixed Worshipping God in our Families. As Personal
Remisness will creep into the Family, so will Family-Looseness easily infect
the Churches. It is in vain to Dream that Congregations will be Holy, if
Families be Profane.

This one thing further, Brethren, I have to beg of you, or rather of God for
you, that you may most zealously, and unweariedly pursue the things that make
for Truth, Holiness, and Peace, and never to divide those things which God has
joined together, and God, even our God, shall give you his Blessing. This is
the unfeigned Desire, and shall ever be the fervent Prayer of him, who is, and
shall endeavor to approve himself to God, to his own Conscience, and to yours,

Feb. 25. 1695/6. The faithful Servant of your Souls through Christ,Vin. Alsop.

The Reader is desired to Correct these few Errors, which notwithstanding all
our Care have escaped the Press.

PAge 19. Line 27. for not read yet, p. 112. line 16. for heart read hurt.

TITUS ii. 10. That they may Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all
things. -- (...).
THE Exhortation here given us, is of far greater extent than the Occasion on
which it was given: The Occasion was narrow, but the Equitable Construction is
wide: It was given immediately to Servants, but it reaches their Masters: None
so low as to be beneath it; none so high as to be above it: The poorest Servant
in his humble Capacity, must demean himself with that Fidelity and Integrity,
that he may Adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel. The highest Prince in his exalted
Orb, must remember that he has a Lord and Master in Heaven. In a word, whatever
Figure any one makes, whatever Character he wears, in whatever Relation he
stands, whatever Place he fills, yet he comes within the compass of this
Command, to walk soberly, righteously, religiously, that he may Adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior in all things.

The Christian Religion is a Piece of exact Symmetry, a Face of excellent
Beauty, It Is all glorious within, and its clothing is of wrought Gold; Psalm.
xlv. 13. But we must take up a most bitter Lamentation over it; its Harmony has
been disordered, its Beauty blemished, much filth thrown in its Face, not only
by the Reproach of declared Enemies, but the unsuitable Conversations of those
that profess it, who value themselves highly upon it; who pretend to have an
Interest in it, and their highest hopes and expectations from it. In short, it
has been wounded in the house of its friends. Zac. xiii 6.

What Plato once said of Virtue, may be more justly affirmed of the Gospel, if
it could be seen in its native and genuine Beauty, Omnes in sui admirationem
abriperet; it would allure all Eyes, ravish all Hearts, draw all Men's
Affections, and raise it self a Throne in every Man's Conscience. But here we
must acknowledge with grief and shame, that either we have got such feeble
Conceptions of it in our own Souls, or so miserably misrepresented it to
others, that we have rendered it cheap and unlovely, and most wretchedly
scandalized it before the Sons of Men.

If therefore there be any who have already heard, or shall hereaster read,
this mean, but well-meaning Discourse, whose pious Souls are grieved that this
Holy Doctrine has been trampled in the mire by unhallowed Feet, or whose
Consciences have been touched, that they themselves have been the Cause of, or
given occasion to this Scandal, unto such is the word of this Exhortation sent.
That they would conscientiously endeavor to retrieve the Credit, to vindicate
the Honor, and in the Language of the Text, to adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior in all things. In which words you will easily observe Three Parts.

1. The Great End which God has propounded to us, and which we are to propound
to our selves; that in the whole Course of our Conversation, we adorn the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

2. The Extent of this Exhortation; In all things, (...), which may refer to
all the Parts of this holy Doctrine; to adorn it in all the Precepts, all the
Promises, all the holy Examples laid down therein; or else it may refer to all
the various Relations, wherein we stand, the various Conditions wherein the
Providence of God may cast us, that in all these we make it our Business to
adorn this Doctrine to beautify this blessed Gospel.

3. The Reason assigned to enforce this Exhortation; it is the Doctrine of God
our Savior, (...), of our Savior, who is God: It Is the Doctrine of our God
who has Authority over us; the Doctrine of our Savior, who should have the
great commanding Interest in us; and our greatest Concerns are wrapped up in it.
It Is the Doctrine of a Savior, and it is a saving Doctrine, and all the
Reproach thrown upon this Doctrine, falls upon Christ, what falls upon Christ
falls upon God; and whatever Reproach flies so high as God, will certainly fall
down again with an overwhelming Vengeance upon the Head of him that throws it.

There Is little that will need Explication, to clear our way to the Doctrine,
only two words may deserve some Consideration.

1. Doctrine, (...) I will not be so critical to distinguish it from (...),
seeing Suidas makes them Synonymous, (...) These two words then are of adequate
significations, and both of them denote, 1. Matter of Faith, what we are to
believe. Or, 2. Matter of Practice, wherein we are to obey. Thus where the
Apostle, Tit. 1. 9. amongst the other Characters of a Bishop, requires this;
That he be able by sound Doctrine to exhort. Occum^nius thus glosses it, (...)
that is says he, (...), sound Doctrine is that which teaches Orthodoxy, and a
regular Conversation. It Is that which makes a sound Head, in opposition to
Heresy; and a sound Heart in opposition to Hypocrisy, and both these will
produce a sound Conversation.

2. A second Word which I will touch upon, is (...), that they may Adorn. The
adorning commanded, is not by painting Religion, or adding any Artificial
Color to the Face of it; it is not by superinducing any varnish above its
natural Complexion; for Religion needs none of our over-officious Skill to
deck, and trim it up after the newest Mode, or to recommend it to the wanto^
Affections of Men with a meretricious d^s, for Gold needs no Gilding; but the
way of Adorning here enjoynd, is by rubbi^ (...) the Rust, wiping off the Dust,
washing o^ the Dirt, which by the injury of Time it has contracted, or by the
reproach of Enemies it has suffered; that we restore it to its primitive
Luster, its original Simplicity, by walking up to the Commands, answering the
Demands, living up to its Ends, and expressing the true Native, real Glory of
it, in a suitable Conversation.

From the words thus opened and cleared, I recommend to you this Doctrine. It
ought to be the conscientious Care of all that do profess the Gospel of Christ,
to adorn the Doctrine of that Gospel which they profess in all things.

The Apostle lays so great a Weight upon this Duty, as if it were the one
thing, the only thing n^cessary, Phil. i. 27. only let your Conversation be as
it becom^th the Gospel of Christ. And there are two subservient Duties, which
will much contribute to this great Design. 1. The former is Stability,
stedfastness in the Faith, that y^ stand fast in the Spirit. 2. The other a
Holy Zeal, that ye strive together for the Faith of the Gospel. Stand fast
without wavering, be zealous without cooling; and let your Interest and the
Name and Glory of your Redeemer, be much upon your Hearts in both these.

Whatever can be said upon this Subject, is compendiously summed up in that
other place of the same Apostle, which I will give you a brief Paraphrase upon,
and then proceed.

Phil. iv. 8, 9. Finally brethren, whatso^ver things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoev^r things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be
an^ virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things which
ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me: do, and the God
of peace shall be with you. This is the abstract of what I can speak, or you
hear upon this Subject: Think on these things and do them. Digest the matter
well in your Thoughts; concoct it thoroughly in your Hearts, and then reduce all
to Practice. It Is not Speculation but Action, that must recover the Repure of
Religion, and the particulars wherein you must be active and zealous are such
as these: 1. Whatsoever things are true, (...) Let the Power of Truth in the
Heart, evidence it self in the Life; and the Grace of God in the inward Parts,
shine through the Body in all suitable demeanor: It is Theodoret's Gloss upon 1 Timothy iii. 2. The Apostle (says he) would have a Bishop to be (...) That his
who^ carriage be such, so com^ly in his (...)* in his habit, in his looks and
gestur^s; that the Complexion of his Soul may shine through the Case of his
Body. 2. Whatsoever things are honest, (...). That we be grave yet not morose,
serious yet not austere, reserved without affectation; that as the End of our
Conversation is a matter of the greatest Importance, and the Rule of our Lives
of equal Concern, so the Mien and Air of our behavior may bear some good
Conformity to them both. 3. Whatsoever things are just, (...). As we must be
Holy toward God, so must we also be just toward all Men; for Righteousness is
Evangelium visibile: It Is the preaching of a Gospel which Men understand; our
Religion teaches us to give to God and Man what is their due; and all the World
will conclude that if we defraud them, we would if it were in our Power, cheat
our God too; nor can we ever confute those Suspicions which Men will easily
entertain of our Hypocrisy, but by an exact and punctual discharge of all those
Offices of Justice which we owe to them. 4. Whatsoever things are pure, (...).
Chaste, modest, pure, clean; that our Discourses savor not of Filthiness, our
Behavior do not smell rank of inward Turpitude, that we admit not the Flesh to
mingle it self with our Courses or Discourses, but that in all things our
Speech be seasoned with Salt; Administering grace unto the hearers. Ephesians. iv.
29. It Is a dirty World we walk in; he that will walk clean must pick and choose
his way with great Care and Conscience. 5. Whatsoever things are lovely, (...).
Let a Spirit of Candor and holy Ingenuity breath in all our Actions, that we
affright not Men from Religion by a sour disobliging way of Converse: There is
a mean, could we hit it, between a base, creeping, fawning prostitution of our
selves to the Lusts of Men, and a haughty, surly Arrogance which will not stoop
or bend to the benefit of Men; and this mean is that generosum honestum, that
greatness of humility which would persuade the prejudiced World to entertain
more tolerable Thoughts of God's holy Ways, and perhaps in time to try and
practice them. 6. Whatsoever things are of good report, (...). To decline those
Practices which carry an Appearance of evil with really good Men. Now (says the
Apostle) If there be any virtue. If ever your Religion had any commanding
Interest in you, or has had any sanctifying power upon you, And if there be any
praise. If you expect the acceptance and approbation of God, or the moderate
commendation of good Men; Then think upon, and do these things, and for your
encouragement, The God of Peace shall be with you.

In the managing of this Doctrine, I will propose this Method.

1. To show what the Adorning of the Doctrine of the Gospel does presuppose.

2. What it is to Adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel in all things.

3. What are the particulars of the Doctrine which we must Adorn, and how it
may be Adorned in each of these Particulars.

4. I will lay down the Arguments which ought to prevail with us herein.

5. And lastly, I will endeavor to improve the whole Discourse, and reduce it
to Practice.

. 1. Let us inquire what the Exhortation to Adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel
does presuppose.

There was something more than ordinary in the matter that the Apostle so
earnestly, and frequently presses this one Point. Some Injury had been offered
from which it needed to be vindicated; something amiss in their Conversation
that needed Reformation: and we have cause to fear that the Case is our own.
Some notable Affront has been put upon the Gospel, some indignity offered to
the Profession of Religion, which will render our present Discourse too
pertinent. That which is presupposed may be reduced to these Heads.

1. That the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ considered in it self, is a most
beauteous and lovely Doctrine.

2. That this Doctrine has been miserably blackened, and blemished, by those
that should have given it a better treatment.

3. That whoever professes this Doctrine, is obliged to wash off that dirt and
filth which has been cast upon it.

(1.) That we are so earnestly urged to Adorn the Doctrine of our God and
Savior, presupposes that as it came first out of the Hands of Christ, it was
altogether lovely; representing the sweetness, and expressing the holiness of
him that gave it forth: And

1. One eminent Beauty of the Doctrine is this: That those Truths which soar
the highest in Speculation, yet in their design and tendency, aim at a holy
practical Conversation: Those which in the Theory reach the highest Heavens,
yet in their Scope stoop down to the Earth. It was said of Socrates, Primus
Philosophiam e Nubibus in Terras deduxit: He was the first that brought down
Philosophy from the Clouds, and made it an useful thing to Humane Life. It was
greater which was said of our own Mr. Perkins, Primus Theologiam e coelis in
Terras deduxit. He was the first, who amongst us, reduced Doctrine to
Application, Speculation to Practice. However that be; most certain it is, that
every Truth, Doctrine, Proposition in the Gospel, aims at the subduing of Sin
in the Heart, and of the Heart to God; to make us better rather than wiser. The
design of the Scripture is not to Amuse and Puzzle us, but to Reform and
Sanctify us: not to Confound our Heads, but to Conform our Hearts, and Reform
our Lives to the holiness of its Principles: not to make us lose our Wits, but
to save our Souls. But the truth of this will most clearly appear in some few
instances.

1. The Doctrine of God's Electing some out of the Mass of mankind, from all
eternity, unto eternal Life, is a Doctrine which swallows up our Reasons, and
we are lost in the depth of it: here indeed Faith will swim, but naked Reason,
unassisted by Revelation, will certainly sink and drown in that vast Abyss: for
who is he that standing upon the Shore of that unfathomable Gulf, will not cry
out with Apostle, Romans xi. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out! And yet when this sublime Doctrine shall produce its effects in the
calling home of Souls to God, it comes clothed with visible Grace, and
approves it self to our experience, and terminates in practical godliness: Ephesians.
i. 4. According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the World;
that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. As the Sun whose
glory we cannot safely behold, nor gaze upon, in his meridian Luster without
endangering our Eyes, yet we can comfortably view by Reflection: So that
Doctrine which would strike us blind, in its direct and immediate Prospect,
Administers a sweet and sensible Consolation, when it comes to take hold upon
the Heart in effectual Calling.

Those curious Speculations which Men have spun out of their own Brains, and
woven into subtle Webs, as the Spider her Nets out of her own Bowels, are but
Elaborate Nothings; refined triffles, we may know them, and be never the
better; be ignorant of them, and never the worse. Only Gospel-Doctrines have
this singular excellency, that they bear hard upon the Corruption of the Heart
to Mortify it, upon Pride to abase it, and press vigorously upon the
Conscience to purify, and pacify it. They are therefore styled in 1 Timothy vi.
3. Wholesome words; even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
which is according to godliness: (...). Wholesome in themselves, and healing to
the Soul; such as being taken down into the Heart, purge out the Corruption of
depraved Nature, and in a word, it is a Doctrine whose every line is drawn by
the straight Rule of Holiness; and centers in that one point of Godliness.

2. The Doctrine of Redemption is another great instance of this Truth: what
more amazing than that God should send and give his Son, and that the Son
should give, and offer up himself to Redeem lost, self-lost Sinners; to Redeem
them by Price paid to God out of the hand of Justice; to Redeem them by Power
out of the hand of the Devil. This would lead us back to the Covenant of
Redemption, between the eternal Father, and the eternal Son, when the Counsel
of Peace was between them both, Zech. vi. 13. But here we may lose our selves,
and perhaps not find out God, till we relieve our selves by such Scriptures as
that, Tit. ii. 14. He gave himself for us to Redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. Not only
Redeeming us from Hell, but Sin: nor only to purchase, but to purify us to
himself: nor only to deliver us from the future, but from this present evil
World: Gal. i. 4. Not only to rescue us out of the Devils power, but out of our
own, and thus this Doctrine terminates in Godliness, in Good Works, for so the
Apostle concludes his Discourse, that he might purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.

II. Another Peculiar Glory of the Doctrine of the Gospel is, that it never
more directly designs the advancement of a Sinner, than when it abases him
most, and lays him lowest: it suits indeed the Sinners Misery, but always
crosses his Lust: Empties the Creature when it designs to fill it, and humbles
the proud Worm that it may exalt it: the Gospel breaks first, and then binds
up; Wounds that it may Heal, and Condemns that it may Justify: It will make
the Sinner plead Guilty before he be absolved. It strips him Naked before it
clothes him; and makes him know and see, and feel himself the most beggarly
Wretch in the World, before it discovers the unsearchable riches of Christ. In
a word, it will convince us all that we are the most miserable, undone, lost
things, 'ere it Saves us.

And in this Point the Apostle has fully satisfied us, 1 Cor. i. 29. 31. That
the Method of the infinitely wise God is^ues in this: That no flesh might glory
in his presence, but he that glories let him glory in the Lord.

In Election, God had no respect to Faith, Works or the right use of Free Will
foreseen, -- that no flesh might glory in his presence: the same Method he
takes in justifying a Sinner, -- That no flesh might glory in his presence: so
Romans iii. 27. Where is boasting then? It is excluded! By what Law? Of Works?
Nay but by the law of Faith.

There are two things upon which the haughty Creature would value it self, Its
own Righteousness, its own Strength, and we may add a third, its own Wisdom:
upon these especially the proud Worm lifts up its Crest on high; the gracious
God has provided all these in his Covenant; that the Sinner shall have
Righteousness, shall have Strength, shall have Wisdom, but none of his own but
Gods.

First, For Righteousness, This is one of the strong Holds wherein the proud
Flesh fortifies it self, and goes about to establish his own righteousness,
Romans x. 3. And this strong Hold God will dismantle, and level it with the
ground, before he builds the House upon the impregnable Rock of his own
righteousness, i. e. that of Christ. Conviction of Sin, and comparing our
selves with the Holy Perfect Law of God will thoroughly effect this, and then
the Sinner stands upon other terms with God, and his own Conscience: you shall
hear this stately proud Creature speaking in another Language, when he comes to
be distressed about his sin, Mich. vi. 6. Where-withal shall I come before the
Lord, and bow my self before the most high God? What perplexity is here between
the necessity of coming, and the hazard of coming? I must come before the Lord
either to be justified, or judged: I must come before him, both at the
Footstool, and at the Throne: but wherewithal to come, or what to bring that I
may be accepted in his sight I find not: my own unrighteousness I see now to be
abominable, and my own righteousness I am convlnced is not justifiable;
wherewithal then shall I come? In this distress, the Gospel discovers Christ
and his righteousness, and when the Sinner accepts, receives, lays hold and
rests upon it; It has encouragement to say, Isa. xlv. 22. In the Lord have I
righteousness: In the Lord shall all the seed of Jacob be justified, and shall
glory. Here then shines out the glory of the Gospel-Doctrine: it never designs
a more perfect Cure than when it makes the Sinner sick at Heart: Thus the
Spirits Method is, first to convince of Sin, and then of Righteousness, Joh.
xvi. 8. Of sin that the Sinner may be abased, and made willing to accept a
Pardon upon Christ's Terms; and of righteousness, that the wounded Soul may not
die of its Wounds: for thus was the brazen Serpent lifted up, that they who
were mortally stung by the fiery ones, might look, and live, John iii. 14, 15.

Secondly, Another Strong Hold which Man would build up, and God will demolish,
is Man's own strength. It Is unaccountable that Man should thus Idolize his own
often baffled, often foiled strength, which was never yet able to make him
stand against his own Corruptions, the Worlds Allurements, or the Assaults, and
Wiles of the Tempter: It is the Grace of God alone that must take us off our
own, and place us upon a stronger bottom; and teach us how to be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. Ephesians. vi. 10. And now whereas the late
difficulty was, Wherewithal shall I appear before the Lord? Another difficulty
appears; And I find that I can no more appear against the Devil in my own
Strength, than I could appear before the Lord in my own Righteousness: he is
subtle and strong; I am foolish and weak, yet the Gospel has relieved me: Isa.
xlv. 24. Surely shall one say in the Lord, have I strength.

3. A third Peculiar Glory of the Doctrine of the Gospel is, that as it lays
the Creature low, it exalts and lifts up God on high. When the Sinner lies
prostrate at Gods Foot, it sees the Lord most gloriously exalted upon his
Throne, Isa. vi. 1.

There Is no Doctrine that so vilifies Man, none that so much glorifies God: in
all other Systemes which Philosophers had framed to themselves, they provided
well to advance the Creature, they furnished him out with his (...), with a
Free Will, and put him into the hand of his own wisdom to carve himself out a
happiness: they made a God of their own Moral Virtues, and those Virtues were
at their own disposal, so that upon the matter they were Creators of their
Gods: Nullum Numen abest si sit prudentia: That thou art happy owe to thy self,
was one of their highly celebrated Maxims. But the Doctrine of the Gospel gives
a clear other Scheme of things: that Man is nothing, knows nothing, can do
nothing, cannot think a good thought, nor pursue it to any goo^ Resolution, nor
manage the good, nor bear the evil by his own Wisdom or Strength. This Doctrine
teaches us to think meanly of our selves, highly of God: to look upon our
selves as Worms, as Moths, as nothing, and less than nothing, and worse than
nothing: but how honorably does it teach us to think, to speak of God; how
reverently to Worship him, how holily to walk before him; with what confidence
to trust him, with what fervor of Soul to love him, and in short to make him
the first and last of all.

4. The fourth and last Peculiar Glory of the Doctrine of the Gospel which I
shall name at present is, that it never exalts one of the Divine Attributes to
the derogation of another.

Here is Mercy exalted, but withal Justice satisfied, and while the Free Grace
of God is upon the Throne, Holiness is enthroned with it: God can no more
Pardon without security to his Justice, than he can punish with inconsistency
to his Mercy.

The minds of Men are strangely deluded in this matter, for looking only upon
Mercy, they forget the severity of his Justice; and if an imaginary Mercy would
but answer the ends of their Presumptions, they take no further thought what
becomes of the essential Holiness of God: But infinite Wisdom has secured, and
sweetly adjust^d the Interests of these two great Attributes, Romans iii. 2^.
That h^ m^ be just, and the ju^r of (...), that believes in Jesus: God will
justify, there is Mercy, but he will be just in justifying, there is provision
made for his Justic^. The Justice of God satisfied on Christ. The Mercy of God
magnified on the believing Sinner. Thus God will not lose his Glory, and the
believing ^inner shall not lose his Soul.

There seems to be a difficulty in Exodus xxxiv. 6, 7. A God pardoning iniquity,
transgression and sin, and not a God that will by no means clear the guilty. A
perplexing Riddle, If God will by no means clear the Guilty; how does he pardon
transgression? But his Justice is as peremptory as his Mercy is free: he will
no more pardon Transgression without due compensation to his Justice, than he
will condemn the Sinner that by Faith lays hold on that Compensation, which his
Wisdom has provided, and his Grace offered in the Gospel: Here then. Mercy and
Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. And all
the Attributes of God do sweetly embrace, and harmoniously agree when the
Satisfaction of one makes way for the exerting, and exercising of the other.
Psalm. lxxxv. 10.

(2.) That we are so earnestly pressed to Adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior, presupposes, that however beautiful this Doctrine is in it self, it
has been miserably blackened, defaced, defiled, and much dirt thrown in the
Face of it: which is done various ways.

1. First when from the Doctrine of Divine Grace, Mercy, Forbearance and
Forgiveness, Corrupt Heads and Rotten Hearts draw Conclusions of
Licentiousness; that is, when they interpret Grace into Presumption, which is
evidently to subvert the End, and Design, to invert the Order and whole Method
of the Gospel Doctrine: for though the Gospel proclaims Pardon of all Sin to
the Repenting, it Indulges none to the impenitent Sinner. He that by sinning
presumes to find Work for Mercy, shall find to his cost that he was making Work
for Vengeance. The Corruption of depraved Nature has discovered it self in many
instances; these especially evidence its malignity.

1. When Men will be evil because God has been good: The design of his
goodness, patience, and long-suffering, is to lead them to repentance. Romans ii.
4. But if this goodness be despised; and because God is long-suffering, they
will be the longer in sinning; and because Mercy is still striving with them,
they will out-strive that Mercy: they will be convinced, that they are
treasuring up to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation
of the righteous judgment of God.

2. When Man will be, and do evil, that God may be good in pardoning; such
there are who say, Romans iii. 8. Let us do evil that good may come: Let us Sin
that Grace may abound! Against this presumption the Apostle thunders out a just
Damnation: and because that they might pretend that this was only the
Consequence of that Doctrine of Free Grace which he Preached; he abhors it as a
scandalous report, and that his Doctrine abetted no such abominable Inferences:
he owns indeed, Romans v. 20. That where sin abound^d, grace did much more
abound, but he denies the Consequence, chap. vi. 1. That therefore any should
continue in sin that grace might abound.

The Apostle Jude ver. 4. notes those ungodly ones, who turned the grace of God
into lasciviousness. (...) where it will deserve observation. 1. What it was
they thus wretchedly abused: It was the grace of God: not the work of Grace
upon their Hearts, for that they were Strangers to; they were (...) such as had
thrown off all worship of God; but it was the Doctrine of Grace, which is
indeed sometime called Grace, because it is a revelation of free rich Grace
offered to the Sons of Men. 2. Into what did they turn this Grace? into
Lasciviousness, or an unbridled License to commit all manner of iniquity with
greediness. 3. But how could they do this Abominable thing! They did it by a
Metathesis: most wickedly transposing, inverting, and perverting the Order,
Method, and design of God and his Gospel in every thing; and what should have
been the strongest Argument to withdraw them from sin, they made their great
encouragement to sin; and thus they turned the point of God's argument upon
himself.

2. Secondly, When Men take up a Profession and form of Religion, but deny the
power of it upon their Hearts, and in their Lives: this is one of the
Characters of those perilous, those last, and worst of days. (...) Tim. iii.
5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: for the great end
of the Gospel is to Convert Sinners unto God, to subdue them to the Authority
of Christ; but these Wretches represent it as a weak and inefficacious Doctrine
that has no power nor prevalency upon their Souls, they deny the power of it.
There Is nothing more certain; than that if Men's Religion does not drive out
their Lusts, their Lusts will drive away their Religion: and yet these will be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient
to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers,
false accusers, incontinent, fierce, and despisers of them that are good, and
yet which is wonderful, they will maintain a form of godliness.

If you ask them, Do you believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven
and Earth? They will tell you they firmly believe it: Ask them again; Do you
believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord: that he was conceived by the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
Crucified, dead and buried, that he descended into Hell? And all the other
Articles of the Creed; All these they steadfastly believe! But when this
Doctrine commands subjection of Soul to all these Truths; That we should live
to him that died for us, and rose again. 2 Cor. v. 15. In this point they
desire to be excused; which is an evident affront to the Gospel; whose design
is to turn them to God from Idols, to serve the living and true God, 1 Thessalonians.
i. 9. This is it, which evidences that the Gospel comes not in word only, but
in power, and in the holy ghost, ver. 5. And so the same Apostle, Romans vi. 17.
gives thanks to God, that they who had once been the servants of sin, had
obeyed from their heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered unto them: or
rather, that unto which they had been delivered. (...).

Men may be sound, and Orthodox in their Heads, and yet Heterodox, and rotten
in their Hearts: They can afford to lend Christ an Ear, and give him a civil
hearing, still reserving their Lusts to themselves, and their Hearts for the
World; and when the Word demands entrance into, and to have a Throne in their
Hearts, they deny it the commanding power, and bid it sit below at the
Footstool, sending away the blessed Gospel disappointed, and ashamed.

3. Thirdly, The Gospel has been exceedingly stained, when it is entertained for
no other end than to subserve some base low design of the Flesh, and made a
slave to some worldly interest. This Reproach the Pharisees cast upon their own
Religion. Mat. xxiii. 14. who under the Covert, and Color, of long Prayers,
devoured widows houses (...) A pretense indeed they had, but it was so thin and
transparent, that an ordinary Eye might see through it, and discover the wicked
Design at the bottom. Such were they, 1 Timothy vi. 5. who supposed Gain to be
Godliness. But most notable was the Instance of Simon the Sorcerer, Act. viii.
13. This famous Hypocrite was baptized, nay, believed and adbered to Philip,
and was free of his Money too; but all was that he might make his Markets of
Religion, that he might purchase the Gift of Miracles for himself and his
Disciples, and so maintain his former Repute that he was some Great Thing, the
very Power of God amongst the deluded People. But all this Project was defeated
and blown away with one breath of St. Peter's Mouth, thy Money perish with thee.

We have a Generation of Men in our Age, denominated from this Simon, who have
driven a mighty gainful Trade by the Gospel; who buy or sell the
Superintendency of Souls; whose Money, and we may justly fear, their Souls too,
and those of their Flocks perish together. These are a horrid Scandal to
Religion, not seeking Christ, but themselves; not feeding the Flock, but their
own Pride and Ambition; who when the Great Shepherd shall appear, must be
compelled to stand before his presence, but will not dare to lift up their
Faces with a holy and humble Confidence, and shall receive a just Recompense of
Reward.

4. A fourth thing that has blemished the Doctrine of the Gospel, is those
swarms of damnable Doctrines which have been poured out upon the World; of
these the Apostle, 2 Pet. ii. 1, 2. has prophesied. That there shall be false
teachers who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them; and bring upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall
follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil
spoken of. That they shall bring upon themselves swift destruction, is very
sad, but the least part of the evil, they have justly deserved it; but that the
way of Truth should be evil spoken of, which has not deserved it, is most
deplorable.

(3.) The Third and Last thing supposed in the Apostles exhortation is, that
every one of us in our respective places and stations, do engage as far as in
us lies, to restore Religion to its Primitive Luster and Splendour, and so to
retrieve the Reputation of it; to adorn it in all things. In order to which
blessed End, I will only at present offer a few things:

1. Would we recover the original Beauty of the Doctrine of the Gospel; we must
so walk, so act, live as those that believe Invisible things to be the greatest
Realities.

Without breach of that Charity which we owe to all Men, or pretending to
search the heart; we do see, and may say, that many walk, as if all their hopes
were terminated by their Eyes, and that they believe no other World, no other
Reward, than what is within the reach of Sense.

But this was the Glory of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. iv. 18. that he looked not
at the things that were seen, but at the things not seen. His main scope and
hope was in invisibles; an invisible God, an invisible World had that influence
upon his Soul, that he was born up under all present pressures; could glory in
all his present tribulations, upon the hope of a future Recompense. This was it
which made Moses endure, as seeing him that was invisible. Heb. xi. 27. And if
we search into the Reason of this otherwise unaccountable resolution, we have
it, v. 1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. If Faith can render the future World present: if it can represent the
unseen World to the Eye; if it can bring down Heaven and lay it with all its
Glory before us, it will teach us to live at another rate, than we can possibly
do upon the proposal of all things to our Sense. This will teach us to wait,
and to possess our Souls in patience whilst we wait so. For those things which
Christ has promised to them that love, and from love obey him. Romans viii. 25.
If we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it. This was
it which taught the Primitive Christians to rejoice, 1 Pet. i. 8. Whom having
not seen, ye love; in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

2. Convince the World that you can trust your God upon his naked word; who
will believe your Religion, has any thing solid and substantial in it, if you
cannot depend on the promise of him whom you say you have chosen, and taken for
your God. We see it evidently, they that have chosen the World for their
Portion, can trust its Promises and take its Word for good Payment; what a
reproach then will it be to those who have a better God, but a worse Faith than
they that have a worse God?

Let all Men therefore see that you dare follow your God on the Credit of his
Truth; that you can trust him, for the Re-imbursement of whatever you shall lay
out for his Name, or lose for his sake. Compel Men to acknowledge that you dare
avow your Consciences against all the Damage you can possibly sustain for it,
or from it; convince an unbelieving Generation that there are those who know
their God so well, that they can trust him, and though you apprehend you may
probably lose something for him, yet you shall lose nothing by him, you have it
under his Hand, he will Repay it.

Glorious was the Faith of Abraham, Heb. ii. 9. Who sojourned in the land of
Promise, as in a strange Country, because he could confidently and comfortably
look for a City that had foundations, whose builder and maker was God. v. 10.
Such was the Faith of Moses. v. 25. Who chose rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had
respect unto the recompense of reward. In which Heroical Actings of Faith, we
cannot but observe; First, The Value, the different Value that he put upon
things. Secondly, The Choice he made in pursuance of that Valuation. First, Let
us consider his estimate of things; he esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater
Treasures than the Riches of Egypt; where the two things put into the opposite
Scales, are the Reproach of Christ in the one, and the Treasures of Egypt in
the other. And what Man looking on these with an Eye of Sense, would not esteem
the Treasures of Egypt preferable to Reproach and Scorn? But there was
something that turned the Scale in his Judgment, something that gave him a Holy
Bias, that he judges the worst thing in Religion, better than the best in
Egypt. The best thing that Egypt could boast of, or court him with, was its
Treasures: the worst thing Religion could affright him with, was Reproach,
especially if it goes so high as an ignominious Death: And yet he esteems the
repr^ach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; because he kept
his Eye fast fixed upon the Recompense of Reward. Secondly, Let us not wonder
if this was the value and estimate he made of things, that his Choice was
proportionable; he chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Two things are set before him,
and upon his good or evil Choice depended Life or Death, Affliction and
Pleasure. And is this a Measuring Cast? Or can any one be long in suspense
which to choose? Affliction is evil, Pleasure is good: True, but those
Afflictions were to be born with the Church of God, in which he might be
assured of God's gracious Presence, his powerful Protection, his seasonable
Grace to help in time of need. And for the Pleasures, they were polluting and
perishing Pleasures, which would leave a sting in the Conscience, to imbitter
the remembrance of them, and therefore his Judgment swayed and determined his
Choice that way.

This, and nothing without this will convinee Men that you take the Promises
for True, that these shall be responsible to your Faith; that God shall be
responsible for his Promises, and that his Truth, his Faithfulness and
Omnipotency shall be responsible for God.

3. Thirdly, Let this one thing more be made appear, that you are under a Law
to God. That the preceptive part of the Word has taken as strong hold upon your
Hearts, as your Faith has taken on the promissory Part. This will satisfy all
the World, that you are in good earnest with Religion, when you live in the
practice of the most Flesh-displeasing Duties; that you can deny the most
profitable temptation to sin, and that you walk as those that firmly believe
your Religion will bear its own Charges. The power of the Word restraining us
from the most gainful sin, and constraining us to the most chargeable Duty,
will be a most pregnant Proof, that God is with us, and Religion in us of a
Truth.

But let thus much susfice to the first general Inquiry, viz. what this
Exhortation to adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior does presuppose.

. 2. Proceed we now to the second general Inquiry: What does it imply to adorn
the Doctrine of the Gospel in All things? To this the answer must be returned
in many Particulars.

(1.) That the Doctrine of the Gospel must be Adorned in Civil as well as
Sacred Affairs. It Is not enough that we demean our selves decently and
reverently in Acts of immediate Worship, we must walk in the same fear of God,
under the same holy awe, in our secular Businesses: Religion must command even
our Recreations, our Diversions, our Converses, our particular Callings As
carnal earthly Hearts will carnalize their Religious Performances, so will
spiritual Minds spiritualize their common Employments. It Is far short of the
Whole Du^y of Man. That we Sanctify the Lord's Day, we must Sanctify our own.
God has indeed graciously indulged us six Days in the Week to labor in, but
not one of those Days, nor one moment in any of those hours, wherein we may do
the Work of the Devil and the Flesh.

If ever we will pretend to Credit our Religion, we must evidence Holiness in
the Shop, as well as in the Church; in our own Houses, as well as the Lord's;
we must be Holy in Trading, as well as Praying; we must Sanctify the Name of
God at our own Tables. as well as the Lord's Table. 1 Cor. x. 31. Whether
therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And
again, 1 Pet. i. 15. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation. 'Ev (...). In all the windings and turnings of your
liv^s. There Is nothing lawful, though never so remote from Heaven, but may be
laid in a right line and due subor^ination to it; and when we cannot actually
intend our ultimare end, yet must we virtually refer all unto it; this is that
which has reproached Religion. that what warmth we get in the Worship of God,
we presently lose it, and grow lukewarm, perhaps stone-cold when we depart
from it: And thus whatever we build up at the Church in one day, we are
plucking down all the week after.

(2.) We must adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. In second
Ta^ Duties as well as those of the first: The same God who sees and observes
the temper of our Hearts in Dealing with himself, observes it also in our
Treatings and Dealings with Men; would we approve our sincerity before an
all-seeing God, approve it also in our Treatings, Conversings and Transactings
with Men.

There are some excellent first Table Christians, who will not swear lightly;
not take God's Holy Name into their Mouths profanely; that seem to make a
Conscience of the Lord's Day; that are severe in regulating the Worship of God
by his Word: And yet if common Fame may be credited, are under no such severe
Bonds of Conscience in their Covenants, Contracts and Engagements with their
Brethren; but the Doctrine of the Gospel would have taught them another Lesson,
Tit. ii. 12. which teaches us to carry it Righteously toward our Neighbor,
Soberly toward our selves, and Godly toward our God. What a rare Pattern was
David, Psalm. ci. 2. I will behave my self wis^ly in a perfect way; I will walk
in the midst of my house with a perfect heart. He will be a Holy King upon the
Throne, a Holy Judge upon the Bench, a Holy General in the Field, Holy in the
City, and Holy in the Country; for a perfect Heart had taught him to walk
wisely in a perfect way.

If therefore we design to vindicate the Glory of Religion, none must go
beyond, overreach, or defraud his brother; 1 Thessalonians. iv. 6. our Covenants must
be kept, though we suffer by it, Psalm. xv. 4. Truth must be spoken to, and kept
with our Neighbor, and that Neighbor must be every one that partakes with us
of Humane Nature.

(3.) In all things. In holy Works as well as holy Words: It Is not well-saying,
but welldoing, that must wipe off the Reproach that has been thrown upon our
holy Profession, 1 Pet. ii. 15. So is the will of God that by welldoing, ye put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Foolish Men will be lavish of their
Tongues, they will be reproaching Religion, and the Religious; this
evil-speaking is the effect of their ignorance; but the question is, how shall
we silence them, and stop their Mouths for the future? This he resolves, as the
Direction of God himself. It Is by well doing: Words are cheap, Works are
chargeable, and will cost us more to perform them.

It Is a mortal stab that is given to Religion, when the Professors of it, talk
as high as Heaven, and yet walk as low as this dirty Earth. When our Ntions and
Professions seem too high for this World, and yet too low for the next. Words
without Works, are a Language which Men do not understand; we speak to them in
an unknown Tongue: but to be Beneficent, Charitable, to do them good; to
relieve the Distressed, to deliver the Oppressed, to make peace among
Contending Neighbors. This is a Dialect which is Vernacular to all the World.

Had we judged of a Pharisee by the Ear, and not by the Eye, he had been the
most excellent Saint on Earth; but our Savior notes them for this: Matthew.
xxiii. 3. They say, and do not: Nay our blessed Savior rebukes his own
Disciples upon this Account. Luke vi. 46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not
the things that I say?

Let that therefore be ours, which was the Motto of a great Man in his time,
Non magna loquimur sed vivimus. Let Men see, as well as hear us, that our light
may so shine ^fore m^n, that they seeing our good works may glorify our father
which is in heaven. Matthew. v. 16.

(4.) In all things. In Passive as well as Active Ob^dience. In suffering
according to the will of God, as well as acting in obedience to it: It Is a very
poor Religion that is not worth suffering for. We must expect otherwise no
better Language than this; surely if these Professors did really believe their
God to be Faithful and True, they would trust him. Did they believe the
R^compence of R^ard, they would venture their All upon it. Did they believe
their God able to repay them, to reimburse them, in what they should lay out,
and lose for his sake, they would generously forsake all at the Call, and for
the Cause of their God.

Sufferings have ever been the Test, the Ordeal by which Christ has Proved his
Disciples: Mark x. 17, 18. A young man comes running to Christ, as if in great
haste for Heaven: and that he might justify his Obedience, which he hoped
would justify him; he avouches it to Christ, that he had kept all the
commandm^nts from his youth, he began early, continued long, promised to
persevere to the and: I confess I suspect he either lied against his
Conscience, or else had a very bad one; and he had been more hopeful, if from a
sound Conviction he had bitterly cried out, All these commandments I have
broken from my youth: But be it so; Christ willing to try the truth of his
Active by his Passive Ob^dience, put him upon this Trial: Go, and sell all that
thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: This
was a pinching Word indeed! The Neck-Verse for a Hypocrite! Methinks I see his
Courage cool, his Countenance change, and grow pale; Amazement and Confusion in
his Looks; he turns about, and goes away sorrowful, sar he had great
possessions.

Upon no lower Terms than these must w^ hope to Recover the Glory departed from
our Profession: Then when we can cast all at Christ's Feet, resign all into his
Hands, and whether he gives or takes, say with holy Job. Job 1. 21. The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Let us therefore set before our Faith, and imitate the Father of the faithful:
Genesis xxii. who when called of God to offer up his Son, his only Son, his
well-beloved Son, the Son of the Promise; and that in a way, which seemed to
Contravene the Law of Nature, the positive Law of God, yet disputed not,
delayed not, but gave this clear Demonstration that he had nothing too Dear for
his God.

(5.) In all things. Whether in a more narrow and private; or in a more
enlarged, and public capacity. The Heavenly Orbs are of different Diameters;
yet they move regularly according to the Laws imposed upon them by their
Creator. The Stars are of differing Luster and Glory: and yet they shine, and
grudge not their influences to this lower ungrateful World, which returns them
nothing but Fogs and Mists to obscure their Light and Beauty. God has placed us
All in Spheres of different Circumferences: how small soever they be, let our
Motion be Regular and Orderly: he has filled us with various degrees Grace and
Gifts; let us lay out all faithfully. There are various Talents with which our
Sovereign Lord has entrusted us; for kind, for number, 1 Cor. xii. 11. Wrought
by that one, and the same spirit, dividing to every one severally as he will.

If then our Talents be few, let us be faithful in the using, diligent in the
improving them: the unprofitable servant, Matthew. xxv was not condemned because
he had but one Talent, but because he hid it in a Napkin. He that has but a
little spot of Ground, may Cultivate it, and show that diligence in improving
it, that it may reward his Labor with a blessing.

Since I considered that passage in the History of Absalom, 2 Samuel xv. 4. O
that I were made judge in the Land, that every one that has any suit or cause
might come unto me, and I would do him justice. It has taught me never to be
ambitious of great things, without more Grace to manage them: but we are frank
and liberal in our Promises to God, to Men, and to our selves. The poor Man
says, O had I Riches, how rich would I be in good Works? The Illiterate says, O
that I were Learned, what service would I do. But let us Pray that we may have
Grace to be useful, and serviceable with what we have: that whether in a
narrow, or more dilated Capacity, we may Adorn the doctrine of our God and
Savior in all things.

(6) In all things, In affirmative as well as negative Duties. It Is not enough
that we Curse not God, we must Bless him. The Pharisee, Luke xviii. 11. had a
Religion made up most of Negatives, with a small sprinkling of lesser Duties,
and not without a mixture of Superstition. God, I thank thee, I am not as other
men are; extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican.

When the final Sentence shall pass upon every wicked Man, it will proceed
thus, Matthew. xxv. 42. I was hungry and ye gave me no meat: I was naked and ye
clothed me not: I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. The
Indictment will not be laid that they plucked the Bread out of the Disciples
Mouths; but that they did not feed them: Nor did the Charge run, that they
stripped the Clothes off the Saints Backs; but that they did not Cloth them.
They are not Accused that they Cast them into Prison; but that they relieved
them not, visited them not, when there: we have all cause to Pray with the holy
Person, Lord pardon my sins of Omission. Negatives will never entitle us to
that blessing of living many days, and seeing much good. We must join the
Affirmative with them, Psalm. xxxiv. 14. Depart from evil, and do good.

((...).) In all things: In all Companies whether holy or unholy. The Apostle
discharges the Corinthians, 1 Cor. v. 9, 10. from the Company of Fornicators:
And yet he seems to correct, or limit the Prohibition, yet not altogether with
the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, or extortioners, or with
Idolaters; for in that Latitude the Command would not be practicable: for then,
says he, ye must needs go out of the world. Either a Christian must retire
wholly from all Business in the World, or must quite remove his Station into
the other World. A godly Man then, may possibly be cast amongst them, though a
prudent Man will not of Choice frequent them: The holy Art, and Skill, is how
he may Adorn the Gospel when he is inevitably thrown amongst them. And it is a
good Rule; that if we cannot make wicked Men ashamed of their wickedness, yet
should we neither be ashamed of, nor a shame to Holiness: if they will not go
to Heaven with us, let us not in complaisance go to Hell with them. Though
Prudence will advise us to be wise as serpents: a good Conscience will oblige
us to keep our selves innocent as Doves: That our unseasonable Rashness may not
expose us to the fury of Men; nor our temporizing Compliance, to the wrath of
God. David had studied this Case with great accuracy. Psalm. xxxix. 1, 2, 3. I
will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked is before me. I was dumb with
silence; I held my peace, even from good: and my sorrow was stirred: My heart
waxed hot within me; while I was musing the fire kindled, then spoke I with my
tongue.

Here was a notable conflict in David's soul; betwixt his Prudence and his
Zeal, while the wicked were before him. Prudence advised Silence; Zeal
counseled Speech: while the Case was desperate, and no hope of doing good
appeared, Prudence prevailed, he was silent: but as soon as there appeared fair
probability of doing more good than harm; or rather some good, and no harm;
then Zeal unlocked his Lips, and he spoke with his tongue. A modest word in
season, even amongst the Profane, has proved a seed of God lodged in the mind,
which Divine Grace in due time has awakend to Conversion.

Let us therefore earnestly beg of God this mixture of holy Zeal, and holy
Prudence: That when Providence shall cast our Lot into evil Company, though we
must have some Commerce with wicked Men's Persons, we may have no Communion with
them in their wickedness. I conclude this Head with that blessed Advice of 1
Pet. ii. 12. Having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas
they speak against you, as evil doers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorisie God in the day of visitation. 1 Pet. iii. 13. Having a
good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as evil doers, they may
be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.

(8.) In all things. In all those Relations wherein the goodness and wisdom of
God has placed us. It has pleased the Sovereign disposer of all things, in his
own World, which he powerfully made, and wisely Administers, to set his
Rational Creatures in several Relations, some he has appointed to govern,
others to obey; but whatever Post the Divine Pleasure has allotted us to keep,
our business must be to Adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior in All
things. Romans xii. 6, 7, 8. Having therefore gifts differing according to the
grace that is given us. -- whether ministry, let us wait on our one ministering;
or he that teaches on teaching; or he that exhorts on exhortation; or he
that rules with diligence; that so we may fill up that Relation with a holy
Zeal to glorify our God and Savior.

1. There is the Master, and his Servant: the Master perhaps may think he is
above the Control of his poor Servant: but he must know that he has also a
master in heaven, Col. iv. 1. Let him then remember that with this God there is
no respect of persons. Let them make a Conscience to give unto their servants
that which is just and equal; (...). It Is just, that they receive the Reward of
their Labor, which by Compact or Desert they may claim. It Is Equal, that as
Masters exact of their Servants time for their Service, that they allow them
competent time for the service of God: nor let Servants think that their
Relation to God, does exempt them from Fidelity to their Masters on Earth. 1 Timothy vi. 1. Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their own masters
worthy of all honor, that the name of God, and his doctrine be not blasphemed.
To plead, or pretend Christian Liberty as a Manumission from Christian
Subjection and Duty, is an open blaspheming of the Doctrine of God. But because
the Case of Servants seems hard, the Divine Goodness has made the Promise
adequate to the Precept. Col. iii. 23, 24. Whatever ye do, do it heartily as to
the Lord: knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the
inheritance. This Exhortation is inculcated in our Text and Context. Ver. 9.
Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well
in all things: not purloining, but showing all good fidelity: and all upon this
great Consideration, which has its influence upon all other Relations, and
their respective Duties, that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in
all things.

2. Upon the same Reason, and account, it is that Wives are strictly commanded,
2 Tit. iv. 5. To be sober, to love their husbands, to love their children, to
be discreet, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own husbands; and all
this enforced with the same great Motive, That the word of God be not
blasphemed. All inferior Relations carry some inconveniences with them: they
have the laboring Oar; which renders their Case somewhat difficult, and
furnishes corrupt Hearts with matter of discontent; but still this one thing
may abundantly satisfy them, that in whatsoever Station the wise God has fixed
them, they are yet capable of adorning the doctrine of our God and Savior.

3. This consideration is also pressed upon the Consciences of Subjects, 1 Pet.
ii. 13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake;
whether it be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are
sent by him: for so is the will of God, that by well doing ye put to silence
the ignorance of foolish men. Abundance of reproach has been thrown in the Face
of Religion on this score, which we can never wash off without Tears; it is well
it was not washed off with our Blood, nor shall we be able to do it, till
Obedience for Conscience sake shall convince the World, that though the
Ordinance be of Man; yet the Authority is of God, by which they Reign, and for
which we obey, Ver. 10. As free, and yet not using our liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness; but as the servants of God.

(9.) Lastly, In all things; In all those various Conditions to which we are
obnoxious in this Life: Plenty or Want. Sickness, Health; good or evil Report,
Liberty, Restraint; in all these, or whatever other diversities of Providence
the wise God shall. try and exercise us with, the Gospel of Christ must be
Regarded and Advanced.

As Poverty gives no dispensation to Murmur, Repine, or Steal: so Riches gives
no indulgence to Oppression, Luxury, or Riot. The Doctrine of the Gospel
reaches the highest, binds the lowest* Has God favored thee with
Prosperity? Bless his Name, but humor not thy self in Vanity. Has God humbled
thee? Humble thy self under his mighty and righteous hand, that he may exalt
thee in his due time. 1 Pet. v. 6.

A Garment may be made decent and comely, as well for a Funeral as a Wedding:
In Prosperity God invites us to Rejoice, Eccles. vii. 14. But yet to wear our
Garments of praise with humility: In the day of Adversity, we are called to
Consider; that God has set the one over against the other. Of this excellent
Spirit was the Apostle, Phil. iv. 12. I know both how to be abased and how to
abound: every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full, and to
be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer need. This one instance fairly Copied
out upon our Hearts, and expressed in our walking, would convince the World of
the excellency of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Grace of God, that can
teach the Soul to maintain an equipoise of Mind in all Estates: To have a
humble Heart in an elevated, and a high Faith in a low condition.

Afflictive Sorrows, and exalting Comforts, divide our whole Lives between
them, yet both of them are capable of glorifying God. Jam. v. 13. If any man be
afflicted let him pray. Prayer under Affliction, witnesses that we believe our
God to be good and gracious in it: that he can support us under it, can do us
much good by it, and deliver us from it: But if any be cheerful, Let him sing
psalms. As then God has divided our Lives between Afflictions and Consolations,
let us divide them between Prayer and Praise. I conclude this with that of 1
Cor. vii 30. Brethren, the time is s^ort: it remains that they that weep be
as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and
they that buy a^ though they possessed not; for the fashion of thi^ world
passes away. When Grace shall reach us a Holy indifferency of spirit toward
these outward things: to mourn under evil Circumstances with that moderation as
believing that God can turn our Sorrow to Good, nay into Joy: and to rejoice
under smiling Dispensations, as they that believe our elations, and transports
may soon be dashed; and to keep that equability of Spirit as they that know the
fashion of this world passes away; then shall we Adorn the doctrine of God our
Savior in all things.

. 3. Proceed we now to the third General Enquiry, viz. What are the Particulars
of the Doctrine of this Gospel which we must Adorn; and how may we Adorn it in
those Particulars?

The Doctrine of the Gospel may be reduced to two Heads, Precepts and Promises:
and both these may be comprehended under the General Term of the Divine
Testimonies: because they Testify, what God expects from us; and what we may
expect from God: The Preceptive part informs us, what God justly expects from
us in a way of Duty: The Promissory part, what we may expect humbly yet
assuredly from God; either for present Assistance; or future Reward: Both of
which, if narrowly considered, will inform us, what it is that will Adorn the
Doctrine of the Gospel.

(1.) I begin with the Precepts, These are the true Copy of the Divine Nature:
The great instances of the Divine Authority: The visible Demonstrations of the
Holiness of the Lawgiver: The express Image of the Purity of him that gave
them forth, and the great Proofs of our Integrity. A mavelous Beauty and
Glory is impressed upon them by God, but they have been insolently trampled
upon by unhallowed Feet, cruelly treated by unclean Hands; and now how to
recover them to their Original Glory, is the difficulty and design of this
Discourse.

If we ask the Psalmist what value and estimate he put upon them? What Glory,
what Beauty he could behold in them? He readily answers, Psalm. cxix. 128. I
esteem all thy Precepts conc^rning all things to be right, and I hate every
false way. All thy Precepts concerning All things. There is a luster in every
single Precept; but a Glory in them All. As every Star shines with its proper
Light; but as they stand Combined in their Asterisms, and Constellations, so
they shine with a mavelous Glory. And as every Creature which God produced by
his creative Word, was Good; yet when he came to take a prospect of them in
their Relations to each other, he pronounced them exceeding good. Genesis i. 31.
Such are the Precepts of God; and they are so concerning All things. They reach
the Heart, with all its Principles and Ends; they govern our Words; they
regulate our Lives; they restrain from Sin; they constrain to Obedience; they
instruct us how to walk holily before God, honestly and righteously toward
Men, soberly toward our selves; and to hate every false way.

If you again ask him why, or upon what Reasons he prizes them at this high
rate; he will satisfy you, Ver. 72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me,
than thousands of gold and silver. I know there may be good use made of Gold
and Silver. A good Conscience will not purchase Meat in the Market: nor
Innocence buy us Clothing in the Shops: but the law of thy Mouth is better,
upon higher, upon noblet Accounts. It acquaints me with those ways, wherein God
is to be found; where I may expect Communion with him: it directs me how to
walk well-pleasing to my God, whom to please is my highest Ambition: it shows
me how I may be kept from the paths of the Destroyer. Gold and Silver will not
heal a wounded Conscience; nor pluck the Thorn out of the Flesh; nor instruct
the doubting Soul how to clear up its Peace with God. What use others may make
of their Gold and Silver I know not; but unto me, the words of thy mouth are
better: By them is thy servant warned, to avoid the Sin, and to escape the
Snare: by them is thy Servant Reproved, when his own folly has exposed him to
the bait and snare: and by them is thy Servant Recovered out of those
Temptations, into which my own rashness or carelessness have thrown me.

The Goodness of all things is reckoned from their Suitableness to the present
and pressing exigency: If we are hungry, a piece of Bread is better than
thousands of Gold and Silver: which we may have, and yet Starve. If naked, a
few Rags are better in that present straight than thousands of Gold and Silver,
which will not cover our nakedness. If then the Mind be uneasy; Conscience
dissatisfied; if Sorrow sits as a thick Cloud upon the Brow. The word of God,
which speaks to the Case, is better than thousands of Gold and Silver.

There are three things which render the Precepts of Christ easy, and our
Obedience pleasant.

1. When we keep our h^ ^xed upon the Author of them: It Is the (...) ^rine of
God our Savior: as God he clai^ ^uthority over us, as a Savior he challenges
an Interest in us. Right to Command, and Interest to Obey, are a Cord of Love
too strong to be broken: Christ asiures us, Matthew. xi. 29, 30. That his Took is
easy, and his ^urden light. It Is a Yoke: none of Christ's Servants are Sons of
Belial; but it is an easy Yoke. His strength which he gives, that Principle of
Love which is the governing Principle of the Renewed Nature, makes it so. Hence
Christ presses Obedience upon that Principle, John xiv. 15. If ye love me keep
my Commandments. Can you pretend a mighty love to my Person, and yet despise my
Authority? Give this essential Proof of your Love, that ye keep my
Commandments. If your Friend should sooth you up, and with many fair and
fawning Complements protest he values you, and yet at the same time Spit in
your Face, or throw Dung upon you, you would desire him to give better evidence
of his Love than those Actions, which speak Despite and Scorn. The Commands of
Christ are the Mounds, and Fences which he has set about his Glory. If you will
pluck down those Walls and Defenses which your Neighbor has set about his
Enclosures, and then pretend that you do all this out of pure Love and Respect
to him; I am persuaded he would desire you to forbear such Proofs of your Love,
and give more convincing Tokens of it. Christ is willing you would rather spare
your high Expressions, and give Evidence of your Love by sincere Obedience.

2. When the Conscience is bound in subjection to Christ, when the Soul can lie
at his Foot, and take the Law from his Mouth, then will his Precepts be
exceeding precious. A Command that lies only on the Back, is heavy, ungrateful,
and the uneasy Soul waits but a fair opportunity to shake it off, and the
Flesh will never let it want such an opportunity; but when it has got hold
upon, and firm footing in the Heart, it meets with a Principle there suited to
it. The new Heart makes new Obedience pleasant. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26, 27. A new
heart also will I give you, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

3. A clear Experience of present strength to Obey, with a firm belief of a
future Reward, will render Obedience pleasant. There is not only present
Strength felt, and a future Reward expected. but a prelibation of that future
Reward too, which contributes to this delight, Psalm. xix. 11. In keeping of
them there is great reward. But when the holy Soul can live, walk, act, in the
hope of that eternal Salvation, whereof Christ is the Author to all that obey
him, Heb. v. 9. When the Eye of Faith has got Moses his Perspective-Glass, to
behold him that is Invisibl^, and clearly see the Recompense of Reward; this
alleviates the Burdens, counter-ballances the Inconveniences, overcomes the
Difficulties, which attend a close walking with God. A future Reward produces a
present Comfort: the reward of Eternity influences the present time; for Faith
and Hope though they deal with what is absent, distant, future, yet Administer
present Joy, present Strength, because the Connection between upright universal
Obedience, and the glory of that other World, is close, strong, and inviolable.

Such are then the Precepts of the Gospel; so excellent, so glorious in
themselves, and to all who in a Conscientious course of holy Walking have
proved and approved them; and yet so shamefully have they been sullied,
violated, and trodden under foot, that the Question Recoils upon us at every
turn: How shall we vindicate them? What must we do to restore them to their own
inherent Glory? In answer to which I will lay down these few, and plain, but
necessary Directions.

1. Direction. Let the Universality of your Obedience convince the World that
you make a Conscience of Obeying; you will never satisfy others, nor your
selves, nor the searcher of Hearts, to Obey in any, unless you Obey in All. He
that will pick out one Duty, where, and when, it may consist with the Interest
of the Flesh, and wave others because they will not comport with that Interest,
will never stop the Mouths of Men, nor silence the Clamours of his own
Conscience, when it shall accuse him, of partiality in God's Law, Mal. ii. 9.

The Lawgiver has stamped the same Impressions of his Authority, the same
Characters of Holiness, upon them all: and he that can allow himself
professedly, and deliberately to break one, is prepared to break them all, when
the Temptation shall press hard upon his Corrupt Heart, Jam. ii. 11. He that
said do not commit Adultery, said also do not kill. This was the ground of the
Psalmist's lifting up his Face with Confidence, Psalm. cxix. 6. Then shall I not
be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

The Scribes and Pharisees were a sad instance of this Hypocrisy. They would
strain at a Gnat, and yet could swallow a Camel. They would be thought severe
in Tything Mint, Anise, and Cumin, and yet could neglect Mercy, and Judgment,
those great, and weighty matters of the Law, Matthew. xxiii. 23. If we look upon
them in Ceremonials; the most straight-^aced, and t^nder Conscienced men in the
whole World: but when you view them in their Morals, the most loose, and
dissolute; nothing would choke them there, John xviii. 28. They would not go
into the judgment hall lest they should be defiled, but that they might keep
the Passover. And yet they were not so nice, and squeamish, but they could shed
Inno^^nt Blood, and imbrue their Hands in that of the Messiah. They would not
touch a dead Body for a World, yet scrupled not to murder a Man. They would not
eat with unwashen hands; but had no regard to cleanse their Consciences. The
Apostle expostulates with the Judaizers, Romans ii. 20. Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the Law,
through breaking of the Law, dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is
blasphem^d among the Gentiles through you.

In a Word, Nothing will buoy up the Repute of a drowning Religion, till the
Professors of it shall make it appear, That they not only Obey the Precepts of
the Gospel, but that they carry a ra^^cated Principle in their Hearts, that
will not suffer them to disobey: which Principle, though it falls short of what
God in strictness may expect, yet must it come up to what he in Mercy will
accept. And this was the ground of the Apostles Considence. Heb. xiii. 18. Pray
for us! For we trust we have a good Conscience, in all things, willing to live
honestly.

2. Direct. Make it appear that you can, and dare obey against all temptations,
oppositions, and discouragements. An unsound Man will walk smoothly on in
smooth Ways; but rugged Paths, and a stiff Gale in his Face make him return.
Thus many will walk a Mile or two with Christ, but when Persecution (...)
because of the Word, they have always a reserve in their Bosoms, and an evil
Heart is an easy Casuist to dispense with Obedience upon slender Penance.

That Man who is under a Law in his own Conscience, subject to the Authority of
God, that owns no Dispensation from Obedience, nor Indulgence to sin, is the
Man that will Adorn the Precepts.

They that can shift their Sails as the Wind veres, and use all the Points of
the Compass to make their Point, and whether the Gale blows from Hell or Heaven
can serve themselves of it, will never Credit his Religion.

The Providence of God are many, and various; the Precepts are uniform, they
vary not: the wise God makes use of the former to Prove us in the latter: Thus
he led Israel through the wilderness, Deuteronomy. viii. 3. To prove them, to know
whether they would keep his Commandments or no. They had bread to the full, to
prove them whether they would Obey in Plenty. Again, they are reduced to
Straits, to try whether they would follow him in want. The Proofs will lie
here, whether we can be content with Winter, as well as Summer Work: whether we
will follow God in foul Weather as well as fair.

3. Direction. Let us be much in the Exercise of those Graces, the Practice of
those Duties, which Men understand: sincere Intentions, good Meanings,
uprightness of Heart, the acting of your Faith upon God come not within their
Cognizance; till you can show, and demonstrate your Faith by your Works. Let
your Faith justify your Persons before God; but till your Works shall justify
your Faith before Men, you will never be able to justify your Religion and
your Sincerity therein. Never tell Men of your Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
unless you show Repentance from dead Works they will not believe: and this was
St. Paul's Practice of Piety, Acts xxiv. 16. Herein do I exercise my self
always to keep a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men. But
because this is that Convincing Point which must, if ever, recover the Credit
of Religion, let me be allowed to prescribe some more general Rules for the
right and comely ordering of our Conversation.

. 1. Be very zealous in Gods cause, meek, and yielding in your own. Be content
to lie at the Footstool, that the honor of God may have the Throne. I
recommend to you the great Example of our Blessed Savior, he was a Lamb in his
own Cause: a Lion in his Fathers. He that could be Scourged and not open his
Mouth, could open it in Holy Indignation, and Scourge the Buyers and Sellers
out of the Temple. He submitted to be called Beelzebub, Impostor, and whatever
opprobrious Terms a Rancorous Heart could vo^it upon him; but in the Cause of
his God and Father, (...) could Lighten and Thunder, and flash Fire in the Face
of the most obdurate Conscience. Be ye therefore followers of Christ; who when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered threatened not, but
committed himself, and his cause to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. ii.
23. And again, Not rendering evil for evil: or railing for railing; but
contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called that ye should
inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. iii. 9.

. 2. Be strict and severe to your selves, but very charitable toward others.
Concerning our brethren, we have this Rule, Romans xiv. 13. Let us not judge one
another any more, but concerning our selves, we have this, 1 Cor. xi. 31. If we
would judge our selves, we should not be judged. We are incompetent Judges of
others, because we know not upon what Principles our Brother may proceed; we
cannot take a just Measure of the Latitude of his Understanding by which he
Governs himself: there we ought to be sparing in our Censure; but thou may
know what is in thy own Heart, and know more by thy self, than either all the
World knows by thee, or thou know by all the World.

This has brought no little scandal upon Religion, that the Professors of it,
have been sharp-sighted Abroad, but blind at Home: could see a Mote in their
Brothers Eye, and not the Beam in their own, not duly considering that we who
exact a few Pence from our Brother, need the forgiveness of many Talents from
our God, Matthew. xviii. 24.

. 3. Let us abridge our selves in the use of things which are in their own
nature indifferent. He that will go to the utmost length of his Tedder, will
easily break it. It Is difficult to know where the lawful ends, and the sinful
begins. He that will always go as far as he may go, shall sometimes go further
than he ought to go. How much safer to keep an Ell within our limits, than to
go an Inch beyond? Better do less than is lawful, than what is sinful. It Is an
excellent Caution the Apostle prescribes, Romans xiv. 16. Let not your good be
evil spoken off. The Glory of Christ, the honor of our Holy Religion, teach us
to Retrench in what is merely lawful; and still let us attend that Rule, Romans
xiv. 21. It Is good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any thing, whereby
thy br^ther stumbleth, or is offend^d, or is made weak. Three things the are
included in this Canon. 1. That we lay not a stumbling Block before our
Brother, to draw him into sin. 2. That we provoke not his Passion to speak evil
of the good ways of God. 3. That we enfeeble not our Brother, nor make him weak
in his walking with God, by an unseasonable use of our Christian Liberty.

4. Let your visible Righteousness toward Men, be an inseparable Companion of
your invisible righteousness before God. With what Arguments will you persuade
Men that you are Sincere and Upright in his sight, if you cannot convince them
that you are so in your Dealings with them? So the Apostle, Romans xii. 17.
Provide things honest in the sight of all men. I look upon that Man lost, who
has lost all regard to the judgment of others; and doubly lost who has cast off
all respect to the Judgment of his final Judge.

. 5. Be Ambitious of a public Spirit. Express the Image of him, who is Good,
and does Good. The Sun does not Monopolize his own Beams to his Disc or Orb,
but shines upon the Good and Bad. The Air incloseth not it self, but lends
breath in common to All. The Rain is not imprisoned in the Clouds, but sheds
fruitfulness on the Field of the Saint and Sinner; the Ocean supplies the upper
and the lower World with its Waters. Let us then pray to be made partakers of
the Promise given to Abraham, Genesis xii 2. I will bless thee, and make thee a
Blessing.

Those little narrow Souls that make themselves their own Center and
Circumference, that dwell within their own Shell, and bless themselves that All
is well at home, and never look abroad how it fares with the Oppressed,
Fatherless and Widow, the Sick, the Hungry and Naked, that Consider not the
Afflictions of Joseph, are great Scandals to a Holy Religion; not imitating the
blessed Jesus, who, Act. x. 38. Went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him. Such was the Counsel of the
Apostle, Tit. iii. 8. This is a faithful saying, and th^se things I will that
thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, be careful to
maintain good works: these things are good and profitable unto m^n. ver. 14.
And let curs also l^rn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they be
not unfruitful.

6. Let the Holiness of the inner Man, shine with a convincing Light into all
the Actions of the outward Man. True Holiness will diffuse it self into, and
through the external Carriage and Demeanor, that a Man shall be forced to say,
God is there in that Soul of a Truth; as the Pride, the Wantonness of filthy
ones steams and reeks through the Skin into their Apparel, their Language,
their Converses; so should, so will the Humility, the Meekness, Modesty,
Chastity, Heavenliness of Holy ones discover it self in their external
Behavior, especially in Food and Raiment; 1 Timothy ii. 9, 10. That women adorn
themselves with modest apparel, (the Modesty and Chastity of the Heart, will
evidence it self in the Modesty and Chastity of Clothing) with shame-fac'dness
and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; But
(which becomes women professing godliness) with good works. For thus says St.
Peter, 1 Epist. iii. 4, 5. Did the holy women of old time who trusted in God,
adorn themselves?

. 7. When the favorable Providence of God shall exalt thee, forget not whence
thou have been raised. Forget not those thou have left behind thee, forget not
thy self, forget not thy God. It has brought much Reproach upon Religion, that
many Professors change their Tempers with their outward Circumstances; and when
they have got more Sail, they throw away their Ballast; such was Jeshurun,
Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15. Who when he waxed fat, kicked, forsook the Lord, lightly
esteemed and was unmindful of the rock of his salvation.

. 8. Lastly, Maintain a high and noble Faith in a low Estate. This is
convincing to Men that there is something real and solid in the Doctrine of the
Gospel; when though the Figtree blossom not; though there be not fruit in the Vine;
though the labor of the Olive fail; and the Fields yield no increase, yet can
rejoice in the Lord, and triumph in the God of their salvation. Hab. iii. 17,
18.

(2.) I come now to speak of the Promises. These testify what we may expect
from God, and upon this Head I will open two Things.

1. I will briefly open the Nature of the Promises.

2. I will show from thence, what Conversation will adorn the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as it is contained in the Promises.

. 1. For the brief opening the Nature of the Promises. A Promise may be
described thus. A Testimony which God has given of himself through Christ, to
secure our Faith in whatever we may expect from him; as a Precept testifies
what God expects from us, so a Promise testifies what we mav expect from him.
And this is the Glory of the New Covenant; that what we expect from God,
enables us to perform what he expects from us. It Is in the Strength of the
Promise that we are enabled to obey the Precept. It Is another Excellency of
this Covenant, that Divine Mercy has annexed the Promise to the Precept, and so
we are not left to a Naked Law: The same Apostle who complains, 2 Cor. iii 5.
Of an insufficiency to think any thing of himself, can yet boast that he can do
all things, through Christ who strengthens him. Phil. iv. 13. Nothing in
himself; All things in Christ. The Command creates our Duty, but the Promise
affords Strength for Obedience. Again, according to the extent of the Promises,
must be the extent of our Expectation. What length God has gone in Promising,
the same length may we go in Praying, Believing, Hoping. As the Precepts are
the Bounds of our Duty, and all that we can pretend beyond them, is
superstitious Folly; so the Promises are the limits of our Faith, and to expect
beyond them is Presumption. Further, we cannot justly complain that we are
narrowed and restrained in the wideness of the Promises, for they are adequate
to the spiritual Necessities of all his Children in all Ages. The Oil in the
Cruise will run while there is a Vessel to receive it; our God has to give,
while we can find a Heart to pray and receive; Mercy and Grace will never fail,
while there is room to receive it. 'Twas on this Consideration that the
Psalmist, weighing the indigency of his Soul, and the exigency of his
Condition, was well willing to accept the Promises for his Supply and Treasure.
Psalm. cxix. III. Thy testimonies have I taken for an heritage for ever, for
they are the rejoicing of my heart. So many Promises, so many Testimonies what
God will do for his Children, what he will bestow on them, and what they may
expect from him. Now David, we see, could securely take God's single Security,
nor required any to be bound with him for performance. What Security God gave,
that he takes, with the Hand, with the Arms of Faith; as those ancient
Worthies, Heb. xi. 13. Who died in the faith, not having received the promises,
but having seen them afar off, and were persu^ded of them, and em^raced them.
For whereas there are two things in the Promises, the Goodn^ss contained in
them, and the Truth that confirms them. Those Eminent Saints received the
Truth, though God kept the Goodness still in his own Hands. And thus the Psalmist
accepted God's Testimonies for good Payment, though the Grace, Mercy, Glory wrapped
up in them were chiefly of things future, distant and invisible. And these he
took for an heritage; he blesses himself and rejoices, that the lines were
fallen unto him in pleasant places, and that he had a goodly heritage. Psalm.
xvi. 6. Give him but a clear Interest in them, and he is content that the Men
of the World, whose Portion lies there, should divide the World amongst them:
For they are the rejoicing of his heart. They are Light in Darkness; Comfort in
Trouble; Advice in Streights; Ease in Pain; Supply in Want; Health in Sickness;
Life in Death.

But that I may more fully and distinctly give you the Theory of these
exceeding great and precious Promises; there are Two things in them, which
shall be more particularly considered: The fuln^ss and faithfulness of the
Promises.

1. First, The fuln^ss of the Promis^s. They contain whatsoever the Soul upon
Spiritual Accounts can possibly need: They are commensurate to the Necessities
of the Saints in all Cases, the Promise made to Abraham. Genesis xvii. 7. I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, to be a God to thee; has been
frequently exemplified in af^r-times. 2 Cor. vi. 16. I will be their God. And
it includes, all that God can promise; all that the Soul can ask or receive.
And as it is great folly to sit down with any promise of God, that is short of
himself, so it is as great a folly to aspire after any thing beyond him. As a
little piece of Gold may be beaten out to a great breadth, draw out to an
incredible length, yet still it is but the same Gold for Weight and Substance,
though it will be more for use; so may this comprehensive Promise be drawn out
into infinite Particulars, but still all of them are but this one, I will be
thy God. The Almighty God will be thy Strength; the All-Wise God thy Conduct;
the Everliving God thy Life.

But if we desire more explicit Satisfaction, God has given it 1 Timothy iv. 8.
Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and tha^ which is to come.
Will this World, will the other World, will both Worlds satisfy you? Will Time
and Eternity content you? This Word testifies what you may expect from the
Promise.

2. Secondly, Look now upon the faithfulness of God in the Promises, concerning
which I recommend these things to your Observation.

1. That God's faithfulness in the Promise, is God himself, clothing himself
with the Attribute that our Faith may more easily take hold on him, and more
securely rely on him: God is full and faithful; he is fullness and faithfulness.
And because God seems to value himself, especially upon this Attribute, Psalm.
cxxxviii. 2. Thou have magnified thy word above all thy name. And that whatever
fails, he will not suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 1xxxix. 33, 34. His
covenant he will not break, nor al^er the thing that is gone out of his lips;
for he has sworn by his holiness that he will not lie unto David. Hence I say
it is that Unbelief is a Sin of such horrid guilt, because it dishonours God in
that Point, of which he is so jealous and tender. God can no more lie, than he
can die; to doubt or deny his Faithfulness, is to doubt or deny his Being; 1 John v. 10. He, that believes not God, has made him a liar. Every Thought,
Word, or Act, that represents God otherwise than he is, casts a Reproach upon
the Divine Majesty; but to make him a Liar which Unbelief does, represents him
as if he were that Evil one, Joh. viii. 44. who is a liar, and the father of
lies: It Is true, none can make God a Liar, any more than they can make Light,
Darkness, or Truth, Falsehood; but the Unbeliever not crediting the Testimony of
God, does by Interpretation and devilish Construction, either judge him so to
be, or represent him as such to others. And this Truth, this Faithfulness of
God is the Great Buttress of the Promise; In hope of eternal life, which God,
that cannot lie, has promised before the world began. Tit. i. 2.

2. This Faithfulness of God in the Promise, is now drawn up into Writing: God
has not only spoken but written; we have it not only from his Mouth, but under
his Hand; which though it adds nothing to the Divine Truth, yet it contributes
much to our weak Faith; for hereby we have a more steady Aim at the Mind and
Will of God, than if it had been conveyed only by a Voice from Heaven, or
otherwise. As the Law was more durable engrav^ upon the two Tables, than when
delivered from Mount Sinai; how much more is our Security that God proceeds
with us, and we treat with him by a written Word, than if we had been left to
the uncertainty of Oral Tradition. Our blessed Savior assures us, Joh. x. 35.
The Scriptures cannot be broken. Though nothing more easy than to violate a
Precept, yet impossible to repeal it; Unbelief disparages the Promise, but
cannot make it void; as a River meets with Rocks and Mountains that would
obstruct its Course and Current, and may sometimes run under Ground, yet it
will make its way through all Opposition. Psalm. c. 5. Thy Truth endures
through all Generations.

3. The Truth of God in the Promise receives yet a further Confirmation from
the Oath of God. As when God had nothing greater to give, he gave Himself, his
Son* his Spirit, in an everlasting Covenant. So when he had nothing greater to
confirm that Covenant by, he swore by himself, Heb. vi. 13, 17. Wherein God
willing ^re a^undantly, to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of
his counsel confirmed it by an oath. Happy Man, for whose sake God will
vouchsafe to Swear! Miserable Man, who will not believe a swearing God! How
wretched is the Nature of Suspicion, Jealousy and Doubt* whom the highest
Security direct, and collateral, even from Veracity and Infallibility cannot
satisfy.

4. The Truth of the Promises is yet further attested, sealed, ratified by the
Death of Christ. Of whose Blood and Cross though there are other, and greater
Ends, yet this is one to confirm the Promises. Romans xv. 8. Jesus Christ a
minister of circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made to
the Fathers. And that the promise might be sure to all the seed. Rom iv. 16. He
has drawn the Covenant into a Testamentary form, and then dies to seal and
ratify his own Testament. Heb. ix. 17. A testament is of force after men are
dead, otherwise it is of no strength while the testator lives.

5. You have had many gracious Experiences afforded of the Faithfulness of God
in the Promises; enter them upon Record in your Souls; an Answer of Prayer; the
Pardon of Sin sealed to the Conscience; present Help in time of need; suitable
and seasonable Strength against Temptations; eminent Deliverances in pressing
Dangers, are so many Earnests of what he will further do, special Tokens of his
Truth in doing them.

In all your Dealings with Men you will buy by a Sample or Pattern; many of
these we have had, and from one we might conclude what he will perform in all
other Cases. He shows us in little what he will do in great; and by what he
performs in one Instance gives hope of what he will do in all the rest. 2 Cor.
i. 10. He has delivered us, and does deliver us, in whom we trust that he will
yet deliver us. So that we may with the Prophet set up our Ebenezer, 1 Samuel
vii. 12. and give it this Inscription; Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

6. And now to shut up All; God summons us in upon our Consciences to give
Testimony to his Faithfulness in the Promises. Isa. xliii. 12. I have declared,
and saved, I have showed when there was no strange God among (...) therefore ye
are my witnesses. God (...) (...)g our former Experiences to confront our
present Fears. Therefore be well advised, if it be so heinous a Sin to bear
False Witness against thy Neighbor, what is it to bear False Witness against
thy God?

. 2. Let us further enquire, How we may Adorn this Branch of the Doctrine of
the Gospel?

1. God has sealed to the Promises with his Truth, his Word, his Oath; let us
now mutually seal to them with our Faith. Joh. iii. 33. He that receives his
testimony has set to his seal, that God is true. It Is the highest
disparagement to a Person of known Integrity, not to receive his Testimony; and
yet Man by departing from his God, has forfeited his Credibility: What David
once said in a hot fit of Passion; In his have, that all men were liars. Psalm.
cxvi. 11. All Men, even the Prophets, that encouraged him in the Name of the
Lord; that the Apostle in cool blood, and deliberately has asserted, Romans iii
4. Let God be true, and every man a liar. As none is absolutely Good but one,
so none is True perfectly but one* that is God. Now if we can receive the
Witness of Man, who is branded upon Record for a Liar; that he goes astray
as soon as he is born, speaking lies. Psalm. lviii. 3. What a Reproach do we cast
upon God, who is the Truth. All whose promises are Yea and Amen in Christ to
the glory of God. 2 Cor. i. 20. And thus the Apostle argues, 1 John V. 9. If we
receive the witness of men, (as we must) the witness of God is greater. And if
an oath among men for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Heb vi. 16.
Let the Promise of God confirmed by his Oath, put an end to all those
Controversies, which our suspicious Hearts have made; let us come off roundly
with God, seal to his Promises, and make all the World know to its shame, that
we have a God whom we can securely trust.

2. In pursuance of this, let us walk cheerfully before the World upon the
Credit and Security of the Promises: There was a time when Holy Job could walk
in darkn^ss by the light of God. Job xxix. 3. When the Light of the Promises
guided and comforted him in the Darkness of Providence; when though all was
gloomy without, yet all was clear within* It Is a great Blemish that Professors
give the Face of their Religion; that we hear much and often of their
Complaints, seldom of their Praises; always mourning, never rejoicing. This
represents Religion as a melancholy cloudy thing, and affrights Strangers from
all acquaintance with it; whereas did we live up to the height of what our
Religion would justify us, We might glory in tribulations. Romans v. 3. Rejoice
evermore. 1 These. v. 16. And give thanks to God who always causes us to
rejoice and triumph in Christ. 2 Cor. ii. 14. Nor would this be any Triumphing
before the Victory, seeing we are already more than conquerours in him that
loved us. Romans viii. 37. For what could all our outward Afflictions,
Tribulations, Crosses, Losses, Disappointments, that we meet withal in the
World, do to the extinguishing our Joy, did we, as we might, urge the Promises
upon our own Hearts, plead them with God, and object them to the Tempter.

1. We might urge them upon our own dejected Souls. Psalm. xliii. 5. Why art
thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in God,
for I shall yet praise him. We are apt to be cast down and disquieted, when we
are not able to assign a good Reason of the Dejection and Disquiet: We have a
God to trust in, a Word from that God, by which to lay hold on him, and why
then cast down? And this Psalmist at other times has been able to relieve
himself from such a word, Psalm. cxix. 50. This is my comfort in my affliction,
for thy word has quickened me.

2. We might plead the Word of Promise with God, and humbly press his own Truth
upon himself, Psalm. cxix. 49. Remember thy word unto thy servant, on which thou
have caused me to hope: as if he had said, Holy Lord! Thou have encouraged me
to Hope, and I have thy word for the ground of that encouragement; and I am thy
Servant to whom this Promise is made, and have therefore Reason to apply the
Word to my own Case, and will thou forget thy Word, and fail a Servant of thine
who hopes upon thy Security? If thou had never promised I had never hoped;
but since thou have caused me to Hope, answer my Hope. If I could not say in
Sincerity Lord I serve thee; I could not say in Faith, Lord Save me! If I had
forgot thy Precepts, I could not plead with thee to remember thy Promises. It
was therefore excellent Counsel that Chrysostom gave (...). Hear thy God in his
Precepts, that he may hear thy Prayers: for although the truth of God is the
security of our believing, yet sincere Obedience is the ground of our applying
to our selves the Promises.

3. We have the word of Promise to answer and refel all the Objections of the
Tempter. His great design is to undermine, and blow up that great Fundamental
Principle, that God is good, and faithful: that he is good and gracious in all
his Ways, and Works: faithful and true in all his Words; and great advantage he
has got this way, over many holy Ones. David was ready to conclude, Psalm.
lxxvii. 8. That God's Mercy was clean gone for ever. That there was a Total,
and final failure of the Divine goodness: and that his Promise failed for
e^rmore. Now when the wicked One prevails thus, we are driven from our Anchor,
and he ^loating, and hulling upon the Waters exposed to the next Storm, to be
dashed in pieces against the Rocks. To all these Suggestions, and Injections, we
have this one Answer; 1 Cor. x. 13. God is faithful, who will not suffer us to
be tempted above what we are able.

3. Make all that observe you confess that you dare venture, and if the Will of
God be so, lay down, and lose all your outward concerns upon the sole ensurance
and counter-security of the Promises. God does try us sometimes how much we
dare ensure upon his Word, Matthew. xix. 29. Every one that has forsaken houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for my names sake, shall receive a hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting
life: where you easily observe that the Promise is large enough, and the Title
unquestionably good; the only Question is whether we dare venture our All upon
this Security. He that lends Money will be satisfied in two Points; First,
Whether the Mortgage ossered will bear, and answer the sum he lends upon it?
Secondly, Whether the Title of the Estate be good? What Warranty will be given:
Now in both these we have the clearest satisfaction imaginable. There can be no
dispute whether the matter of this Promise will answer whatever we can possibly
venture upon it: for a hundred fold and everlasting life is far more than we
can lay down; nor can there be any question about the clearness of the Title,
since Christ himself undertakes to make it good. If therefore we believe, how
freely, how cheerfully shall we lay down our All at his Feet, with them Hebr.
x. 34. Who not only patiently but joyfully took the spoiling of their goods,
knowing in themselves that they have in heaven a better and enduring substance.

4. Lastly, Live the life of Faith, and despise this poor beggarly life of
Sense in Comparison of it. The life of Sense, has its proper Food, its
Comforts, Supports, and Supplies: it has its Employments, its Hopes, its Trade
and Gains; but they are all low and mean, all within the road and reach of
Sense. The life of Faith has its Food too, its Joys, its Hopes, Business, and
Designs* but these lie out of the road and way of the Flesh. Now if we could
through the Grace of God make future invisible things, our All, and conform our
Hearts, our Ways, our Course of Life to the great End, we should effectually
persuade Men that the Doctrine of the Gospel is a most glorious Doctrine. Our
Blessed Savior tells his Disciples, Joh. iv. 3-1. That he had meat to eat
which they knew not of. As a Believer has a hidden Life, so he has hidden Meat
to support it. He has a hidden Life, Col. iii 3. Tour life is hid with Christ
in God: and he has hidden Food, Rev. ii. 17. To him that overcomes I will give
to eat of the hidden Manna. As he has secret Sorrows which the World knows
nothing of, so has he hidden Joys, Prove. xiv. 10. The heart knows its own
bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy. And hence it is,
that the World knows little or nothing of the Bread he Eats, the Life he Lives,
the Joy he Joys. 1 John iii. 1. Therefore the world knows us not, because it
knew him not. Whatever is within the compass of Sense and Flesh, the Natural
Man understands; that he values, prizes, relishes, and blesses himself in,
because he finds a suitableness between them, and his own Frame: but if those
who profess themselves Believers have nothing more than this comes to, to
produce, in vain do they hope to persuade others of the excellency of their
Religion.

Let us therefore give all Diligence to get such a view of the glory of that
unseen World, as may dash out of countenance all the glittering glory of this:
and make it appear by our Conversation, that we can with a holy Scorn trample
upon present visible earthly perishing things, that so living by Faith, and not
by Sense, our Hearts may be in Heaven, where our Treasure is; and our
Conversation in Heaven, where our Hearts are.

. 4. Come we now to the fourth General Head, the only thing remaining before we
come to the Application, viz.

The Reasons why every one that Professes the Gospel of Christ should
conscientiously labor to Adorn the Doctrine of it in All things. The Reasons
assigned will be very few, let us Pray that the Good Spirit would make them
very strong.

1. Reason. It ought to be our great Care to Adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel,
because it is the Doctrine of the Great God. It Is a Doctrine that was given
forth from him that has absolute Power to Command us, John vii. 16. The
Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, and therefore we are to receive it,
entertain it, as such, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 13. Te received it, not as the word of men,
but as it is in truth the word of God. The Reproach cast upon the Word of God,
is cast upon the Author of it, God himself, Romans ii. 23, 24. Through breaking
of the law, dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed among the
G^ntiles through you. As the affront offered to the Laws, reflects upon the
Lawgiver; and God is concerned in Honor to vindicate the dishonor cast upon
his own Laws. These things are drawn into a narrow Compass, and we may enlarge
upon them with ease in our own Hearts. Let us be well advised whether we be not
bound in Conscience to vindicate the Name of God, by Adorning this Doctrine,
which has been so horribly blasphemed by defacing it. He that Spits in the Face
of Religion Spits in the Face of God. He that tramples upon the Word, tramples
under Foot the Son of God.

2. R^ason. It Is the Doctrine of our S^viour, our Redeemer; and these Terms
carry strong Obligations in them to Adorn his Doctrine; or having already
defiled it, to repair the damage we have done it. The former Reason was drawn
from Authority, but this from Interest, and both of them work by Love. Christ
is a Savior, and has preached the Doctrine of Salvation. A Redeemer, and has
revealed the Doctrine of Redemption. A Mediator, and has made known how Sinners
may come unto God by him. It was St. Austin's censure of the Pl^tonists,
Patriam viderunt, viam ignor^runt. They saw their Country, but knew not the way
to it: they had at least some rude consused Notions, that Blessedness must
needs lie in the enjoyment of a perfect infinite Being; but how to attain
Reconciliation and Communion with him they were at a loss; what they saw in a
Glass darkly, the Gospel has revealed plainly, and we see it with open Face, 2
Cor. iii. 1 8. And what they were totally ignorant of, we behold in a clear
sight; that is, wherein our everlasting Happiness does consist, and how we may
reach that Happiness* And shall we tread under our Feet that blessed Doctrine,
the power whereof in our Hearts will certainly save us; and the Guilt lying
upon our Head will eternally Condemn us.

The Apostle's Pleading is clear and strong, 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. Ye are not your
own, for ye are bought with a price that ye may glorify him in your spirits
and bodies, which are his. It is an acknowledged piece of Justice, that he that
purchases lawfully, should enjoy peaceably; and with what indignation do we
exclaim against that Man that keeps out of Possession a lawful Purchaser.
Consider this Case, it is your own; if Christ has bought you with an invaluable
Price, whose true value none can perfectly understand, but the Father to whom
it was paid: shall we Treat that Gospel which brings us these glad tidings with
Contempt and Neglect?

3. Reason. To Adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior, will be our own
greatest Ornament. Holiness was the comely wear of Primitive Christianity: no
Artificial Dress did ever so Adorn its Profession and Professors as plain
Godliness. The Varnish and Paint of Art will wash off with a little stormy
Weather, but wisdom makes the face to shine, Eccles. ix. 1. This is the Counsel
of Divine Wisdom, Prove. i. 9. My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and
forsake not the law of thy mother: for it shall be an ornament of grace to thy
head, and chains to thy neck. This was the Tire wherewith the holy women of old
time Adorned themselves, 1 Pet. iii. 4. Even the Ornam^nt of a meek and quiet
spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price. Such was the Dress of the
Gospel, before the commonness of vain Modes and wanton Fashions took away the
Deformity of Pride, and almost forced the Ancient Simplicity to retire into
Corners.

Did we see an Ancient Piece, drawn by the Hand of some of the great Masters of
Greece or Italy, we should admire the Painting, tho perhaps ridicule the Antic
Garbs. Surely if some of the Primitive Professors should rise from the Dead,
they would neither know us, nor we them. A heavenly Conversation is Antiquated;
every one wears the Livery of his Party; the distinguishing Shibboleth of his
own Sect: but where are they that accommodate themselves in All things to the
Doctrine according to Godliness! What an honor to be a Citizen of the New
Jerusalem? To be an Heir of God, and a joint Heir with Christ his Elder
Brother; and let us endeavor to reflect some of the honor back again upon the
Gospel which we receive from it.

4. Reason. To Adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel will greatly recommend it to
those who are at present Strangers to it. We have the prejudices of Men to
contend with; their radicated Enmities to subdue and conquer: we dispute, we
argue in vain. It Is a severe uniform Holiness, suited to the Principles,
Precepts, and Promises, that must either wrest their Weapons out of their
Hands, or make them freely lay down their Arms at the Foot of a Redeemer, 1
Pet. iii. 2. The Apostle supposes a very hard Case: that a believing wife is
unequally yoaked to an unbelieving husband: an uneasy condition! But how may
it be remedied? The Apostle answers, If any obey not the word, they may be won
by the conversation of the wives: but the question is what Conversation will
reach that end? He answers again, While they behold your chaste conversation
coupled with fear.

Are there any of you who have a Neighbor, a Relation, a Friend that is as
your own soul; for whose Conversion you have longed, prayed, mourned, and added
Counsel, Entreaties to your Prayers, and Tears; add a holy humble conscientious
Conversation, keeping your Consciences void of offense toward God and Men; and
despair not of success.

5. Reason. There Is nothing more Provokes the wrath of God, than to throw Dirt
in the Face of the Gospel; and the next Provocation is, not to wipe that off,
which others have thrown upon it. Which way God will vindicate his insulted
Honor; which way he will Avenge himself upon a careless, or loose, or
indifferent Generation of Professors, I cannot foretell: whether he will take
the Sword into his provoked Hand; or give a Commission to Fire, Plague, or
other Judgment, to avenge the Quarrel of his Gospel; but certain it is, he will
do it, Levit. xxvi. 25, 26. I will bring a sword upon you, that shall avenge
the quarrel of my covenant^: and when you are gathered together in your Cities,
I will send the pestilence amongst you: and ye shall be delivered into the
hands of your enemies, and when I have broken the staff of your bread, etc.

We have notoriously assronted the Gospel of our God and Savior, either by
unmerciful Persecution, or an unsuitable Conversation: this Gospel has just
cause of Quarrel against us. God takes the Quarrel of his despised Truths,
Precepts, Promises, Ordinances, into his own Hands, he will avenge it: He has
already sent us a Challenge, nay, he has drawn blood on us; but yet his
patience waits, and strives with us, and calls to us to take up the
Controversy: what shall we do? Either we must fight it out, and carry on a
vigorous War against Heaven; or entertain, O that we would entertain, better,
wiser Counsels, and Agree with our Adversary quickly whilst we are in the way
with him, and he in the way with us, lest, I tremble to mention what follows.
Let us then Repent, and turn to the Lord with our whole Heart; let us Reform
our Persons, Families, our Lives, peradventure the Lord may be, nay certainly
the Lord will be reconciled to us, and have Mercy upon us.

. 5. The Improvement of the Point only remains: and till we have done that, we
have done nothing: but here we are usually under some mistake; we think it is
only the Preachers work to make Application, when it is the proper Duty of All
to apply it. All he can do is to Direct how it may, how it must be appplied by
all that hear it.

This Truth must be applied and improved two ways: by way of Humiliation, and
Exhortation.

I. Improvement by way of Humiliation.
ARE we then thoroughly convinced that it ought to be the cautious care of all
that Profess the Gospel, to Adorn the Doctrine of it, in all things? Let us
then be humbled! Let us take up a bitter Lamentation over this bleeding,
gasping, and if Grace prevent not, this dying Gospel. It has fared amongst us,
just as the poor Man, Luke x. 30. Who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among thieves: they strip him, wound him, and leave him half dead: but who
could expect better quarter from bloody Thieves? In this dying and desperate
state, there comes by a Priest; he sees him, but his Eyes did not affect his
Heart, but passes by. A Levite next, he bestows a careless look upon him, but
passes by on the other side. Might not better things have been expected from
the Priests and Levites? Well! In the agony, and pangs of Death, comes by a
Samaritan; one abhorred both by Priest and Levite; one that they damned for a
wretched Schismatic; but yet he had Bowels of Compassion for the expiring Man:
he binds up his Wounds, and takes care for his Cure. The Doctrine, the Gospel
of God our Savior lies here a bleeding, a dying! It Is in vain to inquire who
has been the Assassin, who has committed the Massacre? For all will remove the
guilt from themselves, though all be guilty: in the mean time Religion bleeds
on, and is ready to give up the Ghost! Now it is usual when a Person is found
sore wounded in the Streets, to ask who wounded him? At least to describe them
by such Characters, that they may be pursued, seized, and brought to Condign
Punishment: But have we Courage enough, Conscience enough to ask wounded
Religion this question? How readily would it answer, though with the Accents of
a languishing Voice, It was you, all, and every one of you that are guilty; and
our own Consciences will accuse, and convict us that we are the Men!

When our Savior, Matthew. xxvi. 21, 22. Had told his Apostles that one of them
should betray him. They were exceeding sorrowful and began to say one by one,
Lord is it I? Lord is it I? He that knows his own deceitful Heart, and the
Corruption that lies dormant there, will find Reason to suspect that a
Temptation may awaken it to deny his Lord, nay to betray and sell his Lord and
Savior: Peter and James and John suspected themselves as much as Judas, and
none of us but have cause to say, Lord was it I? I that denied thy Truth? I
that blemished thy Gospel? And if so, O let us mourn, and mourn bitterly over
him whom we have pierced, as one that mourns for an only Son, Zech. xii. 10.

It was a cutting word that would have wounded the Heart of any but an Obdurate
Judas. Judas betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss: Do we pretend to Kiss
him, and yet basely betray him? The smiling Face aggravates the Rancour of the
false Heart. This was the baseness of Joab, that he saluted A^ner and stabbed
him: do we Complement Christ, and Stab him?

The Gospel may say to us in the language of that Prophetic Scheme, Zech.
xiii. 6. The Qucstion was asked, What are those wounds in thy hands? Religion
will answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends. This is
that which wounds deeper than the Swords, the Nails the Spear, the Thorns, that
wounded Christ: He has been wounded in the House of his Friends! Let not our
deceitful Hearts think to evade the charge: by saying, Lord when did I Buffet
thee, or Spit upon thee? It was the Soldiers! When did I Crown thee with
Thorns, or put a Reed into thy Hands? Or nail thee to the Cross, or pierce thy
side with a Spear? It was the Jews that Accused thee, Pilate that Condemned
thee, the Soldier that Pierced thee. Nay, but it was thou even thou, who
pretending to submit to my Scepter, did make it at pleasure, but a broken
Reed. It was thou that did profess much love with thy Lips, and yet wast
false to my Honor and Interest, thou did betray me! Thou that did call me
Lord and Master, and yet disobey my Commandments: And if Christ and his Gospel
finds no fairer Quarter from Friends, what may he expect when he falls into the
Hands of Thieves?

It was this which cut David to the heart, to be so treacherously dealt with by
a pretending Friend, Psalm. xli. 9. Min^ own familiar friend in whom I trusted,
that did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. May not we take up
the same heavy and doleful Complaint on the behalf of Religion. They that have
eaten her Bread, and drank her Wine have kicked and spurned at her. Hear the
Psalmist, again, mournfully bewailing his Case, Psalm. lv. 12, 13, 14. It was
not an enemy that reproached me, sor then I could have born it; neither was it
he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I would have hid my
self from him. But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, my acquaintance.
We took sweet counsel together, and walked to the house of God in company. This
was the cutting, killing Stroke! And this aggravates the Case of Religion in
this dismal day. Religion has been wounded, betrayed, reproached by pretended
Friends; when yet the Upright like that holy dying Woman, 1 Samuel iv. 22. know
not how to outlive the departing glory, but are willing to die with it. It Is a
matter of the greatest Difficulty to persuade us to Repent of our guiltiness in
this Thing, and before I can hope to prevail, I must premise a few Particulars.

1. Whatever Reproach the Professors of Religion draw upon their own Persons,
will certainly be fastened upon their Profession.

Now though this be an unjust Procedure to Reproach a Holy Truth, because he that
owns it holds it in Unrighteousness; yet thus it will be in Fact, the Crimes,
the Excesses of Men will reflect upon the Doctrine. They that will Reproach Men
for their Duties, will much more revile them for their Iniquities; and from
thence take a welcome occasion to revile their Principles and Professions.

2. Whatever Reproach falls upon Religion. will reflect upon the Author of it,
even our Blessed Savior himself. And this should sway with all our
Consciences, to walk inoffensively, to give no just Occasion to them that seek
it, and watch for it, to blaspheme the Name of our God: Hear, how
affectionately the Psalmist prays, Psalm. lxix. 6. Let not them that wait on
thee, O Lord, be ashamed for my sake; let not them that wait on thee be
confounded for my sake, O Lord God of Israel. And he had reason to be sensible
that some Pious Souls might be justly offended at him, and reproached for him,
when by his sin he had caused the Enemies of God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel xii. 14.

But that I may more effectually Prosecute this Use in inviting you to
Humiliation for, and Lamentation over those Scandals which our Holy Religion
has contracted upon our Account, I will endeavor to lay before you these three
things.

1. I will show what an Excellent Religion we have reproached.

2. I will lay before you the great Zeal of the Primitive Christians to Adorn
their Religion in those purest Times.

3. I will further open how unworthily we have defiled it in ours.

. 1. Let me show you what an Excellent Religion that is, which we have thus
shamefully Reproached.

Amongst the many Great and Glorious Excellencies of the Christian Religion as
it stands described and recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, this is one.

(1.) It is a sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy vi. 3. wholesome words, (...) such as are
sound in themselves, and make sound. Tit. ii. 1. Speak thou the things which
become sound doctrine: (...) All is sound, all sincere, nothing rotten.

1. This Doctrine imbibed will make a sound Head, not filling it with empty
Notions, aerie Speculations, much less with rotten Matter, which will breed
Impostumes, and break out into Ulcers, but with such due Conceptions of God as
will settle our Faith, engage our Fear, provoke our Love, command our
Obedience, and in all, secure the Souls everlasting Interest.

2. It will make a sound Heart; the Psalmist prays, Psalm. cxix. 80. Let my
heart be sound in thy statutes, that I may not be ashamed. As the Truth
received into the Head, will keep us sound from Heterodoxy, so the same Truth
entertained in its Power into the Heart, will secure it from Hypocrisy.

3. It will make a sound Conscience; for herein alone is that Doctrine of Peace
and Reconciliation with God revealed through Christ, whose Blood sprinkled on
the conscience purges it from dead works to serve the living God. Heb. ix. 14.

4. It will produce a sound Conversation; we may lay it down for a Rule, that
Religion which begins in Hypocrisy, will end in Apostasy. And there is little
difference whether we go in a True way with a false Heart, or forsake that way
through a false Heart; a sound Heart is the great preservative against both.

Now here we have cause to mourn till we have exhausted the Springs of Tears,
and can weep no more; Lamenting over the rotten Doctrines of our Days, which
have defied and defaced this Holy and Sound Doctrine; the rotten Conversations
that have shamed it, and rendered it contemptible. The Truth is, we can neither
bear our Remedy nor our Disease; we are sick with our Food, and sick with our
Physic. The Scripture gives us True Notions of God, but Men are ignorant, and
too proud to be taught, 1 Timothy vi 3. Proud knowing nothing. This Doctrine would
be a lamp to our feet, but we shut our Eyes against it; and a light to our
paths, but we will not use it, nor admit it to be our Guide in the ways of
Holiness.

(2.) Another Excellency of the Gospel is, that it is a Doctrine according to
Godliness, 1 Timothy vi. 3. And a Doctrine after Godliness, Tit. i. 1. (...). As
if the whole System of Divine Truth were squared and modelled by Godliness:
It Is not only true, that Godliness must be tried and proved by this Doctrine,
but that the Doctrine is formed and fashioned by the Rule of Godliness; every
Leaf, Line, Proposition, is adapted to the advancement of Godliness. Here Is no
Indulgence for Sin, no Toleration for Lust, not one loose Principle in the Body
of Scripture Divinity; and if any Doctrine offers it self that breaths not
Purity, we may safely reject it as that which is not after Godliness.

And let this also renew our Lamentation, that such a Doctrine has been
tortured upon the Rack of unsanctified Wits, to abet filthiness and
uncleanness: Men have reaped what God never sowed, and gathered what the Holy
Spirit never strewn: when this Grace of the Gospel is turned into
lasciviousness; and Men have abounded in sin, because the Grace of God has
abounded toward Sinners.

(3.) It has this Peculiar Excellency, that in every respect it is Good and
Profitable to Men. It is calculated expressly according to the Image of him that
is good, and does good. Psalm. cxix. 68. Such is this Holy Doctrine; it is a
sanctifying and a saving Doctrine. Prove. iv. 1, 2. Hear ye children, attend to
know understanding, for I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law. This
Doctrine reveals Eternal Life, and the only way to it; it discovers what we
must know, that we perish not in Ignorance; what we must believe, that we
perish not in Infidelity; what we must do, that we perish not by Disobedience;
what we must avoid, that we perish not in our Rashness: It reveals the end of
Creation, Redemption, and how to reach the end of our Faith, Hope, Prayers, in
the Enjoyment of God blessed for ever to Eternity. But if you would have the
Particulars in which it is good and profitable laid before you at once, read
that place, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all
good works.

And upon this Account, if our Eyes were Rivers, and our Heads a Fountain of
Tears, we could not enough mourn; that Men have turned God's glory into shame,
Psalm. iv. 2. The Divine Glory has displayed it self gloriously in the Gospel;
the Glory of his Mercy manifested to lost, self-lost Sinners; the Glory of his
Justice manifested and satisfied in his Son, the Glory of his Holiness shining
out in the Precepts, the Glory of his Truth shining out in the Promises, the
Glory of his Wisdom manifested in adjusting all Interests, and answering all
the Pretensions of the Holy Law, and yet all these impiously turned into Shame.

. 2. To show the Zeal of the Primitive Christians to Adorn their Religion.

In those Purest Times, Religion had another Face than now it wears; it was
delivered Pure to them by Christ and his Apostles, and they represented it
suitably to the worst of their Enemies, and these things were their Glory.

1. First, There was nothing more eminently sound amongst them, than Love
without Dissimulation: The Heathen among whom they dwelt, could not but say, O
how these Christians love one another. Act. ii. 1. They were all together with
one accord in one house; as if one Soul animated so many Bodies. They were of
one Heart, one Lip, and one Shoulder, that they might bear one another
burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ. Gal. vi. 2.

2. A second Excellency in them was their fervent Zeal for the Honor of their
Redeemer; a Zeal so hot, that it quenched the Flames, and the heat of the Fires
which devoured their Bodies. This they copied out from Christ the Grand
Exemplar of Holy Zeal for his Father's Glory. Joh. ii. 17. The zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. Christ's time for Sleep, Food, Rest, was all eaten up
by his Holy Zeal to do his Father's Will, and finish his Work. Such was the
Original which they propounded to themselves for Imitation, and they wrote
after it with great Exactness; they minded, pursued more the concerns of their
Lord than their own; the public Interest of the Church drowned their own
private little Interests; as the Sun sh^ing upon our culinary Fires
extinguishes them, so did their Zeal for Christ burn up all those petty
Animosities, which when peace and rest from Persecution indulged them, broke
out into dividing and consuming Flames.

Thirdly, It was their Glory that they lived in a continual waiting for, and
exp^ctation of the coming of their Lord; which glorious Day, though they could
not hasten, yet their longing, praying Souls hastened unto that Day. 2 Pet.
iii. 12. Looking for, and hastening unto the coming of the day of God. How did
they patiently wait, and yet passionately pray, come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
Rev. xxii. 20. They longed to see their Lord upon his Throne; to see all the
Kingdoms of the World brought into subjection to the King of Saints; and their
preparations were answerable to their expectations, making ready for the
blessed Appearance of their blessed Savior.

Fourthly, Their Discourses, their Lives savoured of Heaven, their Business,
their Conversation was above, whence they looked for their Savior; their
Persecutors, when they stripped them of all the accommodations of their
Pilgrimage, would say with scorn, We do but ease you of what you say is your
burden, and impediment in running your Race; and others when they dragged them
to the Stake and Fire would scoff, We do but send you whither you long and pray
to go.

How wretchedly we have copied out those Excellencies, all the World sees
better than they who have most cause to be ashamed. If we had holy Paul*s
Heart, we should shed his Tears; Phil. iii. 19. Many w^lk (of whom I have told
you often, and now tell you weeping) that they are enemies of the cross of
Christ, who mind earthly things. An earthly Conversation, bears the clearest
Contradiction to a heavenly Revelation. And now what would dry up the Apostles
Tears, or what would wipe off this filth from the face of Religion, but that
gracious Temper of his, v^r. 20. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies,
and make them like to his glorious body. And let us from thence draw this
Inference: If we look that Christ should once at last vindicate our Bodies from
the Dust, let us be ambitious to vindicate his Gospel from the Dirt: Do we look
and hope that he will redeem our vile Bodies from the Grave, let us labor to
recover his precious Gospel from its Tomb, and pray that at length it may have
a glorious Resurrection.

. 3. Let us in the last place consider how Unworthily this Glorious Gospel has
been defaced in our Generation, and from thence furnish our Souls with Matter
for Humiliation and Lamentation.

The Primitive Christians are remarkable for All Love; we may be justly
reproached for All Hatred; they were united, we divided, and subdivided, and
crumbled into Parties, when they were All one Bread. Love and Affection is now
confined to some discriminating mode of Profession; and the Enquiry is not now,
whether a Man bears the Image and Superscription of Christ, but whether he
bears ours. The old Heat of Primitive Zeal is turned into a feavourish
preternatural Heat against each other. It would be difficult to touch this
Point, and not to break out into Satyr; but that we cannot Reprove another, but
we must Reproach our selves. We have been so fiercely biting one another, that
it is a Miracle of Divine Mercy that we are not devoured by one another. Sheep,
whose Character has been Meekness and Mildness, are become Roaring and Ravenous
Lions: How little do we express the likeness of Christ who was meek and lowly
in heart. The Gospel would have taught us another Spirit, Col. iii. 13.
Forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel
against any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

And we have added to that Scandal, which we have brought upon our Holy
Religion, that we have entitled Christ to all our reproachful Disorders; and
the Argument runs now to divide, to quarrel for Christ's sake, when it is for
Christ's sake that we should Unite and be at Peace. And yet farther, have we
aggravated our Guilt in a foolish thought to exonerate and justify our selves
by burdening and loading others, when the impartial can easily judge that all
are wrong, but never determine who is in the Right. Thus are we blindly falling
upon one another, when every Man should strike his hand upon his own heart, and
cry out, What have I done? Wherein have I contributed to that Reproach and
Scorn that has been thrown upon our Religion? We are sharp-sighted to espy the
slips of our Brethren, but blind to observe our own scandalour Falls. And as
the Rain that falls upon the Hills is discharged upon the Valleys, the Valleys
again empty themselves into the Rivers, the Rivers throw all into the Sea. Thus
are we discharging our selves, charging our Brethren, who with equal Zeal and
Passion, and perhaps with equal Justice and Reason, are retorting the same
Crimes upon us. In the mean time, we are mutually throwing Dirt in one another
Faces, tossing of Firebrands at one another Heads, and thereby setting all in
a Flame, that may ^nvolve us all, our Liberty and Churches in the sa^ne common
Desolation.

I cannot comfortably, yet know not how to forbear enlarging a while upon this
ungrateful Subject.

First, Let us bitterly Lament that any of the Precious Doctrines of the Gospel
have been so miserably abused, their Gracious Designs frustrated upon us, and
perverted by us.

For Instance: 1. What more endearing Truth than that of the Patience of God
waiting upon, and striving with Sinners to lead them to Repentance. Romans ii. 4.
And yet what Doctrine more impiously abused? God is long-suffering, and Men
will be long sinning; God waits, and they will find Work for his Patience. Thus
he gave Jez^bel space to repent and she repented not. Rev. ii. 21. He affords
Day after Day to repent in, and they turn them into Days to be repented of.
Like zealous Gamesters that have but an Inch of Candle left, and they will play
it out; and if the Light had la^ted longer, they would have drawn out their
Sports longer, and go to Bed in the Dark. Such are all impenitent Sinners, who
having a Day of Grace, an Hour of Mercy, a Moment of Life wherein to turn to
God, sport away those precious Hours and Moments not lent them for those Ends;
and if Life were prorogued a thousand Years, they would sin those thousand
Years; if their Days were Eternal, their Provocations would be Eternal. And
thus that Goodness of God which should mollify, hardens their Hearts; and they
will be worse, and therefore worse, because God is better. As if it were not
enough to be Evil, though God be Good; but they will be therefore Evil because
God is Good. But this Treatment of the Divine Patience has been foretold. 2
Pet. iii. 4. There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For sinc^ the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continu^ as they were from the beginning of the
creation: Where is the promise? A Promise indeed it is, a most Gracious one to
them that wait and prepare for his coming; but a Threatening, a most dreadful
Threatening to them that harden their Hearts by it; Impenitency turns a Promise
into a Threatening. But upon what Presumptions do they thus harden their Hearts?
Because all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. O
most perverse Gloss upon the Text of Divine Forbearance! for, ver. 9. The Lord
is not slack concerning his promise as some men count slackness, but is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.

2. And what more comfortable Doctrine than that of the Free Pardon of Sin, and
Justification through Faith in the Righteousness of Christ. Rom iii. 24. B^ing
justifi^d freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
We cannot mention this without bitter Tears, that Men will therefore freely
sin, because God will freely pardon. If his Grace abound, they will abound in
Ungraciousness. His Mercies are Great, and they will therefore provide great
Sins to employ and exercise his great Mercy. What a poisonous Heart must that
be that converts, or rather perverts so sweet a Doctrine into Mortal Poison?

3. Nor has it fared better with the Doctrine of the Perseverance of Saints,
which has not been cried down only by such as deny it, but Reproached by those
that own it. The Gospel would teach us to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling; because it is God that works in us to will, and to do of his own good
pleasure; Phil. ii. 12. Not to be slothful because God works, but to work more
diligently, because we have the Divine Assistance. The same Gospel would engage
us, 2 Pet. i. 5. To make our calling and election sure. To make it out that we
are effectually brought home to God, and from thence to infer our Election, and
not to delude our Souls with the Sophistry of Hell. If I be elected I shall be
saved, though I wallow in all manner of abominable Filthiness.

Secondly, Let us renew our Lamentations, that the Lives of Professors express
no more of the Power of the Truths and Precepts of that Gospel which they do
Profess. The Temper of Religion as described in the Scrip^are is Meekness,
Humility, Compassion, Beneficence, Charity, Heavenly-mindedness; but these are
so ill Copied out by them, that we may seek for Religion among those that are
Religious and not find it. And by this means Christ himself is represented
unlovely, undesirable, and the inward Enmity in the Hearts of Men is provoked,
exasperated and inflamed in Persecution.

And from hence it is that wicked Men think they have got sufficient Matter to
justify all their Revilings, their Blasphemies against our Savior and his
Doctrine, and think they do God Service, while they are endeavoring to root
out of the Earth, a Religion which is rendered Odious by the unsuitable
Conversations of those that seem to glory in it.

The Offenses that are given will not justify those that take them: There is a
Woe denounced against the World because of Offenses, and there is a Woe
denounced against those that give them. Matthew. xviii. 7. Woe be to the world
because of offenses, for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe unto them
by whom the offense comes. Thus they that take the Offense fall into Hell, and
Justice sends him thither that gave it.

II. Improvement by way of Exhortation.
I Must conclude with one word of Exhortation. To all you that Profess the
Doctrine of our God and Savior, the Doctrine which is according to godliness;
and yet have seen it lie gasping, bleeding, and ready to die. O pity a holy
Doctrine that suffers unworthy things, and a Savior that suffers in it: when
you lay in your Blood, the Divine pity that saw you wallowing there hopeless,
and helpless, Said unto you, even when you were in your blood, live! Ezekiel. xvi.
4, 5, 6. And have you no Compassion for a bleeding Gospel, for a bleeding
Jesus? 'Twas enough that he once suffered for you, let him not a second time be
Crucified, and Murdered by you! When the spirit of grace shall be poured out
that is promised, Zech. xii. 10. To make us look upon him that we have pierced;
there will be bitter mourning, as that for an onl^ son, for a first born, for
the untimely death of a good Josiah in the valley of Megiddo. Let us none of us
say, What is all this to us? Let them see to it who were guilty; Let J^das look
to it who betrayed and sold him: let Pilate look to that who condemned him: let
Herod look to that who buffeted and scourged him: let the bloody Soldier look
to that who pierced his Side with his Spear: But as for us we are Innocent, and
can wash our Hands in Innocence with Pilate, saying we are Innocent of the
blood of this Just Person! O wretched evasions of deceitful Hearts! We, even
we, this Professing Age, this Generation of Professors has Pierced, Crucified
the Lord Jesus. As it will be charged upon some at the great and dreadful day;
that the kindness they might have shown, and did not show to his Brethren, was
not shown to him; so will it be charged that the Dishonor, the Scandals, the
Reproaches they brought upon his Doctrine, his Truths, his Worship, was thrown
upon his Person.

I have heard of an aged Gentlewoman who having an only Son, who it seems had
found a Pistol in some secret place of the House, she presents it to his Breast
in pleasantry, but the Pistol fires and Shoots him to the Heart, when he had
only so much time and strength as to say, Ah Mother! You have slain your only
Son! Think with your selves; what amazement, what confusion, what consternation
seized her soul when the Hearts blood of a dutiful, of an only Son spun out
into her Face, and his dying Accents sounded in her Ears, and she found herself
Childless in one moment through her own rashness and folly!

Let us set before our Eyes the blessed Gospel of our dear Lord Jesus, wounded,
bleeding, dying by our careless Walkings, by our Animosities and Heats boiled
up into Hatred! Not only his seamless Coat, but his tender Heart rent in pieces
by our Divisions; together with the Triumphs of the Profane, who insult over
Religion, and say, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground; and now it is
fallen it shall rise up no more. Look seriously upon these things, and then
tell me, tell your own Souls; and let Conscience, an awakened, a wounded, a
reflecting Conscience tell you, with what Regret, with what self-Abhorrence,
you, we, all of us should resent these Indignities offered to the dear, and
precious concerns of our God and Savior.

I am assured, and rejoice in that Assurance that there is a sound part amongst
the Professors of the Gospel, which has not drawn this Condemnation upon their
own Heads. There was one Joseph amongst the guilty Sanhedrim who had not
consented to their unjust Sentence, Luke xxiii. 51. There are holy souls that
Mourn in secret for all the Abominations that be done in the midst of us, Ezekiel.
ix. 4. And there may be others whose Hearts God has touched with Sorrow for the
sins of others, and Repentance for their own: now for the sake of these, and
such others, as the Convincing Grace of God shall reach, I will

1. Give some Counsel and Advice. 2. Offer some Motives to give an edge to that
Advice.
I. Counsel and Advice.
MY Advice will be reduced to these two Heads.

1. What we must Avoid, if we sincerely design, or ever hope to Recover the
Credit of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

2. What we must do, if we really design to contribute any thing to the healing
of our wounded Gospel.

. 1. What we must Avoid, if we sincerely design, or ever hope to Recover the
Credit of the Doctrine of the Gospel?

(1.) The first Prescription must be this, that we watch against the breakings
out of ungovernable Passions. A Passionate Man's Heart is like Gunpowder; it
may lie quiet and still at present, but the least spark of a Provocation sets
it all in a blaze: or like the Humors in the Body, which are calm and sedate,
but they only wait an occasion to set them into a Ferment. If once we lay the
Reins upon the Necks of our Passion, the inferior part runs away with the
superior; that is, the Beast rides the Man, runs away with him, perhaps throws
him, and breaks his Neck. In these Paroxysms, Reason and Religion are
dethroned, and a base Lust usurps the place.

He that will not keep a severe Hand upon, and over these unruly Passions lies
open to the Assaults and Practices of the Devil, Prove. xxv. 28. He that has no
Rule over his own spirit, is like a city that is broken down, and without
walls: when the Walls are demolished, the strength is gone, and we become an
easy Prey to our Enemy, and even tempt the Tempter to invade us. It Is
Meekness, Humility, Patience, that gives us and keeps us in Possession of our
own Souls, L^ke xxi. 19.

Now consider what mischief this Passion has done to Religion: our Differences
were but few till Passion multiplied them; inconsiderable till Passion
heightened and greatned them: we have no Controversies but might have been
fairly buried in Christ's Grave. He that could compromise the Differences
between a justly provoked God, and unjustly provoking Men, might be supposed
able to compose those between Brethren: but Pride and Passion have inflamed the
Reckonings, and who now is able to quench the Flame?

As others that behold our Passions will suspect all is not right with us, so
have we most Reason to suspect our selves; and to question whether ever the
Word of God has taken any saving hold of our Hearts, when it cannot govern the
intemperance of our Lips, Jam. i. xxvi. If any man seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongu^, that man's religion is vain. In vain, as to any
acceptance it finds with God; and in vain as to any satisfaction it can give
the Conscience: and thus the fiery Professor tempts all the world to judge
there is no Religion in him; and then to conclude, there is as little in
Religion. And this is it which affrights Aliens from the good ways of God; they
render Religion so unlovely, so uncomely, so little amiable, that Strangers
think it better to be as, and where they are, than to become Christians, some
of whom they see fitter for Bedlam, than the Church.

If we could learn to discern the Divine Providence, in Men's Provocations; and
that as the evil one has a hand in them, the righteous God has an overruling
hand in them too, it would serve to dash the Ferment of our most boiling
Passions, and teach us to say with the Psalmist, The Lord has ^idden him to
curse me. The sense, and fear of God vigorous upon our Hearts, would fortify
them against the sudden eruptions of these Distempers, Prove. xxiii. 17. My son,
be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long, and let not thy heart envy
sinners.

And in a word, It would abate our Passion, and the Pride that feeds it, did we
but calmly consider that our strongest Passions, are our greatest Impotencies,
and that whilst we indulge this last, we do but make work for Repentance. And
what a folly is it to give way to that which must cost us bitter Tears, and
Sorrow, before we can heal those Wounds which thereby we have given both our
own Consciences, and our Profession.

(2.) Let my next Advice be to avoid all Fraud, Falsehood, and Overreaching in
your Covenants, Contracts, and Dealings with your Neighbors. Every Christian,
besides that business he has with his God, and his own Soul, has Affairs in
this World, on this side Eternal Life. In all these, let your Heart be true to
God, your Tongue true to your Heart, and Heart and Tongue both true to your
Neighbors, Ephesians. iv. 25. Wherefore putting away all lying, speak every man the
truth with his neighbor; for we are all members one of another. We are all
Members either in the First Adam, or in the Second: If in the First Adam only,
yet why should we defraud our own Flesh and Blood? If in the Second, why should
we wrong them that are with us, the same spirit? 1 Cor. vi. 17.

The Psalmist, Psalm. xv. 1. Propounds this great Question, and propounds it to
God himself, who alone could answer it, Lord who shall abide in thy Tabernacle?
And who shall dwell in thy holy hill? Who is that blessed Man, whom thou will
admit to Communion with thy blessed self in Grace and Glory? And amongst other
Characters that describe this person: this is one, verse 2. He that walks
uprightly, and works righteousness, that speaks the truth in his heart. And
verse 4. He that swears to his own heart and changes not. Let others go
beyond him in Temporals, he will be true to his own Soul, to his God, to his
Neighbor, and the Credit of his Religion. It Is a great contradiction to
Religion to use falsehood in our Commerces, and Converses. Our God is the God of
Truth, his Word is the Scripture of Truth. In all that Gospel which we Preach,
there is not one Proposition but what is truth; and the Apostle, 2 Cor. i. 18,
19. Purges himself of all Levity, and Inconstancy in his Promises, by the
Truth of that Gospel which he Preached. As God is true our word toward you was
not Yea, and Nay; It was not Yea in Promising, and Nay, in Performing; for
(says he) the son of God Jesus Christ was not Yea and Nay. Every Yea of Christ
is Yea; and every Nay of Christ is Nay: Fidelity therefore is the Image of God,
and bears some strokes of his veracity; as unfaithfulness bears the Image of
the Devil, who is a liar and the father of it: and when he sp^aks a lie, he
speaks of his own, John viii. 44. And if at any time he speaks a Truth, it is
not of his own, but either by an overruling power extorted from him, or from
some wicked end of his own used by him.

(3.) Let us be jealous of, and watchful over our selves in those things that
lie near the Flesh: our Corruptions are Tinder, one spark struck into them sets
all in a flame: whatever things therefore are most suitable to those
Corruptions must be carefully inspected. Let us watch over our selves, watch
against the Tempter, and his temptations, and watch as those that watch for
their Souls; and then Pray that God would watch over us and all our watchings,
or else we wake, and watch in vain.

The things that lie nearest our Flesh are Food and Raiment; which are apt to
awaken and draw out sleeping Corruption. When we read of some, Jude 12. That
feed themselves without fear: surely they know not what an Enemy they have that
lies in wait to surprise them. Holy Fear would suggest these Thoughts. How know
I but the Tempter has laid a baited Snare for me at my Table? And when he is
Adorning the Body; how know I but I may be now preparing a Bait for another
Soul? Let every Man study his own weak point; there it is the Devil will be
sure to Aslault thee. It was a dreadful Prophetic Curse which the Psalmist
utters against some, Psalm. lxix. 22. Let their table be made a snare; and let
that which should be for their good, be to their hurt. How sad is it to find
Death, in the Cup or Dish, where he seeks his Life? And yet how many Eat and
drink their own damnation, perhaps at Christ's Table, and at their own! The
Wise Man, or rather the Wise God has given us this Counsel, Prove. xxiii 2. When
thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is set before thee;
and put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite. And these
Thoughts would mortify the cravings of the Flesh.

1. That after all our studious Catering, and Carving for the Flesh, yet we
must die, and are now dying; whilst we are Eating and Drinking; perhaps whilst
Sinning, we are still dying: the means of Life will not always prove effectual
to preserve Life. They that fed upon Angels Food yet dyed, John vi. 19. Meat
for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God will (...) ^oth it and them, 1
Cor. vi. 13.

2. It would greatly abate the Luxury of the Table, to consider that the Rich
Glutton, who fared sumptuously every day, Luke xvi. 19. was Dead, Buried, and
in Hell, where he could not by all his eloquent begging prevail for one drop of
Water to cool his Tongue, scorched with those Flames.

3. And it might moderate our craving wandering Appetite, to consider that
Nature is content with little, and Grace with less: and whatever is beyond
these comes of evil, and leads to e^il.

4. And that if we cannot deny our selves in the lesser Instances, how should
we deny our selves in those more difficult Trials which Providence may possibly
call us to? How shall we be able to want Necessaries, when we cannot deny these
Extravagancies?

5. And what a Reproach is it to a Professor, to feel this raging Hunger for
the Meat that perishes, when there is such a languishing affection for that
which endures to eternal Lif^. What a shame that we bring sharper Stomachs to
our own Tables, than to the Lord's.

. 2. I have given you the Advice of God, what you must Avoid if you would not
Defile. It remains now that I lay down those Directions which you must observe,
If you will Adorn the Doctrine of our God and Savior in All things.

(1.) And first severely Govern your selves, and the whole Tenor of your
Conversations, by that Royal Law, Matthew. vii. 12. All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. A Law which Christ has transcribed out of the Code of Nature
into his own. A Law which once grew upon the stock of Morality, but he has
transplanted and inoculated into the Gospel. Called therefore by the Apostle
St. James ii. 8. (...). If ye fulfill the royal law according to the Scripture,
thou shall love thy neigh^our as thy self, ye do well. A Law that carries the
fairest Stamp and Signature both of the Divine Nature and Authority. A Law that
shines with its own Light into the Soul of Man. No Man would Defraud, Oppress,
Persecute another, if he would give his Conscience leave to put this Question
to him, Would I be thus treated, thus dealt with my self? A due Attendance to
this Rule, would not only teach us to do Justice, but to show Mercy to Others,
upon this single consideration, I expect Justice, and may need Mercy and Pity
from others: for certainly I am obliged to give what I expect; and to show what
I my self may need. And nothing would more reclaim Men from their Unchristian,
their Antichristian Barbarities, than to put our selves into the same
Condition, and Case; to suppose our selves chained in the same Prison,
laboring under the same pressures, with others of our Brethren.

1. Whatever Mercy, Pity, Charity we may possibly need in our Extremity, let us
learn to show it to others in theirs. If we shut up our Bowels of Compassion,
what may we expect but that God will shut up his; and that will restrain the
Bowels of Compassion of all the World to us: as the first Cause either draws
nigh to us, or recedes from; so will the second, either assist or forsake us.
This Reason the Apostle offers, Heb. xiii. 3. why we should Remember these that
are in bonds, and sympathize with them, as if we were bound with them; and them
that suffer affliction, as being your selves also in the body. Suppose we are
not actually bound, yet we are in the body, and may be so. We are not Sick as
others are, yet we are in the body, and may be so; and shall then need those
Charitable Visits, that Relief, which we now forget or neglect to Administer.
Or perhaps we now abound, dwell at ease, yet still we are in the body, and may
soon in that very Kind need Compassion.

And this may seasonably lead us into the Admiration of the Pity, Compassion,
and Bounty of our gracious God; who being out of the reach of our Necessities,
yet can exercise Bowels of tender Mercy to us poor sinning and suffering Worms;
and into the Admiration of the pities of Christ, who now upon the Throne, and
out of the way of those Afflictions and Temptations wherewith we are
encompassed, yet has not left the Humane Nature behind him, but taken it with
him into Heaven, that he might therein compassionate his distressed Members,
whom he is not ashamed to call his brethren, Phil ii. 11.

2. This ought to teach us to do that Justice to others which we expect others
should do to us: for with what judgment we judge, we shall be judged, Matthew.
vii. 2. This one thing would marvellously Adorn the Gospel, when we can
Convince all the World that our Religion has made us better Men, when it made
us Christians, and that we brought along with us Morality, when we espoused and
came over to Christianity.

(2.) Secondly, Maintain a heavenly Mind, and Conversation. Let all see that
though your Root be in Heaven, yet you bring forth Fruit here on Earth. It has
reflected highly upon our Profession, that we believe well, but live ill: we
have got a Systeme of heavenly Truths in our Mouths, but we disparage them with
Earthly Lives. A heavenly Mind, a heavenly Frame of Heart* would support a
heavenly Conversation; now because this is that great thing that must recover
the Credit, and Honor of the Gospel, I will in few words show you what it is.

1. A heavenly Mind has unmoveably fixed and pitched upon Heaven for its great
and commanding end; this is his Fathers House whither he is always Traveling:
it is the Port for which he is Bound. And because there may be a mistake in the
Notion of Heaven, as that it may be only a place of Ease, a state of Rest from
the Troubles of this Life, he is satisfied that the enjoyment of God in that
Place and State makes the real Heaven, Psalm. lxxiii. 25. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee?

2. The heavenly Mind, and Heart, is always vigorously pursuing that great
Design; and because there are many impertinent avocations that would seduce or
steal his Heart from his end; he shakes them off with indignation, as those
that would divert him in that Holy pursuit; nor does he so much consider how
much of his Race he has run, as he ties up himself to run the rest, Phil. iii.
14. Forgetting the things that are behind, and looking unto those that are
before, we press toward the mark for the prize of our high calling in Christ
Jesus.

3. The heavenly Mind, endeavors especially to maintain a heavenly Temper and
frame of Heart; which is the life of all heavenly pursuits. The Habits of Grace
must be reduced into Act and Exercise; and Grace must be laid out to its
highest and noblest end, as the best Instrument must be in Tune before the
skilful Hand can make Melody upon it; so must the Heart be kept in Frame
suitable to the services which are proper to it.

4. A heavenly Mind must Conform it self to, and Exercise it self in those
employments here below, which are the proper Work of Heaven: always recovering
it self when it deviates from its main end, with this Question: My soul! How do
the Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect spend their bl^ssed
Eternity above? They are surely Praising, Blessing, Admiring, Adoring, Loving,
and Serving their God, their Redeemer, their Sanctifier, and Comforter; and why
do not we Conform our selves to their Pattern? The great Law of Heaven governs
them, and every Thought and Motion of their Wills: why do we not then more
fervently Pray, that we may do the Will of God on Earth as *it is done in Heaven?
With the same cheerfulness and perseverance? And though we come short of their
Perfect Love, Praise, and Service, yet let us be Practicing, and tuning our
Hearts* and Harps, for those Hallelujahs. The Work of Eternity must be begun in
time upon us, and done in time by us; nor is there a wilder Fancy that can
delude the vain Heart of Man, than to imagine we shall leap at once from a Life
of murmuring and repining here, to a State of Praising and Glorifying God for
ever.

We cannot doubt but such a Life as this would put a New Face upon the
Christian Religion, and convince the most obstinate, that we suppose
Everlasting Life and Glory, to be the most Real, Certain, and Excellent Thing,
when we can live at the Holy, Heavenly, and Cheerful Rate, which supposes it to
be all these; That we do firmly believe, that whatever are the inconveniences
of our Pilgrimage, a Portion in Heaven will answer them, and repay us. And that
therefore we look upon our selves as dwelling in Tents and Tabernacles, without
any fixed City here below, as those Holy Patriarchs once did; Heb. xi. 9. and
dare not drive our Stakes too deep into the Earth, because we look long, and
pray every Day to be called away home to our own Country.

(3.) Let us study and follow after the things that make for Peace; our God is
the God of Peace; our Redeemer, the Prince of Peace; the Holy Ghost, is the
Spirit of Peace; the Gospel is a Doctrine of Peace, which revealed peace on
earth, and good will toward men. Luke ii. 14. But to our shame, and the shame
of our Profession, we have represented it as a Civil War. We say we own one
God, one Lord Jesus Christ, one holy Spirit, and one hope of salvation; why
then do we not keep the unity of spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. iv. 3, 4,
5. Peace is that which every one will commend, but very few will entertain. If
we regard the Orations of Men, one would think it the most precious and
desirable thing in the World; but if we observe their Divisions. one would
conclude it the most Pernicious and Dangerous. All Differences in Opinion do
not infer a Difference in Religion, nor all Local Separation a Schism; but when
the smallest Differences are managed by proud and froward Spirits, and they
influenced by secular Interests, it is a wonder to see what Flames a little
Spark kindles. The sum is this; Perhaps we cannot syncretize in the Minutes of
Religion, nor express the finer Strokes of Uniformity in our Sentiments; yet
let us Religiously keep up a Spirit of Love to Peace and Truth. Christ has
declared Love to be the Livery of his Disciples, by which they are known to be
His, Joh. xiii. 35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another. As it was the Livery he enjoined them whilst living,
so was it his Legacy bequeathed to them when dying, John xiv. 27. Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you.

(4.) Let us all most fervently cry unto God that his Holy Spirit may be poured
out upon the Professors of Religion, and that it may accompany the Preaching of
the Gospel; then will the Doctrine of God our Savior shine gloriously when the
Spirit shall be its Light; then will it Conquer and Triumph, when the Spirit
shall second it with his Might. This is that which subdues the Pride, the
Passions, the unruly Lusts of Men, and brings down whatever exalts it self
against the Truth in subjection to God. This influence attending the Word shall
make Persecutors become Preachers; Scoffers of Religion become Admirers of what
they have Scorned, and Blasphemers to justify that Name which they have
Reproached; this will give the Doctrine of the Gospel a Throne in their Hearts
who have trampled it under their sordid Feet. And this St. Paul well understood
when he so earnestly entreats the Churches Prayers, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 1. Brethren,
pray for us that the word of the Lord may have free course and be glorified.
When the Light shall scatter the Darkness that like a thick Cloud sits upon
Men's Minds; when the Power of it shall bear down that Opposition that rages in
their Hearts; when it shall break through all Impediments and make its way to
the Conscience, then will the Doctrine of our God and Savior Adorn it self,
and not need any other Ornaments we can put upon it.

I profess my self unwilling to dismiss this Argument, till it has had its
proper Effects upon the Hearts and Consciences of the Readers; but I must draw
to a Conclusion, which I will do with a few Considerations, humbly praying that
the Great Lord and Master of the Assemblies would drive every Nail to the Head,
and so fasten it in the Heart, that the Power and Policy of the Devil may never
draw it out.

1. Consideration. What great Reason have we to Adorn the Doctrine of our God
and Savior, when we have been the Cause, or given the Occasion to its
Dishonor. Ju^tice demands that we should heal it, because we have wounded it.
I persuade my self that there are many under the Rebukes of their own Hearts,
that the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ has been evil spoken of through their
irregular Conversations; I hope too that many have repented, and that God has
pardoned the Iniquity of their Sin; but yet God will bear a Testimony against
their careless and common Behavior, though he has pardoned the Sin. Thus he
dealt with David, 2 Samuel xii. 13, 14. The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall
not die. Nevertheless because by this d^ed thou have given great occasion to
the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; the Child that is born unto thee shall
die. In what way the Jealous God will bear Witness against the present
Generation of Professors, for the Scandals they have given, I presume not to
determine; most certain it is, he will not put up the Affront without
Repentance and Reformation. The safest Course for every one of us is, to
confess our Sins, to take Shame to our selves, to give Glory to God, and not to
blush at our Repentance, when the only thing should make us blush, is our Sins.

2. Consideration. Adorning the Gospel by a suitable Conversation, will prove
the best expedient to secure its Presence with us. If we think it not worth the
Adorning, we may question, whether God will think it worth his Continuing and
Protecting. 'Twas disingenuous in Absalom, to spurn his poor Sister out of
doors, when he had defiled her; but the Justice of God will be manifest, if he
removes our Gospel which we have basely prostituted. It Is his own threatening to
the Church of Eph^sus, Rev. ii. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen and
repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick
out of its place, except thou repent. A Father takes away the Childrens Bread,
when they crumble it in scorn upon the Ground; and if he indulges them Candle
to play, yet will not allow them it to fight and quarrel.

Let us consult the Histories of Ancient Times, they will inform us, that
Religion was never rooted out by Persecution, till it had been made cheap by
the Profanation of Professors. The Primitive Christians proved this Truth, that
Religion flourisht fairer, and grew faster when it was watered with the Blood
of the Martyrs. Pro^perity, and that Looseness which commonly attends it, was
the Poison poured out into the Church. The frequent mowing down of Christ's
Field, makes it come up the thicker, and greener. Plures efficimur quoties
metimur, was Tertullians Observation. Debauching Prosperity has been the
greatest Enemy that ever Religion had in the World; Isa. v. 4. when God looked,
as after all his Cost and Pains he might well look, that his Vineyard should
bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes: Go to now (says he) I Will
tell you what I will do to my vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and
it shall be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden
down, and I will lay it waste.

The Politics of Earth are vastly different from those of Heaven, both in the
Securing and the Adorning Religion. The Methods of humane Wisdom to secure
Religion, proceed thus. They hedge it about with strict Laws and severe
Penalties, which sometimes are as cruel as the Crimes they would restrain are
Enormous; and whilst by these Artifices they would entail Religion upon
Posterity, corruption of Doctrine, defiling of Worship, and looseness of Manners
provokes God to cut off the Entail. And thus when we have lost the Power of
Religion upon our Hearts, and the Purity of it in our Lives, our Care is to
supply the Defect, by trimming and tricking it up with gaudy ceremonial
Ornaments. How much more beautiful were our first Parents in their Original
Nakedness, than when the Sense of Sin and Shame taught them to patch together a
few Fig Leaves to cover it; but Religion is its own Strength, its own Beauty.
It Is its own Ornament and Muniment; nothing adorns, nothing secures Religion,
but Religion. Let us therefore show an Exemplary Conversation, and this will
Beautify, this will Fortify it better than all our politic Contrivances, and
fruitful Inventions.

It was a Glorious Promise which God gave to the Gospel Church, under the
Notion of Jerusalem; Zech. ii. 4, 5. Jerusalem shall be inhabited as Towns
without walls and bulwarks. For I, says the Lord, will be a wall of fire round
about her, and will be the glory in the midst of her. Holiness engages God's
special Presence, and that Presence is our Protection. Secure God's Glory in
the Center, and we shall have a Wall of Fire in the Circumference. A parallel
Promise we have, Isa. iv. 5. Upon all the Glory, there shall be a Defense. If
therefore we are careless of that Glory, let us make what Walls we can, our
Walls of Water and of Wood will deceive us; nothing but such a Holiness as will
engage the Divine Presence and Protection can secure us, and the Gospel of God
our Savior unto us.

3. Cansideration. Nothing but a holy exemplary Conversation can possibly
propagate the Gospel abroad; our Lives speak louder than our Words; and we may
with more ease live Men over, than dispute them over to Christ. Let us be never
so Zealous in our Arguings, they will readily retort it upon us; Why do you
persuade to go to Zion, when you your selves are running to Babylon? In vain
did we plead with others to Turn, and look toward Heaven, if we are treading
the broad way that leads toward Hell. Do we then, indeed, wish well to the
Kingdom of Christ? Should we rejoice to see the heathen given him for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possessions? First,
remove the stumbling Blocks we have laid in the way of their Conversion, then
win them over by an Heavenly, Holy, Sober, Righteous Conversation; speak so
that Men may see that what you speak you believe to be Truth.

There were more brought in and converted in the first Twenty Years of the
^eformation, than in the last Century; and of our few Modern Converts it is to
be feared some of them need Conversion.

This was the Glory of the early Days of Christianity, Act. 2. 46. They
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to
house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God,
-- And the Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved. And the same
Success the Gospel had upon the same reason, Act. ix. 31. Then had the Churches
rest, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and the comforts
of the Holy Ghost were multiplied.

4. Consideration. The Adorning of the Gospel by a holy practical Conversation,
would contribute much to the healing of our present deplorable Divisions, our
scandalous Separations, and that Spirit of frowardness and perverseness which
has possessed this present Generation.

The Differences amongst us are not so great as are imagined, nor yet so small
as not to be lamented; Wisdom, Humility, and a temper of Moderation, might have
managed as great Matters as these came to, without any notable Scandal; but a
Spirit of Pride, Hatred, uncharitable Censoriousness, has inflamed these little
things to a prodigious height: Now the process was thus.

Some Professors had given Offense by their remiss, or perhaps some irregular
Walking, there began the Offense; first at the Person, then at the Profession.
The Disgust at one grew up to a Disgust against all of the same Denomination;
from an Ossence at the Persons, it grew up into a Distaste of their Worship,
and Administrations, and when this dividing Zeal had usurpt the Title of Divine
Fervor, then Heaven and Earth, Church and State, must be involved in
unquenchable Flames. This was therefore the generous Spirit of the Apostle, 2
Cor. xi. 12. What I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them
which desire occasion, that wherein they glory, they may be found even as we.

But I must shut up this Discourse, which a sincere desire to restore our Holy
Religion to its due Honor and Repute, has made to grow under my hands, to a
bulk far greater than at first designed.

Give me leave to reassume my Exhortation; I beseech you Brethren by the
Mercies of God, and the Bowels of our Lord and Savior, that you would consider
and pity the sad Case of his blessed Gospel, which has been wounded either by
our hands, or through our sides; and make it your great Business to Adorn it in
All things. I deny not but though you should walk like Angels, there are a
Generation of Men would reproach you as Devils; but yet there are many Curable
Souls, whose Reconciliation to the Ways of God, wants nothing, waits for
nothing so much, as that you should show them the way to Heaven by your
Heavenly Example: And that our Endeavors may be successful, let us all join
with the Prophet in his Pious Prayer, Hab. iii. 2. O Lord I have heard thy
speech and was afraid: O Lord revive thy work in the midst of the years, in the
midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy,

Amen.
FINIS.

