ANTI-SOZZO, SIVE Sherlocismus Eneyvatus: IN VINDICATION OF SOME Great TRUTHS
Opposed, AND OPPOSITION TO SOME Great ERRORS Maintained BY Mr. WILLIAM SHERLOCK.

1 Cor. 16. 22. If any Man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder at the Sign of the Peacock in the Poultry
near Cornhill, and in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet, 1676.

The PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
SInce the Great Tyrant Custom, has made every one that shall dare to Write, a
Debtor to every one that shall please to Read, and obliged him under no less
penalty than the forfeiture of his Readers Candor, and falling foul upon his
severe displeasure, (...) render a Reason of his Scripturiency; that I may not
seem to stem the violent Current of this inveterate and prevailing Humor, by a
sullen moroseness, I shall suffer my self silently to be carried down with the
stream, so far as to give thee this short Account of those Motives which won me
over to this Undertaking.

In the Printed Catalogue of Books, 1674. I met with One, wearing the glorious
Superscription of A Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and our
Union and Communion with him: By W. S. And I did seriously rejoice, to see
those who are Adorned with the Honorable Name of Ministers of the Gospel, so
profitably employ those Hours which they borrow from Public Service, as to
travel in so necessary a Subject. Now as this was the only Reason of my first
Ambition to be found amongst his Readers; so perhaps I am not the first that
has been decoyed by a specious glittering Title, to place out precious Time
upon Disappointments; for I must freely confess, how ashamed I was of my
ill-spent pains, when I found pro Thesauro, Carbones; not many Barley-Corns,
but not one Jewel in all that Dunghill.

I was willing at first to suspect, that happily through some Oversight, either
in the Collator, or Binder, a wrong Title Page had been praefixt to the Book;
so irreconcilable did the Enmity seem between them; but second thoughts
informed me, that the Title did not oblige the Book to Treat of the True
Knowledge of Christ, nor to acquaint us wherein our Union to, and Communion
with him, did really consist; for, provided, The Discourse was managed
concerning these things, though in Reproach of them, or in Opposition to them,
yet it was enough to justify its Harmony with, and make good whatever was
explicitly promised in The Bill of Fare.

But whatever my Apprehensions were about that, I found many difficulties to
remove, and great discouragements to get over, before I could persuade my self,
to give the Author the Contentment, or the World the Trouble, of this Answer.

The first and greatest that presented it self, was, from my own Inexperience
and want of skill, dexterously to handle the Polemical Saw: But yet I was
helped over that Block by a temptation, that softly whispered, I must never
hope for a more encouraging Piece to enter a Novice, or flesh a junior
Disputant. For though it be not the Privilege of every one, with the great
Hercules, to strangle Serpents in his Cradle, yet a Child may serve to kill
Flies, as well as the Mighty Domitian. But I was more daunted at that Huffing
Confidence, wherewith he Hectors his low-spirited Readers into Obsequiousness,
challenging the whole World, at all Weapons, from the Spanish Needle to the
long Pike and upwards; and yet amongst them all, I felt not the weight of
Goliah's Weavers Beam. His discourse indeed proceeds in Cavalcade, like the
Ceremonious Train of Bernice, (...), with glorious Pomp and Gallantry, but when
I had rallyed up so much Courage, as might make me once dare to look his
Arguments in the Face, truly I found nothing but a Giants skin stuffed with
straw, or the Guts of an old Warr-Saddle; such as might well affright any, but
would kill no living thing: Methought I saw how the poor terrified Frogs
trembled at the first Appearance of Jupiters Viceroy Log, but when they had
retrieved their scattered spirits, and came to examine the Reasons of their
Consternation, they soon made that the Object of their Scorn, which had been so
lately the Cause of their Terror. It minded me too of that little Policy of
the great Alexander, who, to impress the Dread of his Name and Arms upon the
Indians, formed such a Camp, that none but the widestradling Rhodian Colossus
could look over the Breast-works; and left such exalted Mangers behind him, as
would have sterved his own Bucephalus, such as must presume every Horse in the
Army to have been a Pegasus. But yet my poor Labors might well plead a Writ of
Ease, from the weakness of his Reasonings, which would hardly proselyte any,
but those who were half-curdled; nor infect any with that (...), but such who
were already in Latitudine Morbi: But I considered withal, that weak persons
are mortally strong when they encounter weaker constitutions, and there are not
many who (with Mithridates) carry Antidotes in their Complexion. This last Age
has given us plain demonstration, that Noise, Clamor and Confidence, with a
small sprinckling of Rhetoric, are Charms able to over-sett ductile and
sequacious Natures; and the Eagles complaint has taught us, that the Beetles
enmity ought not to be despised. But I was superseded a while by a more weighty
Consideration; That they who superintend Ecclesiastical Affairs, would
doubtless interpose, and bestow a deserved Trimming upon the Book, and make it
do Penance in its own sheets, which had so openly defiled its own Mother,
exposed her avowed Principles; but withal it was my Duty to consider, that Non
vacat exiguis rebus adesse -- Greatness and Smallness, are two Circumstances of
Beings, which render them less Visible: Thus we cannot take a view of the
World, because it is too Bulky; nor of an Atome, because it is too Minute an
Object for the sight: And possibly from one of these Accidents it was, that his
Book walks invisible, and (as under the Protection of Gyges his Ring) has
hitherto escaped the Cognizance of Authority.

Such were my Remora's; but now whether those Inducements which lay before me,
might outweigh these Discouragements, and be sufficient to turn the scale of
an aequipoiz'd Judgment; I must leave to the better judgment of the impartial
Reader.

And, (1) The Comprehensiveness of many of his Errors, called aloud for
Preservatives: I saw the Offices of Christ, so confounded, ravelled, and
mangled, that it was impossible to discern the Acts of the Prophetical, from
those of the Regal; and the proper Employment of either of them, from that of
the Sacerdotal; I saw the great and glorious Ends of the Death of Christ,
vacated and cashiered; I saw the Work of the Holy Spirit in Regeneration
scorned and denied: Now the Historian tells us, There were in uno Caesare december
Marii; the Ambition of ten such as Marius in One Caesar: And others tell us,
that Serpens cum Serpentem devorat, sit Draco; when a Serpent swallows a
Serpent, he becomes a Dragon: What then could we expect less than Legion from
the Teeming Womb of such Big-bellied Monsters? For though in point of Argument,
his Mountain is often delivered of a Mouse; yet in point of Error, his Mouse
always brings forth a Mountain.

(2) It was a Spur to my duller Temper, to Observe how he had raked all the
Kennels and common Sewers of Friendly Debates, Ecclesiastical Polities, (which,
with Martial Law, and Civil War, make up the Four great Soloecismes of this
last Age) and borrowed Auxiliaries from the Scavinger, to compose an Oleo, to
throw in the Faces of the Innocent; some of the particulars the Reader will
find wiped off by these Papers, and returned with that Correction and
Chastisement, which it became me to give them, though not with what they
deserved to Receive: but for fouling my fingers with them all, I must beg
Excuse; it had been a work no less irksome and tedious, than the cleansing of
Augaea's Stable, and no otherwise to be effected, than by Letting in the Thames
from Billings-gate through Buttolph-lane. Yet one Instance of the Many omitted
(and one is too much for a Taste) I shall here give the Reader, hoping it may
not turn his stomach against the Rest: Dr. Owen, Com. p. 177. has said: By the
Obedience of Christ, I intend the universal Conformity of the Lord Jesus Christ
(as he was or is in his being Mediator) to the whole Will of God, etc. Now this
Obedience of Christ, (N. B. as Mediator) may be considered two ways. 1. As to
the habitual Root and Fountain of it. 2. As to the Actual parts and Duties of
it. 1. The habitual Righteousness of Christ as Mediator, (N. B. p. 178.) in his
Humane Nature, was the absolute, complete, exact Conformity of the Soul of
Christ to the Will, Mind, or Law of God. 2. The Actual Obedience of Christ, was
his willing, cheerful, obediential Performance of every Thing, Duty or Command,
that God by virtue of any Law whereto we were subject, did require; and,
Moreover, to the Peculiar Law of the Mediator: Hereof there are two parts: 1.
That whatever was required of us, by the Law of Nature, etc. He did it all. 2.
There was the Peculiar Law of the Mediator, which respected himself Merely, and
contained all those Acts and Duties which are not for our Imitation: Thus far
the Doctor. But now what a world of wit has our Author shown upon this
Occasion, or rather no Occasion? Declaiming for four, five, or six pages
together, upon the Trite and Common Theme of his own Ignorance; page 298, 299,
300, 301, 302, 303. So that by the Law of Mediation (says he) He understands
whatever Christ was bound to do as our Mediator, whatever was proper to his
Mediatory Office; All this is not imputed to us, as though we had done it; I
hope we shall find something at last to be imputed to us; but there is nothing
left now, but (thirdly) that which concerns him in a Private Capacity, as a
Man, subject to the Law. Now had this Gentleman been pleased to have understood
the Doctor a little before he had pretended to Confute him, he might have seen,
that He supposes, 1. A general Law of the Mediator, whereby he gave Obedience
to the Law of Nature, etc. in our stead: 2. The peculiar Law of the Mediator,
which respected himself merely; to this he gave not Obedience in our stead: But
still, whatever Obedience he performed, 'twas as Mediator, though not according
to the peculiar Law of the Mediator: But alas, this would have spoiled a great
deal of excellent Wit, and dear Drollery, which no man, engaged in a Design of
Raillery and Scolding, would willingly lose for a World; especially when he was
practicing (like the great Balsac, in some of his Letters,) to make an
Experiment, what The Height of forced Fancy can produce out of a barren and dry
Subject, or placing his Draining Engines to Recover the Boggs and Fenns upon
New Market Heath.

(3) His Subtle and Politic Method of venting Blasphemies, was that which
mainly pressed me to this Service: For it is now grown the solemn Mode of this
Tribe of Men, to vomit out the most opprobrious Language against the Lord and
his Christ, and then to wash their hands in Pilate's Innocence, by saying,
These are the Consequences of other Men's Opinions: And herein lies this Authors
singular Excellency, and proper Talent. Thus when some affirm, That God is a
Holy God, a Righteous Governor, a Just Judge, who will by no means clear the
Guilty, one that will not fail to recompense to every man according to his
Works; and yet in infinite Wisdom and Mercy has made Provision in the Death of
his Son, for securing the Glory, both of his Essential and Rectoral
Righteousness; that he may be (and appear to be) just, and the Iustifier of him
that Believes in Jesus. You shall now guess at the Lion by his Claw, and see
what nasty, dirty, filthy stuff, he can extract out of this Doctrine. Page 46.
The Justice of God has glutted it self with Revenge in the Death of Christ,
and so henceforward we may be sure he will be very kind, as a Revengefull man
is, when his Passion is over. And page 47. The sum of which is this; That God
is all Love and Patience, when he has taken his fill of Revenge, as others use
to say, the Devil is very good when he is pleased. Again, whereas the Church of
England, Art. 17. has expressed her Conceptions about Predestination, in these
words: Predestination to life is the everlasting Purpose of God, whereby,
before the Foundation of the World was laid, he has constantly decreed by his
Council, secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom he has
chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting
Salvation: Our Author is pleased to droll upon this Tremendous Mystery at this
pleasant Rate. Page 57. This falls hard upon those miserable Wretches, whose
ill Fortune it was, without any fault of theirs, to be left out of the Roll of
Election. Thus when one had ventured to say, by Warrant from Christ's own Mouth,
John 3. 14. That Christ was compared to the Brazen Serpent, etc. he comes in
with this snearing Droll, p. 115. Who can forbear being smitten with so lovely
a Person? In all which, and a hundred times more, we are bound to suppose, That
there is, Nihil bonis moribus contrarium quo minus cum publica. Utilitate
Imprimatur. Now if no Reverence of the Majesty of God, no Regard to the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, no Respect to the Harmonious Confessions of
Faith of All Protestant Churches, could oblige his Pen to observe a due
Temperament, yet methinks, Civility to that Church whereof He is a Member,
which has not been Uncivil to him, and may exercise more kindness to to him,
might have commanded more becoming Language, about those things wherein she has
declared her Judgment: And I will not conceal it, This was one thing that
quickened me to undertake this Province; when I saw how readily some men could
snatch the Pen to under-write, what with the same Hand, and Pen, and Breath,
they intended to Confute; or if not to Confute, yet however to Deride. Upon a
serious Reflection on these things, Remembering (somewhere) a Passage of Austin,
That he would have every man that can hold a Pen, write against Pelagius, that
sworn Enemy to the Free, Discriminating and Effectual Grace of God; and
Remembering also the Command of the Apostle Jude, v. 3. To contend earnestly for
the Faith once delivered to the Saints; I thought we had as good a License to
plead for Christ, and his Truth, here at the Footstool, who pleads for us,
according to his Truth, upon the Throne; as any man can pretend to plead
against them. And therefore to deal Freely with my Reader, I judged it my Duty,
rather to lament than imitate that Deep and Dead Silence of those who are
equally concerned with, and better qualified for the Work, than my self; to
give some Check to this growing Petulancy, and saucy Humor, of daily
encroaching Profaneness: A poor Man came once to a Learned Physician for
Advice; but first he would know, Whether it was safe to take Physic in
Dogdayes? His Physician replied no more but this: If it be lawful to be sick,
it is lawful to be well at any time of the Year. I shall apply it no further
than this: If this Author be qualified to Oppose, every true Christian is
qualified to Defend the Gospel of Jesus Christ: For the Dispute is not now
about Decency and Order, about Fringes and Philacteries, about the tything of
Mint, Anise, or Cummine; nor about a Pin or Peg in the Superstructure of the
Churches Polity; nor about the three Innocent Ceremonies; but about The
Influence of the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death
upon our Acceptance with God; about the Interest of the Blessed Spirit in the
glorious Work of the New Creation; Whether Christ be a proper Priest or no?
Whether as a Priest he Offered himself as a proper Sacrifice to God or no?
Whether God and Man are Reconciled, and we Redeemed from the Curse of the Law
by the Blood of Jesus or no? Whether we are Justified, before the Just and Holy
God, by our own Righteousness, or by the Righteousness of a Mediator? And in a
word, Whether the Death of Christ be the proper and immediate Cause of any one
single Blessing, great or small, of the Covenant of Grace? In which, the
Concerns, all the Eternal Hopes of every Christian, are wrapped up; and wherein
that he may not mistake, and so Finally miscarry, as it is the unseigned Design
of these Papers, so it is the Earnest Prayer of

READER, Thy Servant in the Gospel of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, N. N.

CHAP. I. Containing an Answer to the First Chapter, concerning the Name
Christ, The Offices of Christ, etc.
IT was a Question stated by the Curious, Why Homer should begin his Iliads
with (...)? and the Answer had a spice of the same vanity, because (forsooth)
Anger is blind. Let none be so Hypercritical, as to enquire, Why our Author
commences his Discourse, with, ALL ERROR? nor any so hasty to Reply; Because
he intends to continue the Metaphor, and carry on the Humor proportionably to
the End; but hear him out, All ^rour has some Appearance of Truth; to which if
you shall add, and -- All Truth may have some Appearance of Error. You have
then his Syllabus Capitum; the Marrow and Contents of Five long Chapters, with
their Sections, Paragraphs, and goodly Periods spun out into Four hundred
thirty and two Pages. The whole dividing it self into these two general Heads,
Blanching of Heresy, and smutting of Truth.

The Gentleman Always took it for granted, that Christ and his Religion were
very well agreed, and he is still of the same Mind, that his Person is not at
Odds with his Gospel; but it seems there are some, who have made as
irreconcilable a difference betwixt the Religion of Christ's Person, and of his
Gospel, as between the Law and Grace, p. 3. It was no smaller a Name than that
of the great Socrates, who cursed the Man, whoever he was, that first
distinguished between Bonum Utile, and Honestum; and I must confess, I have no
small Pike against that Generation of Men, who have made Two Religions of one,
and then set them both together by the Ears; Whether there be any such on this
side Utopia, I shall not determine; but this I will; It Is highly expedient, nay
absolutely necessary, that some such there should be, for else what will become
of all that heavy Dinne, our Author has raised upon that one Supposition? and
with what a ruefull Clutter will the Superstructure fall upon the Head of the
Architect, who has reared it full five stories high, upon that single
Hypothesis? To prevent which fatal Inconvenience, I would humbly Advise the
Persons concerned in the Charge, to plead Guilty to the Indictment, (if they
may do it with a good Conscience) and not to be so uncivil and disingenuous as
to render an Exce^lent Author, Ridiculous: And yet if what he tells us be true,
That the Gospel of Christ be as severe a Dispensation as the Law, I see not
what Great Disparagement it can prove to the Religion of his Person and his
Gospel, to be at as great a Feud, as the Law and Grace. A mistake then there is
somewhere or other, which though we poor, dull Mort^ls could not discover, our
Authors piercing Eye had soon observed the ground of it, viz. That some men,
wherever they meet the word [ Christ] always understand by it the Person of
Christ, p. 4. That was the (...), it seems, the Spring of all this mischief;
And if they do not so understand, and misunderstand to boot, there is no way to
Deliver His Discourse, from two little, silly Scapes of Impertinency and
Superfluity; nor any warrant to justify the reviling of those Men, for
expounding, Faith in Christ, and Hope in Christ, of a fiducial Relyance and
Recumbency on Christ's Person, in contradistinction to Obedience to his Laws.
For the very truth is (as I shall acquaint my Reader privately betwixt him and
me,) Those Persons whom he reflects upon with so much s^ornfull Indignation, do
not in the least urge Faith in Christ, in opposition to Obedience; only they
judge, That an Evangelical Obedience to the Commands of the Gospel, must as
indispensibly follow Faith in Christ's Person, as it must necessarily precede
Eternal Life and Salvation, revealed, promised and purchased by Christ: It Is no
Question then with Them, Whether Obedience to the Gospel, shall have a Place; a
great Place; but what is the Proper place of that Obedience? But this I speak
only under the Rose, being loath to nip the blossoming hopes I have conceived
of his Abilities, in the Bud, or to Blemish so promising a Work in the
Frontispiece.

Our Author having once obliged us, by discovering the Origin of this Mistake,
is resolved to load us with a second obligation, by rectifying it. For which
purpose, though he has many ways to the Wood, yet the very best way of All is,
to Examine the various significations of this Name [ Christ] in Scripture.

First he assures us, that [ Christ] is Originally the Name of an Office. The
Name of an Office, and Originally the Name of an Office too! To which I on^y
whisper softly in his Ear; It Is neither the one nor the other; not the Name,
much less Originally the Name of an Office. The Hebrew word Messiah (to which
the Greek (...) exactly answers) denotes a Person Anoynt^d, and thereby set
apart for some special work or service. And I dare be judged by this Gentleman
himself, if it be not so: For in the same sentence, with the same breath
wherewith he had told us, that Christ is Originally the Name of an Office, he
immediately adds, which the Jews call the Messiah, or one Anointed by God. And
now sure the Controversy will be brought into a narrow compass: Whether He
whom the Jews call the Messiah, or one Anointed of God, be a Person or an
Office? that is, Whether a Person be a Person or no? but it is not for me to
determine so weighty a Point. And therefore the Gentleman himself, who is a
fair Disputer, and no imperious Dictator, shall give you a Reason why he
contradicts his own Assertion; wherein he is the rather to be believed, because
he speaks with so becoming a proof of credibility, that to confirm a Truth he
confutes himself: For (says he) under the Law, their Prophets, Priests, and
Kings, were invested in their several Offices by the Ceremony of Anointing them
with Oil. Not to mention what a profound Observation he has made, becoming his
Good Learning; nor how little need he had to Transcribe it from Volkelius, lib.
3. de ver a Relig. c. 2. p. 41. Propte^ea quod Olim, tum Sacerdotes, Vatesque,
tum Reges per Unctionis Religionem, ^tque Ceremoniam muneribus suis
initiabant^r. All Ordin^ry People would conclude, that Kings, Priests, and
Prophets, signify, not Offices in the Abstract, but Persons, very Persons,
real, errant Persons, as any are under the Sun, vested with their several and
respective Offices, in the Concr^te, as your systematical men love to speak.
And therefore if our Authors Reason reaches the Thing it pretends to evince;
Christ, the Messiah will not signify an Office, but a Person authorized by his
Office, for the discharge of those Employments, his Eternal Father had anointed
and appointed him unto.

But how shall we know whom or what the Jews called the Messiah? The very best
way that I know, is to single out those Places in the Old Testament, where
Messiah, or the Anointed one, is found, and let the Gentleman practice upon
them, with all the critical skill and cunning he is guilty of, and see how he
can wire-draw Office out of them, Ps. 2. 2. The Rulers take Counsel against the
Lord, and against his Anointed, (...): Against his Messiah, or against his
Christ: It would be harsh to Render it, against his Office. Whatever it was, it
is called Gods King, v. 6. and Gods Son, v. 7. and whether it was a Person or
an Office that will bear those Titles, I shall refer to his determination.
Dan. 9. 25. Messiah the Prince, (...): V. 26. The Messiah shall be cut off, but
not for himself; was it an Office that was cut off? though not for Himself? So
that this New Notion, dwindles away into a fine New-Nothing, which is a
thousand pities: It would doubtless have served his turn at many a dead lift in
the ensuing debates; however it was advisedly done, and upon mature
deliberation, that he favored us not with one single Text, to prove that
wherein the Scripture professes a deep silence.

It has been accounted very ominous to stumble at the Threshold, and whilst he
lays it down as a superliminary Maxim, That All Error has some, yet to
instance in One which has No, Appearance of Truth. But because our Author has
so court^ously discovered to us, the Ground of that dreadful mistake, That
Christ will save some whom his Gospel condemns; and as you know, One good Turn
deserves another, that we may not be behind hand in returns of Civility, I look
upon my self engaged in all the bonds of honesty and Ingenuity, to show him the
Ground of his gross Mistake; That Christ is Originally the Name of an Office.
The Man had seen or read somewhere, an Hebrew word (...) which is something
more a kin, to (...), than Chalk is to Cheese, or Milk to Mustard; and because
that word signifies Unctio, an Anointing, and so perhaps at two or three
removes, an Office, the Good Man dreamed, that Messiah must needs be of the
same import; Quod misere volumus, id facile credimus; and this might possibly
Trepan him into that critical Soloecisme; yet if I have not hit the Nail on the
head, he has the liberty to assign the True ground of his Mistake, and in the
mean time I shall live as well as I do.

But having given us such a Notable Specimen of his Charity, he is as willing
to improve this grateful Occasion to Bless us with his Admirable Divinity, and
to Illuminate our Understandings (as Dionysius the supposed Areopagite
expresses it) with a Beam of Darkness.

Two things he is resolved we shall be his Debtors for. First, to inform us of
the precise time of Christ's Anointing to his Offices. Secondly, of the Nature
of the Offices themselves.

(1) For the Time, he tells us, Jesus received the Divine Unction at his
Baptism, when the Spirit of God descended on him like a Dove. Well, seeing
'twas no sooner, I am glad it was no later; and if it will not be allowed from
his Birth, and Incarnation, it is some Comfort that it was before his Death, or
Crucifixion. But in good earnest, was not Jesus The Christ before then? I see,
All wise men are not of one mind. For those three of the East, Matthew. 2. 2.
came to seek and worship, One Born King of the Jews. And the Angels preached
other Doctrine to the plain Shepherds, Luke 2. 11. Unto you is Born this day,
in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ, the Lord; and v. 46. at
Twelve years of Age we find him engaged in his Fathers business; and we are
loath to censure, that he ran before he was sent, or acted before he had a Call,
or executed his work before he had a Commission, because we cannot tell (as
times go) what ill use some might make on it. But now, to give some Appearance
of Truth (though never so little) to this Error, we are turn*d over to Acts
10. 38. How God Anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with Power;
which proves indeed that he was Anointed, and that with the Holy Ghost, but not
the Time when he was Anointed, only we are Assured, that after the Baptism of
John it was openly Preached, and Published, v. 37. I have met with some of your
systematical Divines, that would have scorned to talk so crudely and loosely of
these matters; and they tell us, 1. That Christ was Anointed by the Holy Ghost
with an All-fulness of Gifts and Graces from his Incarnation, and that there
was no Moment, wherein Christ was, and yet was not anointed with the Oil of
gladness above his fellows. 2. That he was declaratively Anointed at his
Baptism, when the Spirit descended on him like a Dove; And therefore they can
grant, that Christ was then Anointed; according to that known Rule, Multa tunc
fieri dicuntur, quando facta esse manifestantur: Thus the Resurrection of
Christ, is said to be a fulfilling of the Psalmist, Thou art my Son this day
have I begotten thee, Act. 13. 33. when yet the same Apostle understood well
his own meaning* that Christ was then Declared to be the Son of God with power
by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 3, 4. But because our Authors
Mistake herein, seems to be more speculative and notional, to carry a more
innocent Aspect with it, than some others of his, which like blazing Comets,
dart their malignant Influences upon the very Vitals and Essentials of
Christianity, it may plead for a more gentle Treatment; and accordingly I shall
dismiss it without more severe. Animadversions than what it carries along with
it.

(2) He proceeds in the next place to inform us in the true Nature of Christ's
Offices, and that first in General, p. 5. His Consecration to the Mediatory
Function, Virtually contained all those Offices of the Prophet, Priest, and
King, which are not properly distinct Offices in Christ, but the several parts
and different Administrations of his Mediatory Kingdom. I shall take little
notice, what Poison may lurk under that fair word [ Virtually] it sounds
somewhat oddely, that Christ should be Actually consecrated to a* Mediatory
Function, and yet his Offices reside in him only Virtually; a Function in Act,
without an Office in Act, is ^ust like an Office in Act without a Function; I
know no difference, nor they that are wiser than I: Christ's Offices it seems
lay dormant in his Function, till time should serve for them to emerge into
Act; They were in Abeyance, that is, when he should ascend to Heaven, he should
then become a Priest; We know very well in what Shop this Tool was forged. Nor
shall I stay upon that Expression wherein he so much delights, of Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom, as if all the Offices of Christ were to be reduced to that
of the Regal Power; that which he plainly speaks out is, That the Offices of
King, Priest and Prophet, are not properly distinct Offices in Christ. It has
been the Interest and therefore the unwearied endeavor of the Socinians to
confound the Offices of Christ, which else they were well aware would confound
their Heterodoxies; so Volkelius, lib. 3. de vera Relig. cap. 37. de Sacerdotio
Christi. Iam ut de Pontificio Christi munere explicemus, primo loco
animadvertendum est, illud ab ejusdem officio Regio, si in rem ipsam mentem
intendas non multum differ. Now that we may speak of the Priestly Office of
Christ, we must in the first place observe, that it differs not much from his
Kingly Office, if we narrowly attend the Nature of the Thing: and his fellow
Crellius to the same purpose. Duo ista Munera, Regium nempe and Pontificium, in
sacris Literis aperte a se invicem disjuncta, and ut in Scholis loquuntur,
contradistincta, nuspiam cernas, sed potius alterum in altero quodammodo
comprehensum videas. Those two Offices, viz. the Kingly and the Sacerdotal, you
shall never observe in the Scriptures to be separated, or (as the School men
speak) contradistinguished, but rather the one included after a sort in the
other: And our Authors Notion is the very Pallas hammered out of their Brains;
the Falsehood whereof we shall endeavor to lay open in a few words. And, 1. The
Names which express the Offices of Christ, signify things properly distinct
amongst men, and yet these very Names, by which God knew we understand properly
distinct Offices, was he pleased to Use to express the Offices of Christ by:
They were not Names or Terms coined by the Holy Ghost, and then a signification
stamped upon them by Divine Authority, but they were first used in common
speech, and past current in the world; never any questioned but a Priest, a
Prophet, a King, were distinct Officers, and it were more than strange the
Spirit of God should translate the words to signify Religious matters, and
never give us the least intimation that the Significations of the words were
changed. 2. They were Properly distinct Persons who Typified our Lord Jesus
Christ in his Offices: Aaron was only a Priest, had a Priesthood in him
distinct from the Kingly and Prophetical Office; and it were really an
astonishing thing, that Aaron should be a real proper High Priest, and bear
that Office distinct from all others, to typifie him, who had the Office but in
an improper, and that a confused manner in himself; Nay those Persons in whom
two of these Offices did meet, yet kept the Offices in them distinct;
Melchizedek acted otherwise when he enacted Laws at Salem, than he did when he
stood besides the Altar; though both those Offices centered in his Person, yet
they remained really and truly distinct; 3. The special Acts of all these
Offices are properly distinct in Christ. As the Kings Crown, is really another
thing from the Bishops Mitre, the Scepter really distinct from the Censor; so
are Teaching, Governing, Sacrificing, Properly distinct things. As I cannot
imagine how to drag, foretelling things to come, into the Kingly Office; nor
conquering of Enemies, and trampling them under his feet, to the Prophetical
Office: so neither how to force offering up a Sacrifice to God upon an Altar,
to be an Act of either of the other two offices. 4. The Objects of these
Offices are distinct: For as the Kingly and Prophetical, have Men for their
Objects; Men are to be governed and instructed; so the Sacerdotal has God for
its Object. Sacrifices are for Men, but unto God. Heb. 5. 1. For every
High Priest taken from amongst men, is ordained for men, in things pertaining
to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices for sins. And we may admire
the wisdom of God in ordering matters with such exactness, in every punctilio,
that our Lord Jesus should so exactly and closely answer this description, that
no room for cavil might be left, nor any creep-hole for a witty evasion: He was
taken from amongst men, ordained for men, in things pertaining to God, he
offered Gifts and Sacrifices, and for sins too: And yet in all this we deny
not, but that the offices of Christ however really distinct, yet do all meet
together in one Person; Moses his Prophetical Office was really distinct from
his Regal Power, and yet both met in Moses his Person; and secondly we own,
that all these did meet in their general and common end, the salvation of all
Believers, yet there are next and special ends very distinct; enlightening the
mind, subduing the will, and reconciling us to God, do really differ in
themselves; and thirdly, we grant that it was the same God, who by one and the
same Call invested our Lord Jesus Christ in all his Offices, and as there was
no moment wherein he was Jesus, and not the Christ, A Savior, and yet not
authorized to be so; so we conceive, that there was no moment in which he was a
half, or two thirds of a Christ, and not a whole Christ; his Offices being
conferred upon him at the same time. Hebr. 5. 4, 5. No man takes this Honor
to himself but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Thus have I considered our Authors general Account of Christ's Offices; and
proceed now to what he informs us, concerning them in particular. And first let
us see what work he will make with Christ's Prophetical Office. His preaching
the Gospel, (which we commonly call his Prophetical Office) was the Exercise of
his Regal Power, in publishing his Laws. Which we commonly call? Yes indeed the
vulgar and common Herd of Divines, that are not emerged from under Systems, and
the prejudices they have contracted from gross Bodies of Divinity, may be
allowed to talk in the old Dialect; but the common trite road is much below the
gallantry of a rational Divine, who is manumitted from that drudgery; and
therefore let the Volge call Preaching an Act of the Prophetical Office, it is
now determined, and concluded for ever, that henceforward it be an act of the
Kingly Office: But stay; perhaps our Author wrongs this Vulgar Tribe: I confess
I am not sure but some of them may have spoken Nonsense, in one place or
another; but I am sure I have not read this Nonsense in any of their works,
That Preaching the Gospel, is called the Prophetical Office. They do indeed
call it the Exercise of that Office, or an Act of that Office, but should they
call it an Office, they would miscall it miserably; but if Preaching the
Gospel, be only commonly and not truly called ( an Act of) his Prophetical
Office; what may we then call it safely for the future,. and escape a chiding?
Why you may securely venture to call it the Exercise of his Regal Power. In
good Time! but how long shall this Protection be in force? Just till you come
to page 18. For there Preaching the Gospel is grown to be an Employment
belonging to the Prophetical Office again; he came to be our Prophet and our
Guide, to teach us by his Precepts and his Life. But his proof is most
admirable: 1. Because, the Gospel is called the Kingdom of Heaven: Nay, it is
often called the Kingdom of Heaven, which our Author thinks hugely
considerable; but if it were called so but once, it is enough to command our
Faith to what it asserts; but the strength of the consequence is that I most am
at a loss for. The Gospel is called the Kingdom of Heaven, Ergo, Preaching the
Gospel belongs to Christ's Kingly Office. That the state of the Gospel, or the
Church is called the Kingdom of Heaven, or a Heavenly kingdom, is out of
Question; That Christ is the Sovereign Lord and Ruler thereof, that his
Precepts are the Laws whereby he governs it, is as little questioned; but that
there is no proper distinct Employment for a Prophet in this state or Kingdom,
is flatly denied. Christ was not only a King to make Laws, but a Prophet to
declare, promulgate, and reveal those Laws. Nay, there is other work for Christ
to do besides making of Laws or promulgating of them; there are many choice
discoveries of Gods Grace and favor to Sinners, to be revealed; Reconciliation
and Atonement through the Sacrifice of Christ, were to be made, and to be made
known; and with what Engines he will hook these into the Regal Office, I cannot
Prophecy. The Doctrine of the Gospel may be considered, 1. As a Revelation or
discovery; and this is the work of Christ as a Teacher or Prophet, the great
Praeco, or public Officer of Heaven, who having been in the Bosom of the
Father from Eternity, came from thence to reveal Gods Will to us, Ioh. 1. 18.
2. It may be considered as powerfully yet sweetly prevailing over, and subduing
of our Hearts to that revealed Truth, and this indeed is the work of Christ as
a King; but this is a Notion for which our Author will give me little thanks;
for not being willing to allow any more power to Christ, than that of the
Evidence of Truth; and yet seeing a Necessity to assign some Employment or
other to Christ as a King, he thought it the safest course, to Allott it this
Task rather than none at all, and to make the Regal go shares with the
Prophetical office, rather than be quite cashiered, and shut out of Doors. His
next Proof is from John 18. 37. where (as our Author tells us) Christ tells
Pilate, that he was born to be a King, and the principal Exercise of his Kingly
power in this World, consists in bearing witness to the Truth. But they must
have other Bibles than we have, or however be well skilled in the New Device of
variae Lectiones, that can see any such matter there: Christ asserts himseif to
be a King, he was so, he was born so, but that he was born to be a King, he
tells not Pilate; all the strength of his Argument lies in a little obvious
piece of Knavery, joining the first words of the latter sentence, to the last
words of the former sentence, which are clearly distinguished by a full Period.
Nor does he tell Pilate or us, that the exercise, much less, that the principal
exercise, of his Kingly Power lay in bearing witness to the Truth, but that he
was born and came into the world to bear witness to the Truth; which great
Truth was, the Promises made to the Fathers, of sending the Messiah; Romans 15.
8. Jesus Christ a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God, to confirm
the Promises made to the Fathers. And indeed, according to those apprehensions
all Mankind have of Things, Witness-bearing has nothing in it peculiar to the
Royal Power; but when he raised the Dead, rebuked winds, and waves, and Devils,
fed Multitudes with a few loaves and fishes, these look like Acts of Regality;
so like, that the People were ready to come and take him by force to make him a
King, Ioh. 6. 15. upon that very occasion. And this he did even in This world,
though our Author would fain reserve that for Another. The short of the
Business lies here; Our Lord Jesus Christ, by his Resurrection, Ascension into
Heaven, and sitting down at the right hand of the Majesty on high, is visibly
exalted to more Dignity and Honor, he exercises his Regal power in a way more
glorious, and agreeable to his exalted state; yet was he truly a King from his
Incarnation, and all along in this world, and gave such Proofs of his Royal
greatness and Power, that the Devils had not Impudence enough to outface them.
And now to conclude all with this excellent Gloss upon the whole matter. It was
an Act of his Regal Power to conquer Error and Ignorance, to destroy the
Kingdom of Darkness, by the Brightness of his Appearing; to erect his Throne in
the Hearts and Consciences of Men. These Metaphors of conquering, destroying,
erecting a Throne, came in as luckily as the heart of man could wish, to prove
a Royal Power; for what man will now be so refractory but he will confess; and
so senseless and stupid but he may smell a Kingdom in the wind, when he hears
such language? but now if you strip these Metaphors to their bare skins, and
uncase them of all our Authors Bombast and Fustian, they shrink into a mere
declaration of Truth, leaving the matter to the umpirage of an habitually
prejudiced and prepossessed Will; and some think, here is no great Kingship in
all this; for all this is done by the Power and evidence of Truth; which argues
a Prophet teaching, an Orator pleading, or a Disputant arguing; but little of
a King commanding, conquering, and subduing the heart to himself, and there
erecting a Throne, in opposition to all the force that Satan and Hel^ can make
against him: We do freely own, that to conquer and destroy the Kingdom of
Darkness, to erect a Throne in the Hearts of Men, are proper Acts of Christ's
Kingly Office; but then there goes a little more to the business than the bare
Evidence of Truth; the Arm of a King must be revealed, as well as the Mouth of
a Prophet opened; a Power to deal with the enslaved and obstinate Will, as well
as a Light to shine into the darkened understanding; which Light yet requires
something of the Kingly energie, to render it savingly enlightening to the mind
and understanding. And now our Author has made the kingly Office to swallow up
the Prophetical, have but patience till he has made it ^at up the Priestly
Office too, and then ^e day is his own for ever.

Secondly, He comes to Attacque the Sacerdotal Office of Christ. He was (says
he) a Kingly Priest. Well! so he was, and so he might be, and yet though both
the Offices centered in his Person, they might be formally distinct in their
Acts, special Ends, and proper Objects; Nay, we will allow, that All his
Offices conspiring in the same general Ends, their Acts might have mutual
respect, and give reciprocal assistance each to other. And he could not have
chosen a fitter Instance than that of Melchizedek, who being King of Salem, and
Priest of the most high God, Heb. 7. yet would it savor of too gross Absurdity
to say, that when he offered sacrifice, or blessed Abraham, he appeared in the
Quality of a King, or when he enacted Civil Laws, he bore the Character of a
Priest; but our Authors Proofs are as Pertinent as his Doctrine True: His
Doctrine is, When he offered himself a Sacrifice for sin, he acted like a King,
p. 6. Really one would think he acted as like a Priest as we could reasonably
desire. For, 1. Here is a Sacerdotal Act: he offered. 2. A Sacrifice: Himself.
And, 3. This was for sin. And what of a King do we spell out of all this? The
truth is, there is nothing in all this, but a pitiful Socinian Iuggle, who
having resolved not to own Christ as a true and proper Priest at all, and yet
not daring to deny express phrases of Scripture, found out this Expedient, to
own the thing in words, and then to shuffle it off with a Metaphor. The Proof
of his Doctrine is of the same Leaven; Ioh. 10. 18. No man took his Life from
him; he had power to lay it down, and he had power to take it up again. Our
Author had told us, p. 2. of a crafty sort of Men in the World, that consider
nothing but the sound of words, and from thence form such uncouth Idaea's of
Religion as are fitted to the meanness of their understanding; and will tell us
further, p. 102. of some, who Interpret Scripture by the Sound and Clink of
Words and Phrases. And it seems the Contagion of this vanity, infected his own
intellectuals; he found the word Power in the Text, and he runs away with a
full cry, (...)! but the Mischief on it is, it is not (...), but (...), not a
Physical, but a Moral Power that Christ owns there; a Power which is common to
all his Offices, he had Power, or Commission to Preach; Power or Authority to
Rule and govern; Power or warrant from his Father to lay down his Life, for the
great End that was agreed on between them both, -- For he explains himself in
the same Verse; Not, this Strength, but This Commandment I received from my
Father. Nor yet is it denied, that Christ made use of his Kingly might in
laying down his Life, and taking it up again, all we plead for is, that the
Offices and their peculiar Acts may not be jumbled and confounded together.

Thirdly, Having dispatched out of the way the two great Eye-sores of the
Prophetical, and Priestly Office; he thought it not amiss to send the third
after them: And that to which we commonly appropriate the Name of Regal Power
(that Authority he is vested with to govern his Church, to send his Spirit, to
forgive sins, to dispense grace, and supernatural assistances, to answer
Prayers, and raise the dead, and judge the World,) All this is the reward of
his Death and Sufferings. I confess I wondre'd why he should make the Regal
Office of Christ so overtop all the rest; but I soon satisfied my self from
Volkelius, lib. 3. de vera Relig. p. 41. Maxim Regibus id habebatur honoris,
ut Christi, sive uncti appellarentur, ita ut cum Christum dici audis, Regem
imprimis dici intelligas. Kings had chiefly that Honor, that they should be
called Christ's, or Anointed ones, so that when you hear the Name Christ
mentioned, you must understand, that a King is especially intended. This I
confess quieted me; but why our Author should be so zealous, to set up a King
of his own making, and then all of the sudden to pluck him down again, to
enthrone and dethrone at pleasure, is at present to me unaccountable; for I
observe, he has removed these great Things from his Kingly Office, and placed
them upon another Foundation, viz. the reward of his death and sufferings. Now
take away Preaching the Gospel, from his Prophetical Office; subtract offering
himself a Sacrifice, from his Sacerdotal Office; and then Governing the Church,
raising the Dead, and judging the World, etc. from his Regal Office; and when
you have done, compute the clear Remainder, and I suppose at the foot of the
Account, you will have three great Ciphers, without one poor figure to give
them the least significancy or value. I know he will say; He does but only
place them upon other Bottomes, and so long as we find them, what is matter
where they are found. But then (say I) they will have but a praecarious station
in any other place, and he that removes them from their proper and true
grounds, can with a wet finger jostle them from that false Basis whereon, out
of mere good Nature, he had for a season set them. But to come closer home to
our Author: There are two small faults I charge this Discourse with; Confusion
and Falsehood: First, Here Is a great deal of Confusion; As your old dull
Philosophers use to tell us, that Cold did congregare Heterogenea, Unite things
that were of differing Names and Natures; so has our Author glazed over his
discourse with Ice, which has so united things of various Natures, that its
hard to find sure footing in his Expressions: Christ pardons sin upon one
Account, governs his Church, and raises the Dead upon another: The former he
does by his Sacrifice, the other by his almighty power. And yet some of these
things, in one respect, belong to one Office of Christ, and some of them to
another: he purchases Grace as a Priest, he dispenses and gives forth that
Grace as a King; he offers Sacrifice for sin as our High Priest; yet he applies
the pardon of sin to us, as a King: But, Secondly, I find as much Falsehood as
Confusion in these Expressions; and that, 1. In denying that these are truly
appropriated to Christ's kingly Office. For if Governing the Church, raising the
Dead, Judging the World, do not speak a king, never talk more of a Kingly
Office in Christ, but make that Metaphorical too, as you make the rest, and so
the Tree is cut up by the roots. 2. In that these are assigned only as the
Reward of his Death and Suf ferings. For we find Christ invested with an
Authority to execute, and actually executing these Powers before his Death,
saving in one or two particulars, where the Nature of the Thing did exclude the
perfect and complete exercise of them at that time. It may be worth the while
to run over the particulars. (1) For governing the Church; he gave Laws to it,
set up new Institutions of Worship for it; Baptism and the Lords Supper, to
continue to the end of the World; sent out his Apostles to preach the Gospel,
and we have good and sufficient warrant for it, under our Authors own hand,
just on the other side of the Leaf, That his preaching the Gospel, was the
exercise of his Regal Power and Authority in publishing his Laws. (2) For
sending his Spirit, that is, in an extraordinary way pouring out the gifts of
Miracles; it is true, the full and abundant effusion of these Gifts was reserved
for the day, when the Son of Man should be glorified: Yet it is clear beyond
Contradiction, that Christ had the Power, and delegated the Power too before
his death; The Gift of speaking with Tongues there was no need of, and Christ
never used to bestow extraordinary Gifts without an extraordinary and pressing
Reason; The Apostles were sent to their own Contrymen, and could dispatch
their Errand, and deliver their Message in their Vernacular and Mother Tongue,
Math. 10. 5. Go ye not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any of the
Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost Sheep of the
house of Israel: But as to other miraculous Operations of the Holy Spirit, he
had Authority to make it over to others, v. 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the
Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out Devils; Nay the Seventy Disciples had an
extraordinary power in their Commission, as it appears, Luke 10. 17. And the
Seventy returned again with joy, saying, Even the Devils are subject to us
through thy Name. That is, We produced thy warrant and authority, and the very
Devils could not resist it. (3) As to forgiveness of sins, there needs no other
proof that Christ had the power, than that he exercised it. Matthew. 9. 2. Son be
of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee. I know there are some who will allow
Christ a Power to forgive sins, even here on Earth; but then it is such an odd
kind of Forgiveness as never was heard of; Volkel. lib. 3. de vera Relig. cap.
21. Non diffitemur quidem eum (viz. Christum) cum in terris degerit,
divinissima potentia praeditum fuisse, quam ipse peccatorum in terra
condonandorum, id est, terrena ab hominibus supplicia, propulsandi potestatem
appellat. We deny not that Christ even when he was upon Earth, had a most
divine power, which he calls a Power to forgive sins, that is, to drive away
from men temporal and bodily punishments. A very liberal concession truly; to
cure a Fever or an Ague, must be pardon of sin, when these men's Necessities
require it should be so. (4) That Christ did dispense Grace and supernatural
assistances, at any time, we are glad to hear owned, and as sorry that they
vanish again into smoke, and nothing, when our Author is out of the good Mood;
but let them signify what he will, for once, he dispensed them before his
death, he conquered Error and Ignorance, destroyed the Kingdom of darkness by
the brightness of his Appearing, erected a Throne in the Hearts and Consciences
of men, by the power and evidence of Truth. And I suppose he will allow Christ
to do no more now he is risen from the dead. (5) That Christ raised the Dead,
needs no other Confirmation, than to call over the Instances of Lazarus, the
Widows Son of Naim, the daughter of Iairus; but whether he did it with, or
without Authority, I list not to dispute till I hear the Gentleman endeavor to
disprove it. (6) That he answered Prayers will need no proof; I think it would
puzzle the most froward Caviller to instance in one Case, wherever he denied
Mercy to any, that with Faith or Importunity craved it for themselves or
others: (7) That the power to judge the World, was committed to him, we have
his own words, Ioh. 5. 27. The Father has given him authority to execute
judgment, because he is the Son of Man. And the ground of this Power entrusted
with him, is not assigned because he had merited it by his death and
sufferings, but because he was the Son of Man. And though it be true, that the
General Judgment be yet to come, yet Christ was furnished with ample Power to
execute it, whenever it should come. Say the same of his bestowing immortal
Life on all his Disciples: Now concerning all these, it is acknowledged once
for all, that though he had the Original and Radical Power, the plenary
Commission to put in Execution all these matters, during the state of his
Humiliation, and in some pregnant particulars did accordingly exert and put
forth that Authority, yet the way and manner, the degree and measure of his
Acting therein, was in much wisdom suited to that dispensation wherein he was
to appear in the form of a Servant; The more illustrious, august, and solemn
exercising thereof being reserved for the State of Exaltation, when he should
Appear like himself, cast off the Cloud which had eclipsed the rays of his
Deity, and sit down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.

But 3ly, I must repeat my charge of Falsehood against his Doctrine, in that he
says, All this is called his Intercession, p. 6. That Government of the
Church, Raising the Dead, Judging the world, etc. should be called Christ's
Intercession, looks as like Nonsense, as ever I saw any thing in my life. For
Intercession has God for its Object; as Intercessor he deals with his Father,
though on the behalf of Men, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father,
and he is the propitiation for our sins. I should wonder to hear, that an
Advocates Office should be to plead with his Clyent, and not with and before
the Judge, on the behalf of his Clyent: but because Intercession is the other
great Branch of the Sacerdotal Office, and some are deeply concerned, that he
should not offer up a Proper sacrifice to God, they judge it Reason, that one
part of the same Office should not fare better than the other: The High Priest
under the Law, when he had offered Sacrifice upon the Altar, upon the Feast of
Expiation, he goes into the Holy place, with the blood, carrying on his Breast
and on his shoulders the Names of the twelve Tribes, to signify that he went
in to intercede with God for the whole Church; what He did typically, Christ
has done really, Hebr. 9. 12. for when he had obtained eternal Redemption for
us by his blood, he goes to Heaven, there to Appear before his Father and our
Father, his God, and our God, on our behalf, and this is indeed called his
Intercession; the benefits we have thereby, comprize some or all of those
things before mentioned; but I think it is reasonable to distinguish between a
thing and its proper effects and fruits: but these are nothing but the Socinian
Coleworts, twenty times ^oyled till they are rank poison; So Volkel. lib. 3. de
vera Relig. p. 148. Primo illud occurrit, quod seipsum pro nobis in Coelo
offert, vel quod idem reipsa est, pro nobis coram Deo asta^, seu apparet, atque
interpellat, quae omnia verba ad Christi Regnum translata sunt, per
similitudinem ab illorum Pontificum Officio ductam, quod erat omnia modo
enumerata in terrestri illo Sanctuario proprie vereque perficere. This we take
notice of in the first place, that Christ offers himself for us in Heaven,
which is all one, stands, or appears, and intercedes for us before God; all
which words are applied to the kingdom of Christ, by a Metaphor taken from the
Office of those Highpriests, which was properly and really to perform the
things forementioned in that Earthly Sanctuary So that now according to this
man's Sentiments, the typical, umbratile Priests under the Law, did that really
and properly, which Christ the only True and proper High Priest performs but
in a shadow. And I do the more wonder at the Confidence of the Man, who could
to this purpose quote Hebr. 7. which Chapter, plainly sets Christ's ever living
to make Intercession for us, upon this bottom, that he has an unchangeable
Priesthood. But p. 149. he comes close up to our Authors apprehensions. Itaque
consequens est, Interpellationem, nequaquam proprie, sed per translationem
quandam Christo tribui, nihilque revera aliud ejusmodi loquendi formis
significari, quam Christum divinitus sibi concessa potentia, omnia quae ad
salutis nostrae Rationem pertinent, summo studio perficere. Hence it follows
that Intercession is not at all properly, but by Allusion ascribed to Christ;
and that nothing else is signified by those forms of speech, but that Christ by
a Power granted him from God, does very earnestly perform all things that
belong to the Business of our Salvation. And how sweetly does our Author
syncretise with him; Government of the Church, sending the Spirit, are called
his Intercession: And his Reason is as pretty as his Doctrine: -- because like
the Intercession of the High priest under the Law, it is founded on his
Expiation and Sacrifice. The strength of this Argument, (if it has any) will be
easily seen; If Christ's Intercession be founded on his Expiation, then his
Governing the Church, is called his Intercession; But the former is as true as
what is most so, Ergo, the latter is True also: The Assumption is but a mere
Presumption, one part of Christ's Priesthood is not founded upon another, but
both are equally founded in his Unction, and that Authority which he received
from his Father; but it is the Consequence of the former Proposition, which I
would see a little more clear; for methinks they hang untowardly together.
Suppose Christ's Intercession were founded upon his Sacrifice; for what I can
discover, his governing the Church, sending his Spirit, raising the dead, may
be Acts of his Kingly Power, as they have always been.

Let this whole matter be laid even with the type: Aaron did not only offer
Sacrifice to God upon his Altar, but he went into the most holy pl^ce to make
intercession for the people; Was his Intercession founded on his Oblation? or
both his Power to Offer and Intercercede, grounded upon his Office, that he was
High Priest? Intercession then signifies not the Administration of a Mediatory
Kingdom, which has Men for its immediate and proper Object, but the
Administration of an everlasting Priesthood, which has God for its Object,
though managed on the behalf of Men; so it has signified this sixteen hundred
years, and so it is like to do, till we see stronger Engines to unfix the
Notion of it. Hitherto of the Nature of Christ's Offices, which he says is a
true Account of his Mediatory kingdom; but, I say, it is the most false,
absurd, and Idle account that ever was given by any but our Author and his
partisans of the Socinian misbelief, and is neither reconcilable with the
Truth, nor with it self, one instance whereof we have in this last Paragraph.
That (says he) to which we commonly appropriate the Name of Regal power, is
his Intercession: Commonly indeed, but not truly so called; and yet in the
close, he tells you, that Intercession signifies the Administration of a
Kingdom, which how it should do, and not pertain to his kingly Office, I
cannot make out.

And now from the Nature of Christ's Kingdom, he proceeds to the method of
erecting it. 1. He conquers the minds of men by the power of his Word and
Spirit, and reduces them to subjection to God. 2. Then he pardons their sin: 3.
He raises them to Immortal Life: 4. This is done by the Expiation of his
Sacrifice, and that Power and Authority that is founded on it. Of which
supposed Order and Method of Christ's procedure, because abundant occasion will
be offered for its Consideration in the ensuing Discourse, I shall supersede
any further Disquisition at present.

I hope the Reader does not forget whereabouts he is, and what our Authors
operofe Endeavors have designed; it is to prove, That Christ is Originally the
Name of an Office, and fearing that none would bestow the pains to confute him,
he is willing to save the world that Labor, and confute himself. And this is
the Interpretation of the Name Christ, which signifies a mediatory King,
immediately appointed by God to that Office, p. 7. Be it therefore Reported to
the Judgments of all to determine, Whether a Mediatory King, be a Person or a
Thing: an Office, or an Officer? So large a Dose of Milk had he given us, and
now has kicked it all fairly down again with his foot: Indeed we had complained
before that he favored us not with one Text of Scripture to establish his
Notion; But 'twas not out of Penury, but Plenty, and that it seems made him
Poor, For thus (says he) the Name Christ signifies in those places of
Scripture where Jesus is said to be the Christ, i. e. that Messiah whom God
promised to send. So that all the further trouble the Reader is like to have
from me in this matter, is to advise with himself, Whether, He, the Messiah
whom God promised to send, be the one or the other; i. e. Whether God promised
an Office, which like the Popish Accidents of Bread and Wine should hang in the
Air without their proper Subjects, or Mahomets Tomb; or else a real person
even Jesus the Mediator between God and Man, furnished with those Offices of
Prophet, Priest, and King, to save us in turning away every one of us from our
Iniquities.

Secondly, Though Christ is Originally the Name of an Office, yet it is used in
Scripture to signify the Person who is invested with this Office. It would
tempt a man to enquire, what that original use of the word is, which is opposed
to the Scripture use. In some Original or other it is the Name of an Office; and
that can be no other but the Originals of Socinus, Volkelius, Crellius, and
other of the same bran; however we are infinitely his Debtors for the
Concession, that the Scripture Use of the word is wheeled about to our side;
though ju^t now, The places were so many and so obvious that he needed not name
them, for the other use of the word. But I see it is not wisdom to be too hasty
to own a kindness before we be sure on^t, for no man more real when he offers
an Injury, nor more complemental in his Courtesies; for he is just now standing
upon a Tack. Before his Designation to this Office was publicly owned, he was
only called Jesus, the Name given him by the Angel, before he was born, yet
when by his Resurrection from the Dead he was declared with power to be the
Son, and the Christ of God, Christ became his Proper Name, as Jesus was before.
It may create a suspicion in some jealous heads, that our Author does insinuate
Jesus to become the Son of God, as he became the Christ of God; which latter
bears date in our Authors Chronology, from After the Resurrection, but
Suspicions ought to prejudice no man. To his confident Assertion, I answer:

1. That this blessed Person of whom we speak, was called Christ, without any
reference to men's owning or not owning of him; nor could he claim to be owned
by men as the Christ of God, unless he had been so, even the Christ, before
such claim; he was therefore owned, because he was Antecedently so, and not
subsequently called Christ because Men had owned him: It were strange indeed
that he should hold his Name upon so ticklish a Tenure as that, Advoluntatem
Populi.

2. That he was owned to be the Christ of God before his Rsurrection from the
dead, not so generally and universally, but yet as really and truly; Nay, all
that owned him to be Jesus, a Savior from sin, owned him be to the Christ
Anointed of God, that he might be a Savior: They that denied him to be the
Christ, denied him to be a Jesus; for what firm Footing could Faith have to
believe him to be a Savior, had he not brought his Credentials along with him,
that he was sent of God, for that End, a Term of the same Import with that of
Christ.

3. The Christ of God was as truly his Proper Name, as Jesus: These with many
others, denonoting still the same Person, though under diverse Considerations:
Jesus was his Name, expressing the General end for which he came into the
World: Immanuel was his Name, denoting the Union of God and Man, in one and the
same Person: Mediator was his Name, as signifying the two Parties between whom
he was to stand, and whom he was to Reconcile; and Christ was his Name too, as
Intimating the Authority he had from his Father, to Accomplish the Work of
Saving, which he undertook.

4. The Angels foretelling his Name to be Jesus, makes not that to have the
Advantage of the other Appellations of Christ: Seeing he was made The Christ,
by the Father Himself, and yet we have the Suffrage of an Angel too, that he
was Born the Christ, Luke 2. 11. Unto you is Born this day a Savior, in the
City of David, which is Christ the Lord.

5. As sadly out is our Author to say, that in the Gospels he is always called
Jesus: Which, whether you take it Exclusively, as shutting out the Name of
Christ, or Inclusively, taking in the Name of Jesus, is apparently False, and
needs nothing but a Common pair of Spectacles for its Confutation: But the
stress of all this Pother lying here, that he was not called Christ as by his
Proper Name, till after the Resurrection, we shall call over a few of many
places in the New Testament to Evince the Contrary, John 4. 25. The Woman of
Samaria went upon Common Fame, and a generally received Maxim, that he that
should acquaiut them with the Will of God, was to be called Christ. I know that
Mesiah comes, which is called Christ, and when he is come, he will tell us all
things. And our Savior would not suffer her to hang in Suspense about the
Person, who was so well Satisfied about his Name, and Employment, but presently
Answers, v. 26. I that speak to thee, am He: The poor Woman glad at the News,
and loath to Rejoice alone, Proclaims it in the Streets, and speaking in their
own known Dialect, says she: Is not this the Christ? ver. 29. John 1. 40.
Andrew finds his own Brother Simon, and says unto him, we have found the
Messiah, which is being Interpreted, the Christ. A Person then there was who
under the Title of Christ, was always laid before the Faith and Expectancies
of the People of God. And of so great Concernment was this Name, that Peter
joins it with the Son of God, Matthew. 16. 15. Whom do ye say that I am? Simon
Peter answered (in the Name of the rest) Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living
God. I shall not urge the Testimony of the Devils, Luke 5. 41. Thou art Christ,
the Son of the Living God: For he is a Liar from the Beginning, and would not
have owned the Truth, but to Disparage it by his Testimony; yet its somewhat
sad, there should be greater Heresies on Earth, than in Hell: Nor shall I
insist upon that of the Soldiers, who took it for granted that he was commonly
Distinguished by the Name Christ, Mat. 16. 68. Prophecy unto us, thou Christ,
who it is that smote thee. But Christ's own Testimony must pass, Matthew. 23. 8.
10. Be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master even Christ, and all ye are
Brethren; neither be ye called Master, for one is your Master, even Christ. A
huge Bussle there has been about this place, and our Authors Evidence had it
been Subpoened in, would have struck the Business dead, One is your Master,
even an Office: And now will you hear a Facetious and Merry Reason, why He is
always called Jesus in the Gospels, which contain the History of his Life and
Death, p. 8. Because (forsooth) all this time it was Disputed, whether He were
the Christ or not.

Great Disputes indeed the Devil has raised about the Lord Jesus, some will
dare to Dispute it, whether He be very God or not, others whether He be the
Christ of God or not? And not a few, whether he offered himself a Propitiatory
Sacrifice upon the Cross, to an offended God for sin; so that if Christ must
never be owned till all Disputes be ended, we must Prorogue his Naming, till
the coming of Elias: The World was then as it is now; which would always be
Disputing things in themselves Indisputable, Disputed then his Name was before
his Resurrection, and so has been ever since, by Infidels; and by those who
Believed, neither Disputed before nor after. I have heard of a great Dispute of
late amongst Persons of great Learning, about the Reason of an Appearance in
Philosophy, when one of the Company, wiser it seems than his Neighbors,
gravely Counseled them, to Examine more Narrowly, whether indeed the Thing
were so in Fact or no; before they did beat their Brains about giving a Reason
why it should be so: His Advice was hearkened to, and upon severe Scrutiny, they
had been Arguing about a Nonentity. Thus it had become our Authors Excellency
to have shown that it is, before he came to fly so high, at the Why it is? But
it seems the Matter was not weighty, whether he were the Christ or not; it
being determined by our Authors own Licenser, that whatever is Disputable is
inconsiderable.

Thirdly, Christ signifies the Gospel and Religion of Christ: As Moses
signifies the Writings, and Law of Moses, and the Prophets the Writings of the
Prophets. Hold, good Sir, Create your self no further Trouble, we will grant
you more than you con Prove, even as much as you Demand, that we may purchase
our Peace. And that, in Common Speech, Christ may signify his Laws by much
stronger Reasons, than Moses can signify his Laws: For Moses was but a Servant
in His Masters House, but Christ a Son in and over his own House; Christ was
the Law Maker, Moses only an Instrument for their Promulgation, and Execution.
But then it must be Remembered withal, 1. That the Name Moses signifies
Originally, Properly, and Primarily the Person of Moses, the very Man Moses,
and only Obliquely, Secondarily, Figuratively, or (as your great Friend Vol.
has it) Analogico, Figuratoque dicendi genere; the Doctrine, Writings, Laws of
Moses. 2. That when we meet with a word that has a Proper, and an Improper; a
First and a Second; a Plain and a Tropical signification, we always let that
Proper, Plain, and Primary signification take the Wall, and have the Upper hand
of the Improper, Tropical, and Second-hand sense; all ways provided, that no
Cogent Inexorable Reason taken from the Circumstances of the Place, do Oblige
to the Contrary. 3. We must well understand what our Author Claims, and what we
Grant: That it is usual, nothing more usual, in Common Speech, than to call any
Laws or Religion, by the Name of the first Authors: In Common Speech then this
holds; for if he will lay the Weight or Stress of any Disputable Point upon it,
that the word is so used in Scripture, we must beg his Pardon, and desire him
to hold us Excused, unless he can Prove it by Convincing Arguments; and we lay
down this Protestation beforehand, that we shall not take High mounted
Confidence, nor Imperious Dictates, nor Hungry jejune Glosses for Apodictick in
the Case: The rather, because we are ascertained that the Name Christ does
Properly, Primarily, Frequently, nay, Generally express a Person in Office; and
if our Author will needs have it signify, or Office, or Church, or Gospel, or
any Living thing else in all the World^, merely to evade the force of Truth, or
to hedge in any Whimsical Notions of his own; he shall get his Ground by
Inches, and force his Way through the main Rocks, for we shall part with
nothing that we can Fairly and Honestly keep. But we attend his Evidence, Gal.
6. 15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. That is, in the Gospel, and Religion of
Christ, nothing is of any Value to Recommend as to the favor of God, but a new
Nature, a Holy, and virtuous Life, p. 9.

To which Gloss, I oppose two small Incoveniencies: First, The Uncertainty.
Secondly, The Apparent falsehood of it. First, If there were nothing else to
Disparage it, its Uncertainty is enough; for its merely Precarious, that Christ
must signify so here: If any has the Confidence to deny it, though never so
faintly, the Cause is utterly blown up; our Negative upon him, puts him to
Eternal silence. When our Author is hard beset at any time, he has one Answer
ready Cut and Dried, which serves for every Text in the Scripture: as page 261.
It is a sufficient Answer to this, to say, they need not signify so. If that
will suffice him, which others must be glad to be sufficed with, he is Answered:
But why not the Common Gloss? In the Account of Jesus Christ, Circumcision, nor
Uncircumcision avail nothing, but, etc. And the strongest Probabilities lie on
this side: First, The foregoing words, whereof this Verse is rendered as a
Reason, do unquestionably speak of a Person, ver. 14. The Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And now comes in this Verse as a Reason or Proof thereof: For in
Christ Jesus, etc. Did the Apostles Premises speak of one thing, and his
Conclusion of another? 2. Here Is this lies in the way, that no Cogent Reason
can be assigned why we should depart from the Plain, Ordinary, Primary
acceptance of the Word Christ, for a Figurative, Improper and Secondary
acceptance, but only to humor our Author; for which at present I am not in
the Mood. 3. He is miserably short in his Foundation; for after all his pains
to prove that Christ signifies an Office, a Doctrine, a Church; he must go over
with all this again, and prove that Jesus signifies a Doctrine, and Jesus a
Church, or else he is just in Statu quo. For he had told us before, that (though
Christ was an Homonymous word, a Name, of Desuetory, Lubricous, and Versatile
sound) Jesus was his Proper Name, given him by the Angel before he was Born;
and therefore surely that has not been Warped, and Twisted, and Scrued, at that
Rate that this other poor Name has been; for as it falls out unhappily. Here Is
Jesus joined with Christ, and that persuades us almost, that a very Person is
intended.

But yet secondly, The apparent Falsehood of it sticks more with me than all
this, I could easily down with a few Absurdities: For I think, and believe
according to the Scripture, That there is something besides a Virtuous Life of
value to Recommend us to the Favor of God; nay, something more of Value (and I
shall not be Hectored out of it by Blustering words:) It Is the Righteousness of
Jesus which I mean, and we have the Apostles Warrant for it, Ephesians. 1. 6. He
has made us accepted in the Beloved. If God should enter into Judgment with us
according to the Exactest of our Obedience, perhaps we should be willing to
accept of Christ's Recommendation to the favor of God, notwithstanding our
most virtuous Lives, but secondly, I indite it of Falsehood, that he makes a new
Creature, and a virtuous Life, equivalent Expressions: For I had thought that a
virtuous Life is but the Fruit that Grows on the Tree, but the Tree must be
made good, e're the Fruit can be so; A virtuous Life the Streams, that flow
from the Spring of the new Creature, and the Fountain must be cleansed e're the
Streams will be so: In plain Terms, the virtuous Life is but the Result of a
new Heart, the product of a Renewed Nature; without which Principle of a
virtuous Life, and without Christ to Recommend both to God, there is no hope to
find favor in his sight.

His second place is, Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain Deceit, after the Traditions of Men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ. Where (says he) after Christ is opposed to the
Traditions of Men, and Rudiments of the World, and therefore must signify, not
the Person, but the Religion or Gospel of Christ. Must! And what necessity of
that? I can see none from the Text: But if our Author has imposed upon himself
an absolute and indispensible necessity of being Baptized into Volkelius, then
indeed it must be so Interpreted, no remedy: Lib. 5. c. 10. p. 437, 438.
Divinitatis Nomine, nec Dei nec Christi Natura, sed Divinae voluntatis notitia,
Deique colendi ratio Intelligi porest, atque ideo debet. By the name Deity, not
the Nature of God, or of Christ, but the knowledge of the Divine Will, and the
manner of Worshipping God, May be, and therefore Must be understood. The Reader
is now satisfied why it must be so? 1. It may be so, and therefore necessarily
it must be so. 2. Volkelius says it must be, and therefore it must. But let us
be Judged by the words following; Not after Christ, for in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, ver. 9. Does the fullness, the all fullness of the
Godhead dwell bodily in the Doctrine, or in the Person of Christ, ver. 10. And
ye are complete in him, who is the Head of Principality and Power^ Is i^
Christ's Person that is that Head of Angels, or his Doctrine? and so the Apostle
runs it on, till he comes to the Cross of Christ, ver. 14. Must we now, to
Gratify these Gentlemen, renounce our Reasons, and say, that a Doctrine is the
Head of ^roncipality and Power? A Doctrine is raised from the Dead? That we are
Buried in a Doctrine? That the Handwriting of Ordinances, was Nailed to the
Cross of a Doctrine? I confess I would go as far as another for Peace-sake, but
here I must fairly shake hands and leave my Author, and his Masters to their
own ways: But though the words following the Text do frown severely upon them
and their Cause, yet they promise themselves much from the foregoing, ver. 6.
As you have therefore received Jesus Christ the Lord, so walk ye in him: i. e.
Obey the Doctrine of Christ, as you have been taught it by us. It must be
remembered what our Author is endeavoring to prove still, I hope he has not
forgot it, and I hope we shall not, viz. That the Name [Christ] signifies the
Gospel: Now it is easily granted, that though the Name [Christ] do Immediately
signify the Person of Christ; yet Mediarely it may imply the Doctrine; and yet
all this while the Name, or Word Christ; stand in its Original posture, and
Purport. As the name King does primarily signify the Person of a Supreme
Magistrate, and yet that Treason which is committed against the Person of a
King is against his Law, and yet none will say that because Treason against the
King is Treason against the Law, that therefore, the name King, signifies Law.
To violate the Commands of the Gospel, reflects upon Christ's Person; and he
that sins against the one, sins against the other, because of that Privity of
Interest that is betwixt a King and his Laws, a Prophet, and his Revelations, a
Priest, and his Sacrifice; yet it were harsh to say, that Prophet, does
signify Revelation; or Priest, Sacrifice; or King, signify Laws: Those things
may have Relation one to another, one be Inferred from another, and not the one
signify the other: As, 1 Cor. 7. 12. When ye sin against the Brethren, and
wound their weak consciences, ye sin against Christ: To sin against the
Brethren, is by consequence to sin against Christ. Yet none will say that the
Name Christ signifies Brethren. But more particularly I answer, 1. That Christ
Jesus the Lord, does signify in the first place a Person; And secondly, That
consequently it Includes the Promises, the Precepts, the Revelations, the
Death, Sufferings, the Intercession and the whole of Jesus. But his main
strength lies here: That after, Christ is opposed to the Traditions of Men, and
the Rudiments of the World, and therefore must not signify the Person, but the
Religion or Gospel of Christ. So argues Volk Lib. 3. de vera Relig. p. 125. His
mundi Rudimentis, omnem Divinitatis Plenitudinem in Christo sanctissimaque ejus
Disciplina, corporaliter, h. e. reipsa, non umbratili quadam ratione, ut in
Lege, habitantem opponit. Unto these Rudiments of the World, the Apostle
opposes all the fullness of the Divinity, which dwelt Bodily, (that is, Really,
not after a Typical faction as in the Law) in Christ, and his most holy
Discipline. And yet this crafty Knave had a reach far beyond what I hope our
Author is guilty of, namely to cut in sunder the N^rves and Sinews of this Text
as it asserts the Deity of Christ, and therefore very subtlely, he turns Deity
into Divinity, (...), into (...): And that we may see how Eagerly and Zealously
he is Concerned for such a signification of Christ, as much as our Author can
be for the heart of him. Consult. 3 Lib. de vera Relig. cap. 5. p. 47. Qua de
causa Divinis monitis incitamur, ut omnibus aliis Disciplinis Posthabitis, uni
Christo adhaereamus, in quo, id est, in cujus Doctrina, omnis Divinitatis
plenitudo continetur. For with Reason we are called upon by the Counsel of the
Scripture, to leave all other Religions, and to cleave to Christ alone, in
whom, that is, in whose Doctrine, all the Fullness of the Divinity is contained.
And so perfect a Mime is our Author of this Volk* that he borrows his very id
ests of him: But to these things I return. 1. That the opposition lies Visibly
in the first place between, Men, and Christ, secondly between Men's Tarditions,
and Christ's Institutions. 2. That the Person of Christ as the only Lawgiver of
the Church, is directly opposed to the Traditions of Men: For as the Popes
Laws, if set on foot in England, would not only cross the Laws of the Land, but
strike at our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity; so the Traditions
of Men, do not only thwart Christ's Institutions, but mainly and chiefly Christ
himself, who is the Author of them. 3. From the All fullness of the Deity which
dwells in Christ, it is Obvious to an ordinary Capacity to infer, that there
is a Perfection in his Doctrine, a compleatness in his Institutions, that there
needs no Supply from Men's Traditions, no Relief from Philosophy, or Rudiments
of the World; but if, because the Perfection of his Doctrine may be concluded
from the Excellency of his Person, he will conclude that his Person signifies
his Doctrine, we must desire to be excused, for no such thing will thence
follow. His last place is, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. But you have not so Learned
Christ, if so be you have heard him, and been taught by him, as the Truth is in
Jesus. Before our Author can make his best Markets of this Text, he found it
expedient to bestow a little of his critical Excellency upon us, in Correcting
the Translation of the Church of England, presuming he has equal Authority over
it, with the Thirty nine Articles. And,

1. He tells us to our great Illumination, that (...), signifies not as our
Translator renders it, being Taught, but Instructed: A blessed Discovery!
Reserved no doubt for the Glory of these last Ages. Poor dull Translators! that
could not see the difference between being Taught, and Instructed. But that is
the Privilege only, of a Rational Divine, as we shall hear anon, to discern
the Essential differences of things; but that none may ever Rob him of the
Honor of the Discovery, which is equal to that of the Perpetual Motion,
Squaring the Circle, or Doubling the Cube, let it be Written on his Tomb, Hic
jacet primus Author hujus subtilitatis, etc.

2. He informs us that (...) signifies not by him, but in him: Well let him
make his best of that; for I think he has lost Ground by it: For whereas his
Pinching Question is, How could the Ephesians who never saw Christ in the
flesh, be said to ^ear him? he might have added, or to be i^structed by him?
Now it will be answered wit^ ease as to the latter clause, O yes, they may be
i^structed in him, in his Natures, and Person, in hi^ Offices, in the End of
his Death and Sufferings, i^ in the fruits and benefits of his Intercession
with (...) Father for them; Ay, and they might be said to hea^ him too, when
they heard the Apostles discourse and preach of Him, open to them the
excellency of hi^ Divine Person, the meaning of his holy Precepti^ the Latitude
of the precious Promises; especially i^ the Rest of the Apostles were (and no
doubt they were) of the same mind with Paul, who desired t^ know nothing but
Jesus Christ, and him crucified; to Preach Christ, a crucified Christ, and to
glor^ in nothing but in the Cross of the same Jesus; and after all, here is not
the least invitation to interpret Christ to signify Religion, Gospel, upon
this pretended difficulty, that they could not hear Him, no^ be instructed by
him: It Is the Delight of some me^ to make easy things difficult: let the place
be interpreted of the Person of Christ, and it will tak^ in the Gospel, both in
its Precepts and Promises, an^ whatever Discoveries are therein* made of his
Person, Offices, Doctrine, Laws, Government, Death Resurrection, Ascension, and
sitting at the right han^ of God, where he makes intercession for us.

Fourthly, It is acknowledged by All (says ou^ Author) that Christ signifies
the Church of Christ And if he would receive it as an Alms, pure cha^ity,
perhaps it would be granted, but if he wi^ dispute a right and title to the
thing in question, i^ may go the harder with him. The union betwee^ Christ and
his true Church is so near and strict, tha^ ^ey both come under one and the
same Appellation; ^enominated from the most excellent part, the Head ^f that
Body. Hence is the Church called the body ^f Christ, and his fullness; Ephesians. 1.
23. Not his in^rinsick fullness, to supply any personal defects of his, ^ut his
outward fullness, relatively considered, as ^erving to magnify his Grace and
Mercy; As the ^ultitude of Subjects is the Kings Honor, Prove. ^4. 28. As a
virtuous Wife is the Crown of her ^usband, Prove. 12. 4. so is the Church the
Glory ^f Jesus Christ, and he is pleased not to look upon himself as complete
without Her: But that the ^ame Christ signifies Church, exclusive of his
Person, or any otherwise than as Christ and his church make one body, I crave
leave to (...) my ^issent, and wait for his Proof.

The Inference therefore which he draws from this ^upposition is weak and
feeble: And thus must we ^nderstand those phrases of Being in Christ, En^rafted
into Christ, and United to Christ; which ^ignifie no more than to be a
Christian, one wh^ be^ongs to that Body whereof Christ is the Head and
^overnour, p. 11. We must? what necessity I ask ^gain of that? why the very
same that I observed before; one that he has first created to himself, and ^hen
pleads against us; which is to Lacquey it after ^olkelius* For so he, lib. de
vera Relig. cap. 10. p. ^38. Christum autem saepenumero, non Christi Per^onam,
aut Naturam, sed per Metonymicam dicen^di figuram, aliud quippiam, vel ad
Christum respi^iens, vel ab illo profectum designare; ex illis locis ^erspicuum
est, ubi Christum accepisse, Christum di^; Christum induere debere; aut eundem
(...); in Christo esse; in Christo denique (...); dicimur. That Christ
oftentimes signifies (...) the Person or Nature of Christ, but something (...)
either relating to him, or proceeding from him (...) a Metonymie; is plain from
those places, when we are said to have received Christ; to have lea^ Christ;
that we ought to put on Christ; and (...) have put him on; to be in Christ; and
lastly, to (...) in Christ: And at this rate, in a while, the Pers^nality of
Christ shall lie at the mercy of these me^ there being no place of Scripture
left that shall ^cessarily prove him to be a Person; but with o^ of these
evasions they can enervate, and with a (...) dash of a wanton pen strike him
clear out of (...) Writ. But let us a little examine his Consequenc^ Christ
sometimes signifies the Church, therefore (...) be in Christ, to be united to
Christ, must be so ^derstood. From May be in the premises, to must (...) in the
conclusion; is a high leap, let our Author (...) a care he do not break his
Neck, for my part, I (...) not be too sollicitous to answer such Inferences.

But I had almost forgotten, that under the (...) Head, he interpreted In
Christ, to signify in (...) Doctrine; and now to serve the present Turn, it
(...) signify to be in the Church: To which I only sa^ If they be one thing,
this Head is needless, and (...) they be two, they make a contradiction.

In the mean time, our Author is the most unha^py man I have met withal, that
having perhaps (...) place or two of Scripture, where possibly the (...) Christ
may signify, the Church mystically considered^ as it takes in the Head and
Members, the Foundation and Building, the root and branches, the (...) and
Subjects, the Husband and Spouse; yet should so unhappily fix upon those Texts
which would ^empt a rigid Antagonist, to put him to the proof ^f what in a
sober sense will not be denied. Let us ^hen attend to his Quotations, Romans 12.
5. We being many are one Body in Christ. All true Christi^ns, how many soever
they be, constitute but one Body; but how come they to be One, what is that
Center wherein they meet; that common Bond or Ligament, which ties them
together? who is the Cornerstone that couples together the parts of this
Building? The Apostle tells us it is Christ; He is the Head in whom the members
are united, the cornerstone in whom the sides of the building are joined, ^he
Center in whom, as in a point, all the Faith of Individual Believers does meet;
now cannot they be thus One, but the Name Christ must needs signify Church?
Well, let us hear one of his Id ests, i. e. says he, We are all but one
Christian Society, which is the Body of Christ. Very good! according to our
Authors Fancy, it must run thus, We are all one Christian Society, which is the
Body of the Church. But whatever truth there is in the Notion, it never grew
upon this root; all the Apostle asserts is this, that Particular Christians are
compared to the particular members of the natural body, the whole Church
collectively taken, is compared to the natural body, and that he might show,
how the particular Members of this Mystical Body are united, and become One, he
tells us, it is in Christ. Again, Col. 1. 2. To the Saints and faithful
Brethren in Christ. Ergo, what? Why they are Christian Brethren: True, but how
come they to be so? That is indeed the Question; to which our Author speaks Ne
gry quidem.

His last proof is from 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in Christ is a New Creature.
It seems somew^ strange to me, that the word Christ should signi^ otherwise in
this Verse than it had done v. 14. 1^ and must do again v. 18. Before the Text,
v. 1^ The love of Christ constrains us, -- And that (...) dyed for all. Was it
a Person who out of pure Lo^ dyed for his Church? who offered himself a
Sac^fice to God for it? and is it all oth' sudden gro^ a Church? The Church I
had thought was the Oject, and not the Subject of that Love mentione^ After the
Text, v. 18. we read that God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ:
And how do^ our Author wedge in Church instead of Christ, in the 17th verse?
Must the blessed Apostle be made (...) speak Nonsense, argue impertinently,
conclude a^surdly, to gratify one of his forced and wreste^ Notions? Well, for
once, that we may not purchas^ his displeasure, let him paraphrase the
eighteent^ verse thus; God has reconciled the Church to himself by the Church.
What remains in this particular, is only that descant which he gives upon hi^
Text, i. e. Every sincere Christian is a New Creature: Agreed; To be in Christ,
and to be a sincere Christian, do explain one another. But the descan^ upon his
descant, is the Life of all; Whoever professes the Faith of Christ, and lives
in society with the Christian Church, has obliged himself to live (...) new
Life: Better and better still: What is it to be in Christ? Ans. To be a sincere
Christian. Qu. An^ what is it to be a sincere Christian? Ans. To profess the
Faith of Christ, and live in society with the christian Church. Most admirable:
The clearest, fullest, and exactest Definition without all peradventure, that
ever was in the world, of a sincere Christian; and out-vies all that Mr.
Shepheard's Sincere Convert, or Sound Believer can afford us. The only fault
that I find with it is, that the lewdest, and vilest Hypocrite that ever was in
the world, may be one of our Authors Sincere Christians. You have heard what a
Sincere Christian is, to your unspeakable comfort no doubt: Will you but hear
what the New creature is, and you are made for ever. Qu. What is it to be a New
creature? Ans. To oblige himself to live a New life. Nay, if an Obligation, nay
a voluntary Obligation to live a New life, will render a Man a New Creature, I
am sure God has obliged all men so to live, and most men have superadded a
voluntary Obligation of their own so to live; and then what a sad rout of New
Creatures is the world pestered withal?

The Reader has seen by this time, that his first Notion of Christ is false,
his second only necessarily True, his third very questionable, and the fourth
unproved, and if it had been proved would not have done his work; and now it is
high time to draw with him toward a Conclusion. Our Author is beginning to
make an end, but he must first discharge his stomach of a little froth, and
gall, and spit up some venom that lies in his chest, in the face of his
Adversaries, without which he could not possibly conclude his Chapter. He tells
you summarily what great feats he has done, and what greater Achievements he
will adventure on: What he has done amounts to this; he has discovered great
Mistakes in other men's Divinity, but cannot espy any in his own: he can spy a
Mote in his Neighbors eye, but considers not his own Beam: He has also
discovered the rise of these Mistakes, to be from the various usage of the Name
Christ in the Writing^ of the Apostles. The more excusable (it seems) they are,
if they had occasion from thence to err; which they might the more easily do,
because (as he observes well) the Writings of Paul are obscure. He has also
discovered to us the temper and humor of those Mistaken men: They are zealous
to advance Christ's Person, to the prejudice and reproach of his Religion, which
yet our Author himself, when a Qualm of sweet Nature comes over his Heart,
thinks to be Impossible, p. 17. The greater Opinion we have of his Wisdom, and
Reverence for his Person, the more sacred Regard we have for his Laws. He has
also discovered a horrid Plot, to introduce a fancifull Application of Christ
to our selves, instead of the substantial Duties of the love of God and Men,
and an universal Holiness of Life. But this is but a plot of his own making,
unless he had some supernatural Assistances from Beneath. He has also for ever
discharged the world upon his Blessing, from closing with Christ, getting into
Christ, and above all from overloving Christ, and admiring his Excellencies,
and Perfections, his Fullness, Beauty, Loveliness, and Riches. Wherein if he
prevail to his mind, he has for ever Obliged the Prince of Darkness to him, and
done more service to his black Kingdom, than he with his Legions has been able
to effect these Sixteen hundred years. What he intends further to do, he has
reduced to four heads, to which I refer the Reader; and upon the whole Matter
do only make this one Observation; That through this whole Chapter, he has
cheated and tormented us with a sorry, old, Threadbare fallacy, A been
compositis ad male divisa: The Persons whom he reviles, dare not put asunder
those things which God has joined together. They love the Person of Christ,
and not therefore break, but keep his Commandments. They think that Faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ, and Repentance from dead works are very consistent; may
and must sweetly meet together, and Kiss each other. They would be glad to see
those who revile them, to love and admire Christ's Person, and shall be content
to be reproved so far as they neglect, and undervalue his Precepts; but they
are not to be frighted out of their Love to Him, who loved them, and gave
himself for them: They do freely confess, that they admire at the Love of the
Father in sending his only begotten Son into the World upon such a design as
to save Sinners, and they do equally admire the Love of the Lord Jesus Christ,
that he was so willing to come into the world, to be tempted, persecuted,
reproached, and at last to dye, and give his Life a Ransom for many: And
though they have heard many Reproaches and Blasphemies uttered against their
Savior, yet they have not met with one solid concluding Argument why they
should not love him: And therefore if they must be vile upon these Accounts,
they resolve in the strength of Christ to be vile, more vile still; and shall
bind all the Ignominy that is cast upon them for Christ's sake, unto their
Temples as a Crown and Diadem: For indeed they do persist in that persuasion
with some Obstinacy, that it was the Person of Christ who dyed for them; it was
He upon whom the Chastisement of their Peace did lie; it was He whose Soul was
made an Offering for sin, and upon whom God laid the Iniquities of us All. And
therefore our Author must bear with them, if they love him as much as they can,
because they have reason to fear they shall not love him as much as He has
deserved. They remember a Dreadful word, If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, and would not for all the world fall
under the weight of it. Their love to his person makes them studious to please
him, fearful to offend him, zealous to glorify him, and (if the will of God
be so) humbly content to suffer for him: They have not met with any Author that
has, till of late, endeavored a Confutation of Christ's personal Excellencies,
perfections, fullness, beauty, loveliness and riches; and they that have made
the Attempt, have exposed themselves to the universal censure of all that wear
the Name of Christian; and therefore they do ingenuously acknowledge, that they
do admire and honor them, and do humbly hope, Christ at his coming will not
rebuke them for it; And when they are invidiously traduced as setting the
Person of Christ at odds with his Gospel, they are satisfied that they have
not done it in Principle, and lament that they have in any the least degree
done it in Practice: And as they know that the Charge, as applied to them, is a
pure, impure slander; so they conceive it is vey difficult, if not impossible in
it self, nor can they apprehend how any can really and truly maintain a due
esteem of Christ in their hearts, but they must have a proportionable value and
regard for all his Commandments and Injunctions: That these things are become
Riddles to any professing the Name of Christ, they tremble at, as a sad
symptom that the Gospel is hid to them, and from them. They do also in the
general approve of any Labors managed with a due regard to the Majesty of God
and the Lord Jesus Christ, in order to the discovery of any Expressions in
their Writings or Discourses, which might in the least be misinterpreted to
degrade and thrust down Holiness from its Throne; but withal they are
unwilling to be railed out of a good Opinion of Christ's Person, seeing that
however they may have sinned in breaking his Laws, it will not mend the matter
to lessen the honor they justly have for Himself; and had rather be severely
chidden for their sin, than scoffed out of their Duty. But of these Matters
thus far.

CHAP. II. Of what use the Consideration of Christ's Person is, in the Christian
Religion.
IN the Entrance of this Chapter, I observe our Author is feelingly concerned
to amove from himself the sinister suspicion of a Design to render Christ
useless. And he makes a solemn Protestation, not only of his own Innocence,
but is ready to become Surety and Compurgator for all his Accomplices. A design
(says he) which I confess I am wholly a stranger to, as I believe all those
are, who are so much charged with it. When we hear a man zealously purging
himself of some Notorious Crime, noysed abroad only in the general, without
praevious Accusation; it is apt to fly-blow our Heads with jealousy he may be
Tardy; an over-forward Vindication being reputed more than half an Accusation.
But I dare be one of his Twelve-Godfathers in this matter, that he does not
make Christ useless; but will allow him to be of some use, that is to say, that
Christ is good for something, and in effect, a little Better than, though next
to Nothing; and I can with more security become Bound for Him, because he has
given me good Counter-security, that I shall not forfeit my Recognizance. P.
330. I could never persuade my self (no not for your heart, though you had
attempted it) that the perfect Obedience and Righteousness of His Life was
wholly excluded. So that whatever rendered Christ beloved of God, contributed
something to our Acceptance. P. 331. We ought not to think that we receive No
Benefit by the Righteousness of Christ. And I hope something is better than
Nothing. Nay, (such is his Charity) he can be content to Allow, that God was
somewhat more pleased with the Obedience of Christ, than the Faith of Abraham.
ibid. And that his Sacrifice was of greater value, than the Blood of Bulls and
Goats, p. 19. Naughty men are they then, that wrong Him and Them so, as to
insinuate that they designed to make Christ useless, the rather because they
proceed upon so bad a Ground. We are charged with making Christ useless, only
because we dare not make his Laws so; And thus it seems they have unhandsomely
paid him in his own Coin, who charges them with making his Laws Useless, only
because they dare not make his Person so. And yet to deal plainly with Him, for
all this, I find a Double charge upon the File against him.

(1) That though he has not made Christ altogether Useless, yet he has made him
Needless. Though he can use Him, yet he could have spared him; though he can
make a shift with him, he could have made a Rubbing shift without Him. Ut tecum
possum vivere, sic sine te. So p. 46. I should rather have thought that Gods
requiring such a sacrifice as the Death of Christ, was not because he could not
do otherwise. And if Gods Justice could be contented without that sacrifice, I
may presume it shall not stick at our Authors good Nature, p. 43. Had Christ
never appeared in the World, yet we had Reason to believe that God is thus Wise
and Good, viz. to Pardon sinners. And (as he labors to Prove) Enoch, Noah,
Jews and Gentiles, who knew nothing at all of Christ, p. 44. yet understood God
to be a God pardoning iniquity without him: And surely if the World jogged on
for four thousand years without Christ, it might have worn out the Remainder
without him too.

(2) I find a second Charge against him: That though he make not Christ
useless, as to some common, ordinary and general Ends, which might have been
attained, and reached without him; yet he renders him wholly Useless as to
those special, those main and glorious purposes for which he came into the
World: The making satisfaction to Divine Justice, the Imputation of his
Righteousness to Believers, his powerful and effectual sanctifying them by his
Spirit for whom he undertook. Whereof we shall meet with abundant Evidence in
the progress of his Discourse. So that a Declaration contrary to the Fact, is
of small weight with considering Readers, and sinks it self below all
consideration. But to return: Two things fill up this Chapter.

First, That the Person of Christ is of some Consideration; and Secondly, That
the consideration of his Person is of some use* only the difficulty to be
assoyled by His Abilities, is, Of what use, the consideration of his Person
should be?

[1.] Then, the Person of Christ is of some consideration; but e're he ventures
upon that Province, he bethought Himself it would be a Task worthy his great
Parts, to indoctrinate our Plumbeous Cerebrosities in the Nice Point, What the
Person of Christ is? P. 15. By the Person of Christ I mean, what all men ought
to mean, (nay there is no doubt of that; All men at their utmost Peril ought to
mean, to a hairs breadth, just as our Author means) Christ Himself. Had it not
been a Prodigy as great as ever was in the World, if by Christ's Person had been
meant any body else? Such then is Christ's Person. The Consideration thereof
follows: And (as he assures us) the only proper consideration here is the
Greatness of his Person; This is the only, or however, The only Proper, or at
least the only Proper consideration here; whatever other improper
considerations of it there may be in other places, or cases, upon other
accounts, or occasions, at other times, it skills not; for Here, at this Time,
and in this place, the only Proper Consideration is the Greatness of his
Person. And yet methinks, the exceeding loveliness of his Person, standing
betwixt God and lost Sinners; his laying down his Life as a Ransom paid to
God, his standing as a Surety in our stead, his bearing our sins in his Body on
the Cross, might have claimed a Place, and come in for a share in our
consideration of his Person. But thus much for that.

[2] The Use of this consideration follows. And some good Use he has assigned
it.

(1) And first, it is a plain demonstration of Gods love to Mankind, that he
sent so dear, and so great a Person into the World, as his only begotten Son,
to save Sinners. It is so indeed, but a very weak demonstration of Gods Love to
his own Son, to send him into the World, to grapple with all those Miseries he
met withal in his Soul, in his Body, from Enemies, from Friends, from Men,
from Devils; nay, from himself, whom it pleased to bruise him, and lay upon him
the Iniquities of us all, to make his soul an Offering for sin, nay, to be made
sin for them, who himself knew none, to Die a cursed Death, and all this
without any Absolute, or Indispensible necessity: Contrary to all the Rules of
Decorum; Nec Deus intersit nisi dignus vindice Nodus inciderit. And it would be
of use to consider also the Love of Christ, his Willingness to Accept the Terms
of being a Redeemer, though He knew well they were severe, and would cost him
Sweat, and Blood, and yet He cheerfully Undertook, Underwent, and went through
with them. He voluntarily assumed a Body, that He might become a Sacrifice,
Heb. 10. He was willingly for a little while, made lower than the Angels by
Dispensation, who was above them by Nature, for the suffering of Death, Heb. 2.
9. He understood well the Debtor was Insolvent, and yet he became Surety; He
knew well the Righteousness of God, and yet He was ready to put in sufficient
Caution, to Declare his Righteousness, to Clear, and Vindicate it, that God
might be Just, and the Iustifier of them that should believe in Him, Romans 3.
25, 26. These things would have had their Use; but alas, this Head was brought
in by the Shoulders, only to make way for more of our Authors excellent
Theology. Religion is the Theme he has singled out to practice upon; and he
considers it first in General, and then in its particular Species.

(1.) For Religion in General. It Is founded (says he) on a belief that God is,
and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. That
this is a Postulatum, somewhat to be presupposed in all Religion, is easily
granted; and and no more can be necessarily inferred from the Place. All
Religion does suppose the Existence of God, and that it is not in vain to seek
Him: But if hence our Author would conclude, that nothing more is required as a
Foundation for Sinners to Build their hopes of Acceptance with God, in their
Approaches to him, and Service of him; he gathers what the Apostle strewed not,
and Reaps what, etc. where he Sowed not. There are no Infidels in Hell, the
Devils believe God to Be, and Tremble at their own Belief, wishing they could
persuade themselves, what they have persuaded others, that there is no God:
They know too that God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, and yet
they have no Foundation to come to God. A despairing Cain, a self-condemned
Judas may know this to be a Truth, and yet not seeing a Mediator, through whom
they may securely come, and find Acceptance in their seeking of Him, they dare
not, they have no ground to come; but if this be in very Deed the Foundation of
all Religion, why durst not our Author Trust to it, but fly (as Bellarmine to
his Tutissimum est) to the Lord Jesus Christ: For, page 15. He freely tells us,
That the Foundation of his Hope, is that which is the Foundation of the
Christian Religion, the Sacrifice and Intercession, of our Lord Jesus Christ.

(2.) For the Sorts, and particular Kinds of Religion, he is pleased to
Instance only in three, but he might as well, would he have Created himself the
trouble, have named Threescore. A various Mode, or Circumstance, does not
Constitute a new Religion: It may appear in various Garbs and Dresses, be
represented under other Oeconomies, and Forms, and yet continue the same for
Substance. The Ocean as it salutes differing Shoars, falls under diverse
Denominations, yet is but the same vast Body of the Sea: There may be many
false Religions ( Error is Multiform, Truth is Uniform) but as to any that can
plead for acceptance with God, there never were but Two: That of Integrous and
upright Innocent Persons in Paradise; and that other of Sinners retrieved and
brought back to God by a Mediator. But I attend his Motions.

First, Natural Religion (as he says) is founded on the natural Evidences of
the Divine Bounty and goodness, in making, and Governing the World. I now see
my Error, and it is well it is not too late. He had told us, page 14. That
Religion in its first Natural Estate, knew no Priest nor Sacrifice nor
Mediator. Whence I innocently concluded, that he spoke of a State of Pure and
incorrupt Nature, which indeed knew none of these; but I see I was but Choust;
for here we have a Natural state of Religion, on this side the general Revolt
from God, below the common Apostasy of Mankind, a Sublapsarian Posture of
Affairs, which yet is a mere stranger to Priest, Sacrifice, and Mediator,
founded on Natural Evidences of Divine Bounty and Goodness. To which I humbly
offer: That these Natural Evidences were not, could not be a Foundation firm
enough to bear the weight of the Religion of sinners in their Return to God, so
as to render them secure of Acceptance with him. For, 1. Those natural
Evidences could not assure the guilty World that God would enter into a new
Covenant with them, nor Treat with them upon other Terms, or upon another
Account; and as to the old Terms, they were Lost as to any hope by them. This
we see plainly in Adam; Who when he had sinned, and Guilt Recoyled upon his
Conscience, in stead of Returning to God, he became Vain in his Imaginations,
thinking to fly from him that is Omnipresent, or to Abscond from him that is
Omniscient, he takes Covert in the Trees of the Garden; and he gives this
Reason, He heard the Voice of God, and was afraid: And yet I see not but 'twas
as Rational acourse, as to think of Returning to God, when in that Covenant
wherein he had stood, and now had broken, there was no provision for an
After-game, or salving Matters by Repentance: The Law he had Violated in the
Sanction thereof, tells him he must Die. Natural Evidences from Creation or
Providence, or present Patience, and Reprieve, spoke nothing, till Supernatural
Evidence came in, in that Protevangelium, the Oar and Bullion of Evangelical
Discoveries, The Seed of the Woman, shall break the Serpents Head, Genesis 3. 8,
9, 10. 15. But, 2. I say that Natural Evidence would discover only common
Goodness, and general Bounty, which God might afford the sinner, without any
security that he should not Perish eternally. 3. Whatever Evidences man might
have that God made the World, which were Pregnant enough, yet the Evidences
that God did Govern the World would afford him but cold comfort: Seeing that
the Righteous Governor of the World could not be supposed by any other Laws or
Rules to Administer it, than those he had given at first; which being now
broken, and the Creature withdrawn from Gods Order by Disobedience, what could
Natural Light discover, but that God would Reduce the Creature again into Order
by Punishment? 4. Nor could the Evidences of Gods making the World, give any
Glimps of Assurance, that first or last he would not destroy it (though at
present he suspended the Execution, upon a Secret Design of Grace lodged in his
own Bosom) unless a Mediator had Interposed, and that Interposition Accepted,
and both Revealed to those Consciences which were filled with hideous
Apprehensions about the Holiness of God.

Secondly, The Mosaic Religion was founded on those Miraculous deliverances
which God wrought for Israel, and that particular Providence which watched over
them. To which I return: 1. The Mosaic and the Christian, are not different
Religions, but one and the same for Substance, differing in Ceremony and
Circumstance. What they foresaw, that we enjoy: They had Christ in Sacrifices,
and we have all their Sacrifices in Christ: What they had at sundry times, and
in diverse manners, that have we in one Uniform way by Christ: They had
scattered Particulars, we have them all summed up in one, Heb. 13. 8. Jesus
Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. 2. The Miraculous deliverances
which God wrought for Israel, were indeed Cogent Motives, super-added to those
many others vouchsafed them, but not the Foundation of their Religion under any
Notion: When God gave the Law upon Mount Sinai, He Prefaces it with this strong
Inducement; I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
out of the House of Bondage. -- Thou shall have no other Gods before me. May we
now upon our Authors Warrant, say, That Gods delivering them out of Egypt, was
the Foundation of their Religion in Worshipping the true God, and none besides
Him; or rather that it was an Additional Enforcement to command Obedience to
that Law, which yet Antecedent to such particular Obligation, approved its
Authority to their Consciences? But that these Deliverances and Providence,
were no Foundation for the Mosaic Religion, I shall endeavor to prove.

1. In that God himself declares, that he had laid another Foundation, Isa. 28.
16. Behold, I lay in Zion a sure Foundation: And this is not constitutive of
what was New, but declarative of what was Old; not only a Prophecy of what he
would do, but a clearer Discovery of what he had done; that he might lead them
into stronger Expectations of that Messiah, which from time to time was
promised would come, and in fullness of Time should come; and this Foundation
God laid in Zion: Which though it may express the Gospel Church, yet surely
must not exclude the Jewish, to which the Name Primarily appertains.

2. In that God had actually laid another Foundation, from the Foundation of
the World, for sinners to Build their Hopes upon in their addresses to God.
Thus was Christ the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World, Apoc. 13. 8.
Slain particularly in the Sacrifices, which commencing with the New Covenant,
ran a Line parallel with the Old World, to the one great Sacrifice of Christ
our High Priest upon the Cross. In that first Promise then made to our first
Parents, and afterward Amplified to Abraham, was the Foundation of all
acceptable Religion, and Worship, Genesis 12. 2, 3. God promises to Abraham: In
thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed; which promise that it
contained Christ, the Apostle assures us, Gal. 3. 8^ The Scripture foreseeing
that God would justify t^ Heathen through Faith, Preached before the Gosp^ to
Abraham: In thee shall all the Nations of t^ Earth be blessed, ver. 16. Now to
Abraham a^ his Seed, were the Promises made; he says not t^ Seeds, as of many,
but as of one, and to thy See^ which is Christ. Now unless we will find out ^
Quintum Evangelium, that has nothing of Chri^ in it, Abraham had Christ, for he
had the Gosp^ Preached to him; and I do not understand what Gosp^ signifies
without Christ. Our Author, I me sure, (of all the Men under Heaven) has Reason
to allo^ it; for he would have Christ signify Gospel, an^ therefore cannot
blame us who would have Gosp^ to include Christ, because we are loath his Person
should be quite shut out of it. And again, The Promises were made to Abraham;
And is it not strange that Promises should be made to him, and he not
understand one word of them? What wa^ the Foundation of Abraham's, was the
Foundation of the Jewish Religion: Nothing at all in their Service or Worship,
could plead for Acceptance, b^ as it came under the Influence of those Types
which were of no value in themselves, but upon the Account of Christ. In Levit.
6. 1, 2, 3, 4. If ^ Soul sin, and commit a Trespass against the Lord, etc. I
cannot but give the Reader, a Breviate of some Remarkables in this Scripture.
1. That the Sins here mentioned, were not ceremonial Pollutions, legal
Defilements, but such Wickednesses as were discoverable by the Light, and
condemned by the Law of Nature: Lying, Cozening, Falseswearing, Unfaithfulness
in Trust, etc. 2. That these sins did bring a proper Guilt upon the Conscience,
as being committed against the Lord; and therefore the Sinner was guilty before
God, that is, Obnoxious and liable to his Displeasure, and bound over in
conscience to answer it at Gods Tribunal; ver. 1. If a Soul sin, and commit a
Trespass against the Lord, ver. 4. Then it shall be because he has sinned and
is guilty. 3. That for that part of his Fact which was Injurious to his
Neighbor, that which he violently took away, or the thing he has deceitfully
gotten, or that which was delivered him to keep, or the lost thing which he
found; he was to restore the principal in Specie, and to add a fifth part more,
because of the Damnum emergens. 4. That notwithstanding he had thus compounded
with man, he must bring his Trepass Offering to the Lord, a Ram without
blemish, ver. 6. 5. The Priest was to receive the Trepass Offering at his
hand, and offer it up to the Lord. 6. The design of this Offering was
Atonement, procuring Favor from God. 7. Here Is a Promise of the full Pardon
of sin, annexed unto this Sacrifice, ver. 7. It shall be forgiven him, for any
thing of all that he has done in Trespassing therein: Now upon the whole
Matter, we observe here was Pardon of sin annexed to a Sacrifice; and yet their
Reasons could tell them, as Paul has told us, Heb. 10. 4. It Is not possible
that the blood of Bulls and Goats, should take away sin: And I think we may
venture to say the same of the blood of Rams too. How shall these then be
Reconciled? I know no other way, but by owning the Respect which they bore to
the Lord Jesus Christ, who was from the Foundation of, and all along the World
the only Lamb slain, of value for these ends, in Gods Account.

Thirdly, The Christian Religion [is founded] on the Incarnation, Death and
Resurrection, of the Son of God. Our Author had founded his own, and the
Christian Religion on the Sacrifice, and Intercession of Christ, p. 15. But
perhaps, fearing or finding the Foundation too narrow, has here widened it at
the bottom, and taken in the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. But I hope now the
Storm will blow over, and the Indignation conceived against those Persons who
Love, Honor, and admire Christ's Person, a little Slake; for if their Religion,
the Acceptance of their Persons and Services be built upon Him, as Sacrificed
for them on the Cross, and Interceding for them on the Throne, they do judge it
their duty to love him against the World. Nay, what will you say if our Author
himself should become a Convert; his own Hope, and that is his All (he says) is
Built on the Sacrifice, and Intercession of Christ: And can you imagine but he
should Admire, and Adore his Person? And then may there not arise a danger that
he should set up a Religion of Christ's Person? However that goes, This I know,
it was Christ's blessed Person, that endured the Shock, and abode the Storm of
that Displeasure which was due to our sin; and no Reason can be assigned, why a
Person should endure all the Sorrow, and not have also the Love, Honor, and
Admiration of them for whom he endured it: And if some few Holy men be a little
Transported with the Love of Christ, methinks it is easily pardonable; very few
die of that Disease; no danger this Age should be Hot in the fourth Degree of
Love to a Redeemer, that our Author should be necessitated to Write a Book for
fear it should Poison us: For my part I meet with no such Paroxisms of Divine
Love, that his Iulip should be so much cried up; but I would fain please my
self with this, that whilst he seems Frigidam suffundere, his Real Design is to
make us all more in Love with Christ by a Spiritual Antiperistasis.

(2.) This gives great Reverence and Authority to his Gospel, that it was
Preached by so Great a Person as the Son of God. And therefore whilst he is in
the good Humor, let him Retract those Severe and Toothed Satyrs, wherewith he
has Torn and Lasht those poor Honest Men for loving his Person, but Neglecting
his Laws; when he tells us here, The greater Reverence we have for his Person,
the more sacred Regard we have for his Laws. Perhaps he was then under an
Accession of Gout, Stone, or Cholick, or some of the peevish Distempers, which
made him so Testy, and Teachy, with his best Friends; but now he is a little
come home to himself, he is in as Sweet, Treatable, and Debonaire a Humor as
one could wish, if it would but last. I confess, some may think that All this
is nothing but a Complement which he passes upon Christ's Person, or a little
Holy Water he sprinkles in his Face; and that there Lurks a Snake under these
fair Flowers. -- For he plainly makes Laws and Gospel, Edaequate, and
Commensurate Terms. This gives Reverence to the Gospel, [for] Laws always
partake of the Fate, and condition of the Lawgiver: The Gospel as
Contradistinguisht to the Covenant of Works, denotes the glad Tidings of
Salvation by a Mediator, or the joyful News that there was Forgiveness with
God, that He might be feared. As contradistinguisht to the Old Testamentstate,
it is the glad Tidings of the Son of God sent into the World, that taking upon
him our Nature, he might therein become a Curse for us, and by his perfect
Obedience to the Law, might Purchase and Procure Eternal Life: And are Christ's
Laws and His Gospel become Convertible? Is there no Revelation? No Promise?
Nothing done for us, which cannot come under the Nature of a Law? The Laws of
Christ then are Holy, and Just, and Good; that the Greatness of his Person
Consiliates Reverence, and due Regard to them we acknowledge; that Law and
Gospel are words of equal Extent, we deny, and do think our Author will be
harder put to it to prove Christ to signify Law, than to signify Gospel: Much
less are we satisfied in his Comparison. Numa pretended he received his Laws
from the Goddess Aegeria, to procure a greater Veneration to them. Thus God,
etc. Say you so? Did God procure Veneration for his Laws with such a cunning
Trick, a Pia fraus, as Politic Numa did? Or is Christ grown an Instrument of
Government, as he tells us hereafter Gods Justice is? Well, I hope he Meant
honestly, or else it will be somewhat hard to be tied to Mean just as he Means.

(3.) The Greatness of his Person gives great Authority to his Example, for he
came to be our Prophet, and our Guide, to Teach us by his Precepts and his
Life. Believe it, this is something like? The World is well amended since page
5. For then Preaching the Gospel was the Exercise of his Regal Power. And now
here he has brought it into Decorum again, and at present is under a Pang of
Modern Orthodoxy. But his Example gives us an Evident Demonstration, wherein
the Perfection of Humane Nature consists; for he lived up to the Perfection of
Humane Nature, and the only way to be Perfect is to Live as he Lived. Why then,
I doubt, we must never be in any sense Perfect all the days of our Lives; for
in the very next Page, he proves, That Christ's becoming Poor, though he was
Rich; a Servant, though he was Lord of Life, are such Expressions of Love as we
can never fully Imitate; and so Adieu to all Perfection to the Worlds end. It
was, indeed, Prudently done to Imitate the Wisdom of Nature, to Plant his
Antidote so near his Poison, that if he scattered Infection in one Page, to
fortify our feeble Spirits against the Impressions of it in another. A little
Observation will Dismiss this Period. And,

1. One would think that to live as Christ lived, was not so much the way to
Perfection, as Perfection it self. Your dull Syntagmatical Divines use to
distinguish between the Means and the End; or the way to the Wood, and the Wood
it self; but great Spirits are above Pedantick Laws, and therefore to please
all Parties, for once let the way to be Perfect, be to be Perfect.

2. I observe that the Scripture owns some to be Perfect who never lived, all
out, nay, nothing near so well as Christ lived, 1 Chronicles. 15. 17. The heart of
Asa was perfect all his days; and yet we read, that In his Disease he sought
not to the Lord, but to the Physician; he took not away the High places; he was
wroth with the Prophet Hanani, and put him in Prison; and yet perhaps our
Author can Evade, That notwithstanding this, he might come up to his Pattern;
for Christ himself, once or twice, put on the Person of a Jewish Zealot. There
was then a time when a man might have been perfect, and yet not Live up to the
absolute Perfection of Christ, but I perceive its lost, and is to be numbered
amongst the Resperditae of Pancirol. To conclude, How far Christ is to be
Imitated, is a Question of greater Difficulty, than at first sight may be
Imagined. Some Works he performed as God, others as Mediator, and others as a
Man. Those which he performed as God, the Miraculous Operations of the Deity,
none need be dissuaded from Imitation of; for no stronger a Reason, than
because it is Impossible: To Raise the Dead, cast out Devils, Cure Diseases with
a Word, or Touch, are Matter of our Admiration, not Imitation. I know, indeed,
some of our Modern Schoolmen, will tell us, That though we cannot Imitate
Christ herein to the height, yet we may imitate him as far as we can. Thus
though Raising the Dead, be a little too Many for you, yet you may come to the
Grave of your dead Friend, command him to come forth; but if he be Sullen, and
will not stir hand nor foot, let him take his Course, and lie there still like
his Grace in cold Clay clad: You have done your Duty, and may satisfy your
Conscience, that you have Imitated Christ as far as you can, by as Useful a
Figure as any is in Rhethorick, called (...). The Works which Christ performed
as Mediator, though we cannot Imitate them for those special Ends which Christ
had in His Eye; yet must we Imitate that Moral principle from which, and the
General End unto which, he Levelled those Actions: Thus we cannot Die for that
end for which Christ Died, especially to Atone sin, yet may we, must we
Conform our Souls to that Love which carried him out to the Work, and Eye the
general Advantage of the Church, in laying down our Lives when called to it, 1
John 3. 16. Herein perceive we the Love of God, that he laid down his Life for
us, and we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren. And the Argument
concludes strongly: If Christ [a Person so great] laid down his Life, [a Life
so precious] for us [so unworthy] and in such a way to be a Propitiation for
our sins; how much more, ought we [Inconsiderable Creatures] to lay down our
Lives [so useless] for the Brethren, [so dear to God] when our single Death,
may by the Providence of God, prevent some Impending danger, or notable Ruin,
that Threatens the Community? So again, Col. 3. 13. As Christ forgave you, so
also do ye. We are to forgive, as Christ forgave: And yet the [As] is a Note of
Similitude, not of Equality: Christ's forgiveness is one thing, ours another;
they differ Specifically, yet there is a Moral equity which holds, that if
Christ freely pardons our sins, much more ought we ( in our way) to pass by,
and not Rigidly exact those Trespasses committed against us. But the Actions of
Christ, as a Man Living in Obedience to the Moral Law, and especially that
Frame of Cheerfulness, Readiness, Sincerity therein, these call for our
Imitation.

(4) This assures us of the Infinite value of his Sacrifice, and the power of
his Intercession. I have heard some Travelers, when they have met with a spot
of good way, after long tedious laping in the Dirt, say, they could be tempted
to ride it over again, but the consideration, how long they have been, and how
soon again they must be engaged in ways of the same difficulty, has reformed
the vanity of that Crotchet. I could gladly dwell upon some pleasant passages
in this Chapter, (which prove undenyably that there is no such thing as summum
malum in the world,) but that I am importuned by the approaching foul way to
make haste into it, that I may get the sooner through it. Sunshine is
pleasant, but it often proves a breed-storm; and a Dead calm in our Master
Aristotle's Philosophy is the Prognostic and Prodrome of an Earthquake. But
yet why should we kill our selves for fear of dying, and make our selves
miserable for fear another should do it for us? We will then make the best we
can of the present Halcyon tranquillity: This assures us of the Infinite value
of his Sacrifice, and the Power of his Intercession, It Is so indeed; for though
the Manhood only was the Sacrifice, yet the Person God-Man was the Priest; and
though the Sacrifice was not God, yet was it the Sacrifice of him who was God;
none can therefore wonder that our Author calls it of Infinite value. Nor on
the other hand let any surmise, that he uses the Term Infinite to impose upon
us; though some perhaps may carry a jealous Eye over him, because he has dropped
an odd word or two elsewhere which seem to warp the sense of Infinite to
Finite, or Indefinite; In p. 208. he denies that the Divine Nature it self has
endless, boundless, bottomless Grace in it; Though God be rich in Grace, he
has no where told us, that his Mercy was bottomless and boundless, (which yet
is that Notion of Infinite that we have ever Received) and yet the same Author,
in the same Page, will allow Grace to be Infinite. A world of sin is somewhat,
though it bear no Proportion to infinite Grace. Hence I perceive some would
infer, that if the Grace of the Father may be infinite, and yet not
boundless, the Blood of the Son may be so too, of Infinite value, that is, of a
great uncertain worth, in which sense Vorstius will allow God to be Infinite:
They do also foment their own suspicion from what here follows, as it were by
way of Exegesis: His Sacrifice was of greater value than the Blood of Bulls and
Goats. Nay then, if there was only a Magis and a Minus in the case, all this
might be, and yet Christ's Sacrifice come infinitely short of Infinite. These
things may be objected, but for my own part, (though he be angry at it in other
places, when he is not concerned) I shall interpret his words according to
their Chime and clink, and charitably expound his meaning by the sound of words.

That which follows is Truly excellent. God cannot but be pleased, when his
own Son undertakes to be a Ransom, and to make an Atonement for sinners,
which is so great a Vindication of Gods Dominion and Sovereignty, of the
Authority of his Laws, the Wisdom and Justice of his Providence, that he may
securely pardon humble and penitent sinners, without reproaching any of his
Attributes. What pity it is a single word should here be lost.

1. God will not, indeed cannot, pardon any sin to the reproach of his
Attributes. The hopes of sinners are small, if these be their hopes, that to
pardon them God will destroy Himself: It would be the reproach of pardoning
Mercy it self, should we conceive it ready to pardon without respect to the
Interest of other Attributes. As therefore God is ready to pardon, a way must
be contrived that he may securely pardon; and when it is said [he cannot] it is
no Impeachment of His Omnipotency; He is therefore Omnipotent because he cannot
Do some things, the Doing whereof would imply want of Power. He cannot Dye,
and is therefore the rather Omnipotent, because he cannot: He cannot Deny
himself, and therefore he can do all things, because he cannot do that; for
he that can Deny Himself, his Word, Promise, or Threatening, may be presumed
Able to do very little: Thus therefore God cannot pardon sin, without security
that his Attributes be not reproached, for so to do, would argue a
Remisseness, and languid easiness in a Governor which is a weakness, and no
perfection.

2. We gather from our Author, That even humble and penitent sinners need the
Interposition of Christ, that God may securely pardon them: for besides that
even they are but imperfectly such, and that sin still cleaves to their
Repentance and Humiliation, and further that the displicency of God against
sin, as it is sin, small or great, is essential to Him; besides all this, those
however humble and penitent ones, turning from sin for the future, have yet old
scores to discharge, former Reckonings to clear, and have need of Christ to
cross the Book for old Arrears, though for the time to come they should reach
the (...); which yet it is much to a little, they will not do: but when Christ
undertakes to be a Ransom, God may securely pardon humble and penitent
sinners, and not till then.

3. In pardoning of these humble and penitent sinners, Gods Dominion,
Sovereignty, and the Authority of his Laws must be vindicated; for God being
the Righteous Judge of all the Earth, should he discover a facile Indulgence,
and indifferent connivence at Sin, the Authority of his Laws were gone in a
moment, and the sinews of Government cut asunder; God then must be declared to
be a Righteous God; the Sanction of the Law, as to Promise running thus; Do
this and live: Do this personally, do this exactly, do this constantly and
perpetually, and then live; and as to Threatening thus: Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do
them, Gal. 3. 10. And of the same mind with our Author is, (as I remember) one
Dr. I. O. who is very peremptory, that the Justice of God may have its actings
assigned to the full; which is not done by Any that ever yet was heard of, but
the Lord Jesus Christ: Now whilst I see the sweet Agreement of these two at
present, I fancy my self with Aeneas in the Elysian fields, pleasing himself
with the Amicable correspondence held between Caesar and Pompey; and yet his
delight mixed with another passion, even grief in the foresight of their Civil
Wars and Friendly Debates.

Illae autem, Paribus quas fulgere cernis in Armis, Concordes Animae nunc, and
dum nocte Premuntur, Heu! quantum inter se bellum, si Lumina Vitae Attigerint,
quantas Acies stragemque ciebunt*? Aeneid. lib. 6.

4. Jesus Christ having undertaken to be a Ransom, and to make Atonement for
Sinners, and his blood being of Infinite value, the oldest, greatest, and
stubbornest Sinners, through Faith may possibly come to be concerned in Christ's
Ransom, and Atonement, and so may be saved with a Notwithstanding their sins;
for seeing Gods Dominion, S^vereignty, the Authority of his Laws, the Wisdom
and Justice of his Providence, are all vindicated by this Means, and security
given that none of his Attributes shall be reproached, what can Now hinder
repenting sinners from coming to God? and what can hinder God from rewarding
those that so come, and diligently seek him? Nay,

5. God cannot but be well pleased when his own Son undertakes to be a Ransom,
and to make Atonement for sinners. And the Reason is evident, The price being
of Infinite value, and paid into God^ hands, he cannot but be satisfied with
it. Nay further, We can Reasonably desire no greater security for the
Performance of the Gospel Covenant, than that it was sealed with the Blood of
Christ, the surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7. 22. who is (...), one that
undertakes for the Performance of it. I could willingly lose my self, my
Reader, and my Time in the Throng of these good words. Say not; This is only
the Sealing of a Covenant on Gods part, undertaking for him whose veracity
needs none to undertake for it; but not for us, whose guilt and weakness needs
an undertaker. The Covenant being mutual, the undertaking must be supposed
Reciprocal also; and so I hope our Author intends it; that as Christ undertakes
for God, with Man, so he undertakes with Man unto God. Perhaps you will say, A
word or two might have been added, to have put matters out of dispute; why so
there might in any bodies Writings besides his, and as many spared, hanc veniam
petimusque damusque. As 1. It Is likely you would have had him say, The Virtue
of Christ's Sacrifice depends not only very much on the Greatness of his
Person, but Altogether, and the Acceptance thereof with God depends on the
Compact between them both; seeing that which depends altogether, does depend
very much on the Greatness of his Person; and therefore pray let that break no
squares. 2. Whereas he says, The Blood of the Son of God, is such a
Confirmation of the Covenant, as the World never had before. Perhaps you would
add Actually, because the World had it before Virtually exhibited in
Sacrifices, and accepted as already Performed: But set your hearts at Rest,
whether he meant well or ill in this Chapter, I Will engage you shall not be
prejudiced, if he happens to discover an ill meaning in the next Chapter; and
in the mean time, let us go seek all over Paul's Churchyard, Little-Britain and
Duk-lane, for an old Treatise, De modo tenendi Anguillam Aequivocationis per
Caudam.

(5) The Person of Christ is of no other Consideration in the Christian
Religion, than as it has an influence upon the great Ends of his Undertaking. I
confess, I had thought, our Author had not been upon the Head, What
Consideration the Person of Christ is of? but, Of what Use the Consideration of
his Person is? but let that pass. I had thought too, that the former four
particulars had shown us, What influence Christ's Person has upon the great Ends
of his Undertaking; and therefore this seems not to be a fifth Particular, but
the total sum of the other four, but I wave that too. The Lord Jesus Christ
undertook both with God and with Man; for God, and for Man, and he had special
Ends of his undertaking in both. He undertook for God, that he should be
willing to pardon sinners; and for man, that he should return and come back to
God: He undertook to God, that his Attributes should not be reproached, but all
secured, his Righteousness cleared, his Holiness vindicated; he undertook to
man that God should make every word and letter of the Promises good; as they
stand in the Covenant of Grace: He undertook that God^ Justice, should not
break out upon the believing, repenting creature, to consume him; and he
undertook that Man should not break in upon Gods glory, nor break away from
Gods Ways, in a manner inconsistent with a New Covenant. What a horrid
Absurdity then must it be, to imagine that his Person will destroy these Ends,
or to expect more from the excellency of his Person, than his Gospel has
promised Most wretchedly therefore do they deceive themselves, and wrong the
Redeemer, who Trusting to the goodness of his Nature, Renounce his Mediation;
that trust in his Person without a Promise, nay in contradiction to the Terms
of that Covenant which he has sealed with his Blood; that quit hi^ Promise, to
rely and roll on his Person: For should he acquit those men whom his Gospel
condemns, wilful and incorrigible sinners, this would flatly disannull the
Covenant: Though he may absolve such sinners as the Covenant of Works condemns,
through the Intervention of Christ's Sacrifice.

But I perceive we are besides the Cushion all this while, nay besides the
Book, for he knows none tha^ will in so many words own it, nor does he, dares
he charge any man with it; but yet it is the natural I^terpretation of Trusting
in the Person of Christ. That is, It Is impossible to Trust in Christ's Person,
but you do ipso facto Renounce his Mediation: or to Trust in his Blood, but
you must ^o Nomine do it in Contradiction to the Terms of the Covenant sealed
therewith; or which is all one, it is impossible but that things subordinate
should be opposite; The blood of Christ and the Covenant of Christ are
perfectly (...); The Person of the Mediator, and his Mediatory work cannot be
conceived, but they involve the thoughts in a thousand Contradictions; Positio
unius, est Remotio Alterius; Nay soft says he, I only mean, in case they
understand any more by these things, than expecting to be saved according to
the Terms of the GospelCovenant. I do not think they do. And as our Author
gave his word for those that are suspected to make Christ's Person useless; if
my word would go as far as his, I would readily engage it for them who are
suspected to make his Laws useless. And so once again, all is Hushed and still;
and the fearful skirmish that was toward, is at present stinted, Pulveris
exigui jactu.

Let me therefore in the Close, give our Author one wholesome Caution: That he
would not be too rash and peremptory in drawing, or wracking Conclusions from
other men's Expressions. Some will think, he has mistaken in his own, and may
with more ease in others Principles, and the Conclusions from thence. A Ladder
of Deductions and Inferences forty Rounds long, is not easily mastered: A
Sorites or Climax may quickly impose upon us; we are never sooner cheated than
in a Chain of many links, the smallest interruption may secr^tly and insensibly
discompose the whole series and concatenation of Dependencies, wherein we fancy
an infallible Connection; I would not anticipate (...) Hericano; ill weather
comes unsent for; and is always too soon, and unwelcome when it comes the
latest; let us therefore keep our selves well, whilst we are well.

Thus smoothly we conclude; and say,
Here ends your Worships Chapter for the Day.
CHAP. III.
Section 1. Of the Knowledge of Christ.
THis Section allures the Eye of the Reader with the specious Frontispiece of
the knowledge of Christ, but proves a mere MockBeggar-Hall, and Fools
Expectation, like a Fair Porch to no House, or a great Mountain without a
Mouse; just like the Gilded Titles of Apothecaries Boxes, which pretend to
Lodge the rich Drugs of Pontus, and both the Indies; but are Inhabited often by
the Poisonous Spider, and Hung with Cobweb-Tapistry, Spun out of her own
Bowels, and Woven with her curious Fingers: Or like those gaudy Signs which
Encounter us upon the Road, whose promising Motto first Invites the Traveller
with Hopes of Horse-meat, and Mans-meat, and then Baffles his hopes with
Entertainment that would sterve a Dog: To see our Author heaving for a
farfetcht Blow, you would verily think he Designed to Knock the Business
stone-dead for ever; whilst he does but Imitate the Blacksmith, that would
needs Use the great Sledge- Hammer to Kill a Fly on his Child's Forehead, and
very Discreetly dashed out the poor Infants Brains. Leave we him therefore to
the Satisfaction of his own private Thoughts a while, and let ours give the
Readers Patience a small Exercise.

The Happiness of Man consists in the Knowing and Enjoying the True God,
blessed for ever; and therefore He, who is never wanting to his own Glory, nor
to His Creatures Happiness (in such ways as best Comply with His own
Unsearchable Wisdom) first Created Man, and then gave him an Understanding to
Know, a Heart to Love and Enjoy His Creator: Admirably proportioning his
Faculties to his Employment; and as he made it his Work and Wages to Love and
Serve, he furnished him with a Soul qualified to Love and Serve his God: But
when Man had sinned, and thereby lost his Fitness for that blessed Service; it
pleased God to enter into a New and better Covenant with him, Established upon
that Promise, Genesis 3. 15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head.
God would not suffer Satan to rejoice too much in his success, and glory in his
greater hopes, that he should sweep the World before him, and draw the rational
Creation into the same Ruin, into which he found himself Irrecoverably
Plunged. The Father had Divided to the Redeemer a Portion with the Great, and
Promised He should Divide the Spoil with the strong, and Wrest out of his hands
that Advantage he had gotten over Man by sin, and the Curse inseparably annexed
to it: In the Faith of this Promise, had guilty Man encouragement to Return to
God, and not sinck down in black Despair, to which, the Reflections he must
needs make upon that Cursed state he had so cheaply brought himself into, could
not but Expose him. And though the Generality of the Sons of Men through their
own sinful Neg^ect, Lost the Faith of that first and precious Promise; yet the
Gracious God took Effectual Care, that his Service and Worship should be
carried down in a chosen Seed and holy Line, from our first Parents, by
righteous Abel, heavenly Enoch, upright Noah and others, to believing Abraham,
to whom he was Graciously pleased to vouchsafe a more Distinct and Explicit
Revelation of the Promised Seed: And whereas before, all Families of the Earth
might equally pretend to the hopes of it, Now God Clears and Secures it to his
Faith, that in his Seed (by the Line of Isaac) should all the Nations of the
Earth be Blessed. In pursuance of this Promise, and the glorious Design managed
thereupon, he Renews in a more Solemn, Ample, and full Manner, the Covenant of
Grace with him, the Epitome, and Abstract whereof was this, Genesis 17. 7. I will
be thy God. And for the greater Security, adds Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. As the Family of Abraham was branched out
into two; so we observe how the vigilant Eye of Providence Traces that Line, by
which He had fore-appointed to Conveigh so Rich a Mercy as a Redeemer, down to
the following Generations: And accordingly he Hedges it about with special
Care, Waters it with extraordinary Blessings, Impales it from the Common and
Wild of the World, by distinguishing Ordinances, that it might get a fixed Root
in the Earth. Hence was Ishmael waved, and Isaac taken into special Protection;
Esau excluded, and Jacob comes under the peculiar Cognizance of God; just as
the Stream and Current of the Promise found its proper Channel, and the other
Old ones grew either Shallow and Inconsiderable, or quite Dried up. For the
better Securing, and more prosperous Managing this great Project, God was also
pleased to cast the Posterity of Jacob into a visible Church-frame, and
Political Model, appointing to them a Ceremonial Law as an Appendice to the
former; and the Judicial Law as an Appendice to the latter Table of the Moral
Law, accommodating so the whole, that all might lead to Him who was indeed the
whole life and Soul of that Administration; An High Priest and other inferior
ones he also instituted, with great variety of Sacrifices and operose services,
(arising from the beggarliness and poverty of all Types) fully to represent the
Messiah, in whom they did more abundantly meet; yet herein might they (as in a
Glass) eye a Redeemer, and in him, God appeased, sin pardoned, and their
Persons justified, and accepted; The satisfactory Reason whereof lay only in
him, who was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, in Gods
Acceptance, and representation to the Faith of Believers. Now whilst God did
thus Train up the Jewish Church, in the hopes, and expectation of a Deliverer;
he offered also to others of the World, (though forfeiting Gods especial Notice
by the general revolt, and common Apostasy,) a joint Interest in those
privileges stated and settled upon the Iudaical Church as her Dowry, provided
they would come under the bond of the Covenant, and join themselves to the
people of God, and thereby attend the great Ends and reach of Divine Grace, to
save sinners by the Intervention of the seed of the Woman. And further, to
leave some standing hints upon Record, that in due time he intended to throw
open the bedge, and let the Gentiles into the Privileges of the Jews, (who
seemed the Monopolizers of all true Religion, and Worship) it has graciously
pleased the same God to reveal to some few others out of the Purlieus of that
Body, as to Job, the Doctrine of a Redeemer, as early pledges to the World,
that those favors should not always lie under Sequestration; How miraculously
God preserved this Church and State, is needless to insist on; but remarkable
was his Care over Judah, that though she had justified her sister Samaria, and
outdone those in sin, whom she had out-gone in Mercy, yet when the ten Tribes
were hurried away into Captivity; God remembered that ancient Promise, that
Scepter and Lawgiver were not to depart from Judah, till he that should come,
was come: and therefore notwithstanding as heinous provocations (all
Circumstances considered,) and proportionable dangers, as ever yet exposed a
people to utter ruin, still Judah lived: And though the Holy God in
Vindication of his wronged Honor before the world, was concerned to visit
their Iniquities with a Seventy years Captivity in Babylon, yet still he kept a
fixed Eye upon the Tribe of Judah, and especially the Family of David, to which
(e're this) the producing of the Messiah had been entai^ed. And it was not for
Nothing, that after their Return, they were so precise and punctual in their
Genealogies, that there might no scruple arise in aftertimes, when Christ
should come, but that he was of the Stock of Abraham, of the Tribe of Judah, of
the seed of David according to the flesh: In contemplation of which stupendous
design, the wisdom of its management, his Arm made bare, to second and back the
work, how the Great God preserved the Jewish Polity from utter dissolution,
till it had done its work, and teemed the Messiah into the World; and when that
was done, how all things conspired for its dissolution; how the greatest
Convulsions and Earthquakes, which would have unhinged other Kingdoms, and have
thrown them from their Consistency, yet made that Commonwealth take deeper
root, whilst God would serve himself thereof, and when he had no more service
for that Tribe, how it was scattered; How Providence marvellously secured the
Vessel (in the midst of those waves which the Malice of Hell endeavored to
lift up as high as Heaven) wherein the Salvation of the World was embarked,
and when it had once safely landed a Savior in the habitable parts of the
Earth, where his delights had been, how the Ship sprung a leak, and sunk of it
self: These things make me (with the Divine Herbert) pause, and say,

How dear to me, O God, thy Councels are! Who may with thee compare?

But our Authors lips do not like these Lettuces: Two things he industriously
sweats at in this Section: First, To show us, Wherein Happiness consists, and
then to inform us in the Way and Means to reach that Happiness; A glorious
Undertaking indeed; wherein though he should founder, yet an Attempt has its
praise, and may at least plead for Phaetons Epitaph,

Quem si non tenuit, Magnis tamen excidit Ausis.

It was Austins Censure of the Platonists, Patriam viderunt, Viam ignorarunt:
They were convinced that true Happiness must needs consist in enjoying the True
God. The chiefest Good, (...). A Being, Self-being, Essential being; but they
were wretchedly bewildred in finding out the way to the enjoyment of him; and
for all their skill could never double the Cape of good Hope. Where Plato
ended, our Author begins, Ubi desinit Philosophus, incipit Theologus; and
wherein he failed, he undertakes to write his Supplement.

[1] Then (though there be less need of that) would you know wherein true
happiness consists? you are answered, In the Knowledge and Love of God, who is
the greatest and best Being. If he means the utmost happiness Man's Nature is
capable of, it wants a word or two; This Knowledge must be a perfect Knowledge,
and this Love, a perfect Love; and to this Knowledge, and Love of Man to God,
you must add the Sense of Gods Love to, and delight in Man, and Man's
reciprocal satisfaction and complacency in God as his Portion. It Is a tedious
Question bandyed amongst the Schoolmen, wherein the Formale of Blessedness
lies; some contend for the Vision, others for the Love of God: but he seems to
me to have determined best, who has joined both; Faelicitas hominis consistit
quidem in Visione, sed Charitativa; and in Amore, sed Oculatissimo. The
Happiness of Man consists in the most Loving Sight, and in the most Seeing Love
of God; but the Controversy will not lie here.

[2] For the Means of Reaching this Happiness, he assigns this; God has made
known himself and will to the World. Our Author is now obliging Posterity with
a Discovery of the North-east Passage to China, and the Indies; the old way
round about Africa is tedious, and dangerous, and therefore let him not want
the Trade-wind of your Prayers, that he meet not with Sir Hugh Willoughbies
Fate, whilst he attempts to make out a shorter Cut. Now concerning this, you
must understand; That God who is never wanting to his own Glory, and the
Happiness of his Creatures, has taken care in all Ages, by one Means or other
to make known himself, and his Will to the World. Our Author presumes he has
penned this Discourse with much Artifice, and laid a train of fallacies for us,
which if not timely discovered, and prevented, will irrecoverably blow us and
our Cause up into the Air, in the next Section: But indeed the best part of
his Policy is the confounding of things, and involving them in such Intricacies
and Perplexities, that it is much harder to discover his Errors, than to confute
them being once discovered; like what Physicians tell us of the Hectic Fever,
that in its first Rise it is hardly discerned, but otherwise easily cured; and
at length easily discovered, but then impossible to be removed; according to
the French Proverb, Toutes les maladies, termines en Ique, font aux Medecins la
Nique. And therefore, e re things are gone too far, and we be given over by
Aesculapius himself, as those whom safety it self cannot save, let us try if we
may prevent a growing evil.

And (1) it stumbles some I perceive, that he lays the Happiness of Mankind in
the Knowledge and Love of God, and then the Means to that End in making known
himself, and his will; which looks as if the Means and the End were coincident,
and the knowledge of God, were the way to know God.

(2) He supposes that God has by one Means or other made himself known: by
which Means, if he understand no more than the lowest Agents, and subordinate
Instruments, it will not do his work, and we can grant what will not serve his
Cause; but if he exclude the Son of God, who is the Sovereign Revealer of the
Fathers Counsels in all Ages; that we shall not grant, and that he cannot prove.

(3) We are more dissatisfied about this one point, that he makes the
Revelation of Gods Will a sufficient Means for Happiness, to all Ages: for
though it were granted to have been so, in the state of primitive Integrity;
yet it is not so in those Ages when the whole world lay in wickedness. The
Spirit of God describes the state of Sin, to be a state of Impotency. Romans 5.
6. When ye were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly:
There must go something more (then) to make the Means sufficient to attain
that End, than a Naked discovery of what God would have Sinners do, even
strength and ability to do it; for the Will of God was, and is the same; Do
this and live; and if strength be not afforded to fulfill this Law exactly
(which none could ever yet find) nor a Substitute allowed, (which some will not
accept,) Man may, and must perish as well with, as without the discovery of
Gods Will; with this only difference, that he sees now his sin going before
him unto Judgment.

(4) It Is very vain to talk of Man's tampering about doing the Will of God, in
Order to Eternal Life, till some means be found out to take up the old
Controversy; and make a peace betwixt God, and his Creature, that they may
treat upon other Terms* We are sure Adam thought it so; And the first in its
kind may well be allowed the just measure of all after Attempts; who when he
had sinned, went and hid himself; at once discovering both his Rational fear,
which was to stand before God; and his foolish contrivance, which was, to hide
himself from God in the Covert of the Trees, under which (nay under Rocks and
Mountains) it had been more comfortable for him ever to have shrouded his
guilty Face, had not God revealed the postliminary means of conversing with him.

(5) We think our Authors Reason is as lame, as his Assertion, viz. Because God
is never wanting to his Creatures happiness: To which I return,

1. God will not have his Goodness impeached, because he exerts it such a Way,
Method, and Measure, as seemed good to his own infinite wisdom, and sovereign
pleasure: If any shall dare to charge God foolishly, I doubt not he will acquit
himself well enough; but if he will plead his Prerogative, he can demur to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and refuse before the Bar of Imperious and saucy
Reason, to give an Account of any of his matters, Job 33. 13. But,

2. God did create man upright at first, and if he departs from the Law of his
Creation. I know not whether an Action will lie against his Goodness, should he
leave him to perish in his Apostasy; A Father is not bound to set up his Son,
as often as he will shut up shop and become Bankrupt.

3. God was not wanting to the Happiness of his Creature when fallen; but did
provide a remedy for him, and remembered him in his law, in his lost Estate*
because his mercy endured for ever: but then it is upon another Account than
this Assigned by our Author: for he supposes, That Gods not being wanting to
his own Glory, and not being wanting to his Creatures happiness, stand upon one
and the same level, in equal terms of Necessity: but I suppose quite another
thing; God had not been wanting to his own Glory, could have secured that well
enough, though Man had perished, though he had never revealed a Mediator
betwixt God and Man: And that he has done it, is to be ascribed to a Sovereign
Act of Grace. But I see what things are vereing to: Deus non erit Deus, nisi
homini placuerit: God shall not be God, unless he approve himself to every
Caprice of a Rational Divine; who has two peculiar Privileges, and
incommunicable Properties; one, that he may call whom he will Irrational; and
the other, that he may canonize what he will for Reason.

4. I Will throw him in a little one. Although he tells us, God is not wanting to
the happiness of his Creatures, and therefore by one means or other he revealed
himself to the World: yet he also acquaints us, p. 30. Long and sad experience
proved all these ways ineffectual: And as good never a whit, as never the
near; For all this was but rubbing a Brickbatt, and putting a Blackmore into a
Lather, and so we are but just as we were; for though he was not wanting to
them, yet it seems, wisdom was wanting to Him, whose Contrivances did not
attain their Ends; and thus our Author has spun a fair thread; I Will only mind
him of the Epigram:

Turpe est difficiles habere Nugas,
Et stultus labor est Ineptiarum.
Having discoursed these things in general, it is a fine sight to stand by,
whilst our Author is dividing the World into Provinces; and its several
Appartments: And you shall hear him (not ^ispute, but) with the Cartesian;
Provincias dare Atomis, or split a single Cummin-seed into four and twenty
equal parts.

(1) For the state of Integrity; How God was not wanting to his Creatures
Happiness therein, he informs you at large. He left such visible Impresses of
his own Wisdom and Power on the works of Nature, and planted in the Mind of Man
such a Natural Knowledge of himself, that it was as easy to discover the first
Author of all things, as it is now for a well disposed Eye to see the Sun when
it shines, and while Man preserved his Innocence, God Himself did not disdeign
to converse with him. And so I hope Adam is well provided for: Some may think,
that we are here less agreed, and others that we are more of a Mind than indeed
we really are. I shall not take notice of that Phrase of conversing with God,
it looks as if it were near a kin to, and well nigh as bad, as that of holding
Communion with God, which he afterward throws up his Nose so scornfully at:
Some other matters may have a Room in our Consideration: As,

[1] That this Knowledge of God was Natural, had need be a little better
trimmed than ordinary: Natural, either imports what is constitutive of our
Beings, or flows immediately from the Principles of Nature; or else what is
congruous, and agreeable to our Natures, as designed for such an Employment as
is proper to them: If he take Natural in the first sense, I softly deny that,
The Knowledge of God which made or would have made Adam happy, was Natural to
him: And my Reason is, that what does so constitute Nature, or flow immediately
from the Principles thereof, cannot possibly be separated from that Being, but
withal, the very Being is destroyed; but we see damned Souls and Devils retain
all that knowledge of God, which did constitute their Essences, and yet have
lost all that knowledge of God, which is or may be a Means to their happiness;
they retain their Beings, are not physically stripped of them, though they are
Morally divested of all the Comfort of their Beings: but then if by Natural
Knowledge, no more be intended, but that upon supposition, God would create man
to serve, love, and enjoy him, it was due to a Being so posited, to be so
qualified: If man must serve his Maker, and in that service enjoy him, and in
that enjoyment be Happy in him, then indeed is it natural, such a Knowledge,
such a Will, such a Heart, should be bestowed upon him; but I would have this
Bush soundly beaten by a better Huntsman than my self, and ten to one, he may
from under it start a Pelagian.

[2] It would be enquired, whether this Natural Knowledge was a sufficient
means for Adams Happiness? Our Author seems clearly to assert it, but I confess
I cannot join with him, as believing that much more was required of, and indeed
bestowed upon him than a Natural Knowledge of God. He was made in the Image,
and likeness of God, Genesis 1. 26, 27. A main part of that Image lay in
Righteousness, Eccles. 7. 29. God made man upright, (...): Rectum; there was a
Rectitude of all the Powers and Faculties; an exact conformity of them to one
another; and of all to the Revealed Will of God; And this appears, In that the
Image of God restored by Grace, assures us what that Image was which he once
had, but since has lost, Ephesians. 4. 24. And that ye put on the New Man which after
God is created in Righteousness, and True Holiness: And indeed, the first man
not being capable of a foreign Righteousness, whereby he might be justified,
(that Covenant either not needing it, supposing he had stood, or not admitting
it, on supposition of a Fall) he must necessarily have a Righteousness
inherent, one of his own, to qualify him to hold Communion, or (to speak
warrantably with our Author) converse with God.

[3] I question much that Expression of Innocence, as not very Innocent; it has
been taken upon suspicion many a time, and sometime could not give a good
Account of it self. Casta quidem sed non credita: And it has been the more
narrowly observed, since a Generation of Men arose in the world who would
persuade us, That the Perfection of Man in his first Creation, lay not in any
positive Qualities of Holiness, Righteousness, and Truth, but in a bare Freedom
from sin; That is, they would fancy Man to have been created as pure white and
Innocent as a sucking Lamb; but not so much as the first preparative blue
toward the tincture of any Virtues; but whether this one word in our Author,
may be iuterpreted so high, time must discover. And hitherto of the State
wherein God created Man.

(2.) A second Period of Time into which our Author has Thrown the World, is
that from Adam to Abraham, inclusively. Upon which Interval he Philosophizes
even to our wonderment. In afterAges as Mankind grew more corrupt, and declined
to Idolatry. Here I want our Authors Accuracy, or must complain of a Fallacy;
for methinks it is a deadly long stride, to step from Adam to after-Ages,
without the Bridge of some Neat Transition; he might have made two steps of
this: just now, we found Man in the state of Innocence, and now we find him
corrupt, and declined to Idolatry, and yet none can imagine how this evil of
Sin and Misery invaded the world: The Heathens were at their wits-ends about
it; the Manichees could not invent a way to assoyl it, but by assigning a
double Eternal Cause, or Principle, the one of Good, the other of Evil: And now
when we expected great matters from this Gentleman, to be left in the lurch,
and fobb'd off with a blind account, that this was done in after-Ages; In
after-Ages as Mankind grew more corrupt: Oh! it seems they were Corrupt before,
and inclined to Idolatry, but in these villainous afterAges they grew more
Corrupt; Religion passed through many hands, and in long Tract of time gathered
Moss and Furre; Men sliding insensibly, none ever knew how, into this
degeneracy; and Trace it up as high as you can, yet Nilus hides his Head beyond
the Mountains of the Moon: That Men are corrupt and stark naught we see, but
how they became so, or when first turned out of the way, that is hid in darkness
and perpetual Night. But there is one St. Paul (as obscure an Author as some
would represent him) that would have spoken a thousand times more to our
satisfaction than this Gentleman. Romans 5. 12. By one man sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all men, in that (or in whom,
(...),) all have sinned. V. 17. By one Man's Offense Death reigned by one. V.
18. By the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all to Condemnation: That the
evil that we experience in the world (and that is abundance) may be reduced to
two heads, it is either Malum Culpae, or Malum Poenae: Either the Evil of Sin,
or the Evil of Punishment for sin. Now this Excellent Author tells us, that
both these Evils came from one root, one spring, and that was one Man, and that
one Man was Adam; This seems to have a probable face of the Origin of Evil,
but he was a dark Writer. There is therefore another Author, that wrote a Book
called, The Catholic Doctrine believed and professed in the Church of England;
one with whom our Author has some Reason to be acquainted, for a Reason or two
that I know of; now this Author tells us, Art. 9. Of Original or Birth-sin,
That* Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the Pelagians
vainly talk, N. B.) but it is the Fault and Corruption of the Nature of every
Man, that Naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam, whereby Man is very
far gone from Original Righteousness, and is inclined to evil, so that the
Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and therefore in every person born into the
world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. I promise you here are a great
many terrible words, that would not be dofft of with a Flim-flam of Men's
growing corrupt in after-Ages; for this Article is positive, that All that are
naturally engendered of Adam have a corrupt and faulty Nature; Abel as well as
Cain; Jacob as well as Esau; and Isaac as well as Ishmael; Such however then
was their State: Now what Means did God afford the Men of this Generation, that
he might not be wanting to his own Glory and their Happiness? Why you must know
in the first place, that some of the Men of this Age were good Men; others were
corrupt, declined to Idolatry, and degenerate: Very good; but then one would
long to know, how the Good became so; for how the evil became evil, we are
satisfied; every one engendered of Adam brought with him a corrupt and faulty
Nature; but for the other sort, these good men, our Author leaves us as much in
the dark how they became good, as he did before how those other became evil:
Let us consult that excellent Author last Named, Art. 10. The Condition of Man
after the Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot Turn, and prepare himself by
his own Natural Strength and good Works, to Faith and Calling upon God;
wherefore we have no power to do good Works, pleasant and Acceptable to God,
without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and
working with us when we have that Good Will. But let us go on. God afforded
Good Men the frequent Apparitions of Angels, who were the great Ministers of
his Providence. Carry this one thing in your heads as you go Along with my
Author and me, viz. That he is demonstrating, That God in all ages was not
wanting to his Creatures happiness; but by one means or other made himself, and
his will known to them. Now then, what did these Angels appear to these good
Men for? to acquaint them with his Will? why it is supposed they knew that
before; else how became they good? for such they could not be, without the
Knowledge of Gods Will, antecedent to their Obedience, though perhaps they
might have stumbled upon some Act materially the Command of God; as a Blind Man
by Chance may catch a Hare: what then? to protect them? Protection required not
Apparition: what then? to carry some occasional Errand from God, wherein they
were concerned to be instructed, upon the emergency of some extraordinary
Providence? Very true; but not at all to his purpose: but I shall have no more
Concern herein than to move a few Quaeries.

1. It may be enquired, what Angel it was that Ordinarily appeared to the
Patriarchs of old? the rather because he is peremptorily called Jehovah, the
Essential Name of the True God: And I find some have pleaded that the Second
Person of the Trinity, by way of Praeludium to his future Incarnation, to show
that his delights were with the Sons of men, and how ready he was to do the
Will of his Father in the Redemption of the World, when in the fullness of time,
a Body should be offered him; and their Pleas have not been removed, and they
are somewhat confident cannot be. And as I remember amongst many other, they
insist upon Hosea 12. 3, 4, 5. He took his Brother by the heel, and by his
strength he had power with God, he had power over the Angel* and prevailed, he
wept and made supplication to him, The Lord God of Hosts, the Lord is his
Memorial* (...): If this was not the True God blessed for ever, that wrestled
with Jacob, an Atheist will bid you prove there is a Better than the Lord God of
Hosts, whose Memorial is Jehovah; if it be; then he was also the Angel that
appeared, and who could that be but the Second Person?

2. It may be asked I hope without offense, (supposing that Created Angels did
(as sometimes they did,) appear to good Men, and that their Message was the
Mind of God concerning their Happiness, and Blessedness in the Enjoyment of
God;) whether they preached any other Gospel than they preached to the
Shepherds at Bethlehem: because it would seem, that these inferior Angels
could not employ their Tongues upon a more welcome Theme, than Him, who was
their Head, and under whose Obedience they were Ranged by Creation, and to whom
he was also a Mediator of Confirmation.

3. It might deserve Consideration, How far Angels are the Ministers of Gods
Providence? That they are Ministering Spirits sent out to minister unto them who
shall be Heirs of Salvation, (Hebr. 1. last,) we thankfully believe and own;
yet God has not left his Inspection into, or oversight of this lower World:
This looks like some New Divinity, new vamped up from the old Epicurean
Philosophy, which represents God as living at ease and enjoyingly in Heaven,
and not concerning Himself, (for that would they think disturbs his Peace,)
with the Brangles and Contrastoes of Men, but Rules all by the Court of
Delegates. For the Good men, we shall not need to be too sollicitous how they
did, doubtless they would shift well enough in the world: All the difficulty
is, about the Degenerate, how God carried it toward them, that he might not be
wanting to their Happiness? Now here indeed our Author helps at a dead lift.
Two Expedients he used:

First, The Preaching of some eminent Persons, such as Enoch, Noah, and
Abraham: And herein we cannot but admire the wisdom of God in the Old World,
that he sent none but Righteous Men to preach Righteousness, to an unrighteous
generation. To vapor against sin, and then to wallow in it; to forbid our
Patients that Food which is often found upon our own Trenchers, will not gain
much credit to our Doctrine, and therefore Christ, Acts 1. 1. is said first to
Do, and then to Teach: Otherwise Ministers words are looked on as things of
Course, to while out one Glass, that they may be readier for another: Such
Preachers being like him in the Comoedian, Qui altera manu fert lapidem, panem
ostentat altera, that is, he feeds his Auditors like Apes, with a Bitt and a
Knock: but here are a few things upon this head, that we cannot pass by, for
our Author is as full of Excellencies as an Egg is full of Meat.

(1) Here has been good Provision made for Good men, and pretty good too for
the more degenerate part of Mankind; but there is a midling size of Men, all
this while, that have no care taken of them, sink or swim: Men, that your
Papists will tell you, are too good for Hell, and too bad for Heaven, but of a
just Gage for Purgatory: Now these men did not need such extraordinary Helps as
Noah's, and Abraham's Sermons; nor could deserve the apparitions of Angels, and
therefore they must be content to drudge through the work in their own
strength, whereof having a sufficiency, enough is as good as a feast, and
Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.

(2) What Righteousness was it that these Men preached? Surely it would have
been a hard Venture to have preached to them Their own; for if Man's Nature be
Corrupted, and he liable to Gods Wrath, and Damnation, as the Church of England
determines; it will be very difficult at least, to bring such a Righteousness
to God out of so vitiated a Nature by its own mere strength, as may plead
acceptance with him: That Righteousness which is the Result of our utmost
Obedience, has some flaws in it, that make it very improbable to justify any
person in the world under our Circumstances, that is, Sinners. 1. That
Obedience which we may plead and abide by before God, for Justification and
Eternal Life, must be entirely our own; performed in our own strength: it were
idle presumption to come to God, for Acceptance and a Reward for that which we
are beholden to his Grace and strength to help us to perform. 2. That which is
not absolutely perfect cannot justify in the face of a perfectly holy Law, and
an infinitely perfect holy God. For if any thing short of Gods demands, would
serve to justify a Sinner, what should hinder but that, seeing God is infinite
and absolute in Mercy, he might abate the whole? Nay indeed, if God can abate,
and come down from his first Terms, who shall set the Dice upon his Grace and
goodness, and say, Thus far shall Mercy go in Abating, and no further? And in
a little while, no doubt, this Doctrine will be so well improved, that we shall
have it made as plain to us, How God may justify all the Debauches of the
World, as a Repenting Sinner; if no respect be had to the Satisfaction and
Interpoposition of Another. But of these things abundant occasion will be
administered for Debate in the following Papers.

But then Secondly, there is another Expedient, which God used to reclaim the
more Degenerate part of Mankind, and that he tells us was the good Examples of
good men; how they lived, and how well they sped by Holy Living, and how they
were rewarded, and how happily they dyed, and how much God delighted in them:
All this is True in it self, Enoch's Translation, Noah's Preservation,
Abraham's Exaltation, and Lott's Ereption, were convincing Arguments how dear
these good Men were to God: But first I would say, it was a more Convincing
Argument to me, that God was Good to them, who made them so, who called Abraham
from Ur of the Chaldees, from the Idols which his Family had worshipped on the
other side the Flood: It was Gods Grace that raised up the Righteous Man from
the East, and called him to his foot, Isa. 41. 2. And then secondly, I would
say too, that there wanted something more than outward Examples to make that
Age happy, even an inward Operation of Gods Grace; for the Church of England
has excellently resolved, Art. 10. The Condition of Man is such after the Fall
of Adam, that he cannot turn -- without the Grace of God preventing him, that
he may have a Good Will.

(3.) We are now arrived at a third Division of Time, stretching it self from
Abraham until Christ came in the Flesh. For when the World would not be
reformed by single Examples, (as ye know one Swallow will not make a Summer,)
what did God do then? why he chose the Posterity of Abraham to be a public
and constant demonstration of his Power, and Providence, and Care of Good Men.
Our Author fancies that God had been trying Conclusions, and casting matters in
his thoughts, how he might reform the rugged World; and that he might be sure
to hit of the right way at last, he ventured first upon single Experiments, and
then upon Experiments in Consort (just like my Lord Verulams) and yet none of
them would come up to the designed End. I have heard of one that would needs
try how to make a dead body stand upright, he set him upon his feet, and
placed him i^ his true perpendicular, yet still he crinckled in the ^ams, or one
mischief or another, he would not stand; at last tired out with his fruitless
labor, he gave it over, concluding all was not right within, there was some
wheel or pulley, some spring, or string broken. Just such a process does our
Author modestly ascribe to the great and wise God. He supposes God was not
wanting to his Creatures Happiness; and I may suppose God knew well, what would
serve to answer his Creatures Happiness, in the present posture he was in; and
yet all came to little or nothing, surely there is something wanting somewhere
or other. But there never comes better on it, when men will proceed upon a false
ground, and tyle over one Absurdity with another, that their Errors may not
rain through: Therefore,

1. God was never disappointed in the Counsels and purposes of his heart;
whatever he undertakes according to the good pleasure of his will, he goes
through with it; If he will work, none shall let; If he says it, he will do
it, and his word shall not return to him in vain, but accomplish the thing for
which he sent it: Thus Enoch's, Noah's, Abraham's Ministry achieved whatever
his hand and Counsel foreordained by them should be done: And if any be angry
hereat without a Cause, they must be pleased again without amends.

2. Gods varying the dispensation was not because he found it ineffectual,
contrary to his hopes, but because he would make all these Providence comply
with his grand Purpose of conveying the Messiah to the World at last. He takes
this Family, the Posterity of Abraham, to be his Peculiar, and as any bra^ch of
that Family lay out of the Road of Christ, he left it to take its lot in his
more general oversight and cure of his Creatures; That branch of this Root,
which was to bear the Messiah, always was kept alive, and the rest, in process
of time withered, and fell off, of themselves. But there was an odd word dropped
from his Pen at unawares, that had like infinitely to have ravel'd all his
Affairs, and to have quite marred the Music of this Paragraph; had he not been
aware of it in due time: He had said, That God chose the Posterity of Abraham.
Now you know that the World is wide enough; and Choosing in its first Notion
implies, the taking of one, and leaving another; and, how to make that fadge
with some other Cross-Capers he has in*s Head, was a Matter worthy his
thoughts, and timously to be reconciled, which he has thus done: When God chose
the Posterity of Abraham, he did not design to exclude the rest of the World
from his Care and Providence, and all possible Means of Salvation. That God did
exclude the rest, or any part of the World from his Care and Providence, I
suppose none are concerned to affirm, but they who are for God's governing the
World by his Courtiers only, and great Ministers of State: That God excluded
the World from all possible Means of Salvation, is an Id^e Dream, when indeed
they excluded themselves. When God gave the Promise to the Common Parent of
Mankind, there was a Possibility in the Thing, that that Means of Salvation
might have been derived to all those Rivulets into which his Posterity should
be subdivided; and if it was not, I conceive the fault was theirs, not Gods*
and all that I know will be proved hence is, That it is mavelous dangerous to
venture the Concerns of another World upon the Credit of Oral Tradition; for if
it proved treacherous when the Lives of men were drawn out to such a length,
what may We expect from it, whose days are but as a shadow: But if indeed the
World lost that Promise, its Encouragement and Warrant in drawing nigh to God,
I do not, cannot see that God was bound to repeat and renew it every Thirty or
Forty years, to every particular Kingdom, Nation, Country, and the Individuals
therein, for fear of being wanting to his Creatures happiness: and I have some
hopes that our Author will show himself friendly in this business, for he
tells us, p. 33. That Now, the only true Medium of knowing God is the Knowledge
of Christ, who came into the World to declare God to us. Has God then excluded
the rest of the World from all possible means of Salvation? or, Did the Gospel
of Christ come into every Nation, in every Age, and to every individual Man and
Woman of that Age, or else must we say that God is wanting to his Creatures in
not affording to them, but excluding them from all possible Means of Salvation?
But further, God has maintained a Church in all Ages of the World, where the
Means of Salvation have been enjoyed, and there was a possibility of being
interessed in the Privileges and Advantages of that Church; for so says our
Author, p. 29. The rest of the world when they pleased, might fetch the best
Rules of Life from Israel: And in all probability, if it was possible to fetch
any thing from them, it was as easy to come to, and join with them: and then
again, it was as easy every jot, to fetch other means of Salvation as the best
Rules of Life. But I am afraid, we do not discourse ad idem all this while,
perhaps he may reckon upon those to be sufficient Means of Salvation which we
think insufficient to Man under his present Circumstances: Let him therefore
set up for himself, and prove if he be Able, That the knowledge of so much of
the will of God as may be known from the works of Creation and Providence, is a
sufficient means for the saving of Mankind (in any Age he will pick out)
considered as represented by the Church of England, in her Ninth Article, and
he shall either have a just Confutation, or a speedy Recantation.

One Text of Scripture he judges will do his work: Romans 3. 29. Is he the God
of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? Yes of the Gentiles also: It
will be convenient to remember here, what he is proving, least his Argument
should be sick of an old Disease which some call Ignoratio Elenchi. And that
was, That God did not design by choosing Abraham's Posterity, to exclude the
rest of the world from all possible means of Salvation, much less from his Care
and Providence: And we will readily own, that all that the Apostle had been
excluding from Justification and Salvation, was only an importunate Thing,
which has ever give^ the world trouble in this matter, called Boasting: So
that, shut out but that, and take in what you will or can; God is resolved to
justify none, Jew or Gentile, but in such a way as shall solidly ascribe all
the Glory to Himself. So that our Author may sleep on both ears in this matter.
The Gentiles were never excluded all possibility of Salvation, if they excluded
not themselves by Neglecting that Justification by Faith which he had
proclaimed; for so says the Apostle, v. 30. It is one God which shall justify
the Circumcision by Faith, and the Uncircumcision through Faith. There is one
God always the same, and one Faith ever uniform; and what need had our Author
then to fancy, That Enoch and Noah were justified one way, Abraham another, and
Believers since the coming of Christ, a third way: For the same Apostle, Hebr.
4. 2. proves that the Gospel was preached to the Jews from of Old, as well as
unto others, since his Appearing in the flesh; the same Gospel, For unto us was
the Gospel preached as well as unto them; and he proves also that the same
Gospel was also preached to Abraham, that was preached to the Jews; Galat. 3.
8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith,
preached before the Gospel unto Abraham; To Abraham in the state of
Uncircumcision, and therefore under the Notion of a Gentile, and not a
Circumcised Jew. But I would not hinder our Author from making the very best
improvement he can of the Text. Which Argument (says he) ( if it have any
force in it) must prove Gods respect to the Gentiles before the preaching of
the Gospel, as well as since; because it is founded on that Natural Relation
God owns to all Mankind, as their merciful Creator and Governor. If it have
any force in it! why do you Question that? He speaks of St. Paul's way of
Arguing sometimes, as if a man might draw Cutts, whether it should have any
strength in it or no; or as if it were an even lay, one way or the other: No but
that [ If] is not dubitantis, but arguentis, If it have, as undoubtedly it
has; what then? Why it must prove: Must! There Is the singular Happiness of the
Man; who is one of Paul's familiar Acquaintances, and privy to all the Cryptick
ways of his Argumentation: but what must it prove? why that before the
preaching of the Gospel God had respect to the Gentiles as well as since: Have
a little Patience. 1. I would fain know when that time was before the preaching
of the Gospel; for we have heard that the Gospel was preached to Abraham, to
the Jews in the Wilderness, and I think that was Gospel too that was preached
to Adam, That the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head. Indeed
there was a time when the Gospel was more clearly, publicly and eminently
preached, called therefore (...), the times of the Gospel; but I do not know of
any, of which it could be said simply and absolutely the Gospel was not
preached. 2. I would very gladly learn also what that respect was, God had for
the Gentiles: A respect there might be upon Common Accounts; he was their
merciful Creator and Governor, but that respect is short of what our Author
designs: And he might have a respect for the future; there being good Evidences
of Gods intentions to bring in the Gentiles more universally to the knowledge
of the Gospel and Salvation by Christ, when time should serve. 3. It would be
cleared, what he means by, as well as since; aeque, but not aequaliter, sure:
not so much as since, but as truly and really as since. But because his Reason
is to be the Measure of his Assertion, let us attend to it with diligence; This
Respect is founded on that Natural Relation God owns to Mankind: To which I
answer, Whatever respect God had to the Gentiles, so as to afford them at any
time the Means of Salvation, it was not founded on Natural Relation, as their
Creator; but on a Relation Voluntary, and of pure and mere Grace; and we will
join issue with him upon this point when he pleases. But I shall endeavor to
set the Apostles Argument upon its own Legs: What he drove at, he shows you, v.
28. That a Man is justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law: he had
proved this in the foregoing Verse, thus: The way that God takes in the
Justifying of a Person, is such a one as shuts out of doors Boasting; But
Justification by Faith, only excludes Boasting, and the way of Justifying by
works would not exclude it, and therefore God takes that way to justify the
Sons of Men: In this 29th verse, he proceeds to another Argument to evince the
same Thing. If Justification come by the works of the Law, then never any
Gentile could be justified, but some Gentiles have been justified, Therefore
Justification comes not by the works of the Law. That some Gentiles had been
justified, he proves in the Instance of Abraham, who was justified, not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision, as he says, chapter 4. v. 10.

Now it is evident, that Circumcision and Uncircumcision are Terms of equal
wideness with Jew and Gentile: For that which he calls v. 29. of the third
Chapter, Jew and Gentile; Verse the 30th he expresses by Circumcision and
Uncircumcision: It is one God that shall justify the Circumcision (the Jews)
by Faith, and the Uncircumcision (the Gentiles) through Faith; and this he
brings as a proof of his foregoing Assertion, Seeing it is one God, etc. And
therefore Abraham, though he were an Hebrew by Birth (whether so denominated as
coming from the Race of Heber, or from his passing over Euphrates, as some will
have it, it makes no matter,) yet being uncircumcised, he fills the room (in
Gods account) of a Gentile, or one of the Nations. Now for the proof of the
sequel of the first Proposition; That if Justification comes by the works of
the Law, then never any Gentile could be justified: he takes special care to
put that out of Question, v. 30. Seeing it is one God that justifies. There is
but one God that justifies, and therefore but one way of Justification; as he
is always the same, so is his Method always the same; One God, one Christ,
one Faith; and therefore if ever any Gentile were justified without the works
of the Law, never any Jew could be justified by it; for that would be to
suppose two ways of justifying sinners (and such were Jews and Gentiles, both
under sin, both guilty before God,) and then that would prove, that God were
not the same one God, which the Apostle throws out of doors. Let our Author now
cast up his Accounts, and see what he has gained by this place; God is the God
of the Gentiles: Such a God as has justified Gentiles, [(...)*] for instance,
Abraham; and that as his God in a Covenant of Grace, I will be thy God; and
therefore it follows, that Jews are not, were not, could not be justified by
the works of the Law; and then no such thing will be inferred, that God as a
Creator had such a respect to every Individual Person in the World, being
fallen sinners, (...) to give them the Means of Salvation: But to proceed.

This plainly evinces (says he) that all those particular favors which God
bestowed on Israel, were not owing to any partial fondness, and respect to that
People. Methinks I hear our Author speak like the Great Pompey, when he had got
Caesar into Lobs-pound. Non recusare se quin nullius usus Imperator
existimaretur, si sine maximo detrimento, Legiones Caesaris sese recepissent
inde, quo temere essent progressae. De Bell. Civ. lib. 3. Let our Author never
be reputed a Man at Arms more, if he has not got us into such a Cramp and
Purse-nett, that we shall never escape without loss of Bag and Baggage: For
thus he assaults us. Had God a Partial Fondness and respect for Israel? Answer
Yea or No. I see we are quite undone: If we say No, he has us on the Hip, and
comes over us with a Why not? what, no respect for Israel? no favor for his
Beloved People? Why Psalm. 147. 20. He has not dealt so with any Nation; he
showed his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: and
where are we now? If we say, Yes: Then he fetches us over the Coals; What,
partial fondness in God! one Law for Titius, another for Sempronius? Fish of
one, and Flesh of another? I see we must fall upon one of the horns of this
Dilemma, and both are equally mortal: And never was there more need of the good
Curat's Collect, to be delivered from the great Pain and Peril of Cowgoring: We
have got a Wolf by the Ears, and dare neither keep, nor slip our hold for our
own. When I read this and some other like passages in his Book, surely thought
I, this man takes us all for Widgeons and Woodcocks, and that to Scrible with
him, is (...) thing but the Recreation of catching Dottrels, h^ could never
else hope to Impose upon us with so Childish, and obvious a Sophism. In short,
it is nothing but Fallacia plurium interrogationum: As (...) you should ask our
Author, Whether he were (...) London with a Feather in's Cap? He would not
scruple to answer, He is indeed at London, in the Parish of St. George, but he
has no Feather in'^ Cap: Well, Good for one, good for another. God had a
respect for Israel, but no partial Fondness. Two things then would be a little
cleared, that God had, and upon wh at account he had a particular respect to
Israel.

[1.] God had a special respect to Israel above all the People in the World,
Romans 3. 1. What advantage then has the Jew? and what profit is there of
Circumcision? Much every way! (...). Upon all accounts they carried it; But
chiefly, that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Romans 9. 4. To whom
pertains, the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of
the Law, and the Services of God, and the Promises, whose are the Fathers, and
of whom, as concerning the Flesh, Christ came: As whereas God chose Abraham's
Posterity, and committed His Laws to them, from whence (as our Author thinks)
all the rest of the World might when they please fetch the Rules of Good Life,
this very thing argues a particular respect, otherwise God might have made them
fetch the Rules of Good Life from others: He might have made them the
Borrowers, and others the Lenders; some respect above others, God then had
undoubtedly for them.

[2.] Upon what account, had God this particular respect for them? And here we
agree with our Author in the Negative; It was not out of partial Fondness: We
would deliver him from that fear, that he may sleep the better, and that for
these Reasons. 1. Partiallity and Fondness are words of a harsh sound, they
grate upon our Ears with such unpleasingness, that they can be no ways ascribed
to the Glorious God: For God stands not in that Place, or Relation to his
Creatures that he can be Partial: In matters of mere Grace and Favor, due to
neither (and therefore without Injustice may be denied to either or both as we
please) Partiality has no place. If two Persons be equally worthy, I may give
that to one which I will not to the other; In two Persons justly condemned, the
pardoning of the one is no Impeachment of Royal Justice, though the other
suffer under his Sentence: If God gave any thing more to the Jew than the
Gentile; The former could not boast, it was Grace; the latter could not murmur,
they had no wrong. If God denied the Gentiles his Gospel, He was not their
Debtor; they owed him more for their Beings than they could ever pay, and it
might have been expected they should have cleared their old Obligations, before
they desired to be Trusted for more, and run into new Arrears. 2. Then it was
upon a most glorious Project, that he might secure to the World the Promised
Seed, and have him forthcoming in the fullness of time. Hence is it, that when
that People seemed to be at the brink of final Ruin, to be swallowed up of
Destruction, Gods great Cordial was the Reminding them of this, That the
Messiah was not yet come, but he must assuredly come; and therefore no
possibility of Internecion, and utter Extirpation of that Nation, Root and
Branch; to which Design of God had they attended by Faith, they had Lived more
above slavish fears than they did, Isa. 7. 1, 2. When Rezin King of Syria, and
Pekah King of Israel were in Confederacy against Judah; the News discomposed
them, The Heart of Ahaz was moved as the Trees of the Wood are moved with the
Wind; and what way Does the Lord take to calm his Tumultnating Spirit? ver. 14.
A Virgin shall Conceive and Bear a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel. Why
but may not we be all Dead and Rotten by that time? No, if Christ must come of
the Tribe of Judah, of the Family of David: That Tribe, that Family cannot
perish, till they have served Gods Design and Glorious Ends, in handing down a
Messiah, and then they shall be thrown into the Common Box, and retreat to the
Gross of the World, under the ordinary Care of Gods general Providence: Till
then, they might say with Him: Fear not, Caesarem vehis, and fortunam Caesaris;
Christ, and the Concerns of Christ, are all Ventured in this Bottom. But our
Author I perceive does by no means like this Reason: But The Design of all was
to Encourage the whole World to Worship the God of Israel. This was a Design
indeed, but not the only Design; He himself assures us of that, p. 28. It was
one great and principal Design: And then we must not strain things too far, for
fear they break. Our Author must have it Encouraging the whole World, or
Nothing; every Nation upon the face of the Earth: But I doubt the sound of the
Jewish Deliverances did not reach the whole Creation, and Habitable World; we
see Sounds grow faint and languish by degrees, and at last Expire: It Is evident
that the Gentiles had Inoculated what they heard of the Jews great Salvations,
into their own Stock; and all was involved in Fables, and Superstitions. What
they heard of Moses and Mount Sinai, some turned into their Bacchus, and his
Mount Nysa; Sampson was grown Hercules, and Noah became Deucalion; so that
Converts to God upon the account of the Fame of these things were very rare,
one Naaman in an Age or so, perhaps an Urija^, or a few more:

Totidem tibi sunt Numero, quot
Thebarum Portae, vel divitis Ostia Nili.
What then our Author Quotes Psalm. 98. 2. for, I cannot tell, unless to prove
that Jesus Christ should come into the World, to the unspeakable Rejoicing,
and Reviving of the rational Creature: Of which this Psalm is a plain
Prophecy: And so is Psalm. 102. 15. The Heathen shall fear the Name of the
Lord, and all the Kings of the Earth thy Glory: And his Practice upon the place
is Visible, turning [shall] into [might] which needs no trouble to discover.
The 96. Psalm. 4, 5. shows the Excellency of Jacobs God above all the Idols of
the Heathen, and all within the Call of this Psalm, are Invited to come to Join
themselves to Gods People and Church, ver. 8. Bring an Offering, and come into
his Courts; and both this Psalm, and the 98th. very evidently have their
Completion in the Savior of the World; both concluding thus, For he comes,
for he comes, to Judge the Earth; Verified in Him whose Title was, (...), and
who affirms of Himself, John 9.39. For Judgment am I come into the World. But
let us hear more: As God set up the People of Israel as a visible Demonstration
to all the World, of his Power and Providence, so he committed his Laws and
Oracles to them, from whence the rest of the World, when they pleas d, might
fetch the best Rules of Life, and the most certain Notices of the Divine Will.
Fair and softly: 1. These other Nations are supposed by our Author, to have had
already good Rules of Life, though not the very best, and certain Notices of
the Divine Will, though not the most certain: He tells us p. 29. God instructed
them by the Light of Nature; and then, Quid quaeram foris cum domi habeam? No
need to look out, if they had sufficient at Home, they might save
Shooe-leather, and spare their pains. 2. But what if these best Rules of Life
were not so easily fetched, as he imagines? It was a huge way for men to Travel
from the Remotest parts of the Habitable world, to Traverse from the Tropicks
and beyond, to Jerusalem, and when they came there, had no assurance they
should not come of a Sleeveless Errand, and lose their Labor, or at best have
nothing but their Labor for their Pains; For I do not find that they were
under any Command of God to deliver a Copy of the Law to every one that would
Whistle for it, or hold up the finger: It Bordered pretty near upon Christ's
Time, e're the Pentateuch was Translated into Greek by the Septuagint; and
Ptolomy with all his Interest, had enough to do to make the thing Practicable
and Feasible. And besides the Jews were so Superstitiously exact in Examining
every Copy of the Law, so many Ordels and Examinations it must pass through,
before it could pass Muster, that I do not think that the rest of the World
could, when they pleased, fetch the best Rules of Life: And yet there may be a
cunning Truth in it too: They might fetch it when they pleased, because they
never pleased to fetch it. But, 3. As the Noise of the Jews Deliverances, and
Miraculous preservations might reach the Neighbor Countries, (though that also
with much uncertainty, and mixture) so a general Rumor also might Ring in
their Ears about their Ceremonial, Typical Worship, their Feasts, Jubilees,
Temple, High Priest, which were things that made a Noise, but that the World
ever believed they had a better Law in Stone, than they had in their Hearts; I
cannot conceive, though I am loath to make my narrow ones the Measure of our
Authors Conceptions.

(4.) After a tedious Maze in the Labyrinths of former Ages, we are at length
safely Conducted to the more happy Times of the Gospel. For, When long and sad
Experience had proved, all those [ former] ways Ineffectual to reform the
World, at last God sent his Son, etc. Two things we are here Instructed in:
First, Upon what necessity God sent his Son into the World. Secondly, What was
his Employment when He was come into the World.

And [1] It may seem that the Son of God had never exchanged the Throne, for
the Footstool; nor the King of Glory, taken on Him the form of a Servant, nor
He that was Rich to a Miracle, have become Poor to a Proverb, without some
Cogent Reason, and pressing Necessity; which our Author will just now favor us
withal: And here I sorely suspected it would go very hard with him: For whereas
at other times, no necessity of Christ at all could be found; for both Jews and
Gentiles who knew nothing at all of what Christ was to do in Order to their
Recovery, did believe God to be Gracious and Merciful to sinners, page 44. And
what could they desire more? Yet now when it will better serve the Turn, and
subserve the present Occasion, that Christ may be brought into the World with
some Pomp and State, there must be an indispensible necessity of his coming,
for all other means that had been tried, proved ineffectual. What our Author
supposes, may I hope without offense, admit a modest Examination. Two things
are here by our Author supposed: (1) That the means which God had formerly
used, proved Ineffectual to Reform the World. To which I shall Calmly return,
1. That he had done much better to have proved that they were Designed by God
to reform the World, before he asserted that they were Ineffectual for that
end; For it seems strange that God so Wise to know what Means would reach the
end, and to Choose such as would do it, should pitch upon Means that he knew
would never reach their Designed ends. 2. If the end of Christ's coming into the
World was to reform it, upon an Experiment that all other Means proved
Ineffectual: Must not God be forced to Try another Conclusion at least, and
once more to Venture upon other means, because even now the World is
unreformed? 3. The Means that God then used, (he will confess) were sufficient
for that end, Or else how were they Means? And the Means which God now uses
proves not Effectual to Reform the World* And what have we got by the Bargain?
4. I hope our Author will be better advised than to talk of Effectual Means of
Grace, which shall Infallibly reach their ends, for that would bear the Face of
Irresistible Grace. 5. The ways and means which God now uses to reform the
World, are Effectual to reform as far as He in his wise Counsels did Bless
them, and so were they then: And the ways and means He formerly used for the
reforming the World, reached not every Individual person then; nor have they any
higher effect now. The Purpose and Counsel of God then are the true Measure of
the Success and Efficacy of the Means of Grace, before and since the coming of
Jesus Christ. (2) He supposes that God had tried other Means to reform the
World, but upon proof found them Ineffectual. A supposition extremely
Scandalous to those apprehensions which both Natural Light and Scripture, teach
us to entertain of the Blessed and Glorious Majesty.

1. They are Reproachful, and Scandalous to that which may be known of God by
Natural Reason. Which, if ever it taught us one Letter of Gods Name, will
teach us this: That God must needs foreknow what will be the Issues of things;
seeing nothing can be supposed Contingent to him, without another Supposition
that he is Ignorant of what is so Eventual and Contingent to him. If we know
any thing of God, it is that he knows all things; but according to our Authors
Notions of things, we have God dressed up like an Emperick, that must try his
prescriptions upon his patients, before he can tell how they will work: And yet
its some comfort, they purchase their Skill only at the peril of men's Lives
(which yet are too precious to be so cheaply prostituted to blind Experiment)
but God (who in our Authors Divinity had been practicing upon the World for
Four thousand years, before he saw his mistake) bought his skill with the Blood
of many millions of Souls, who perished under his hands by ineffectual
Remedies; and now he must be forced either to study, and find out some more
effectual Means, or else give up the World as desperate and irrecoverable: And
now, whether his Expressions do not more than squint that way, let the
impartial Reader determine.

2. Scandalous, even to Blasphemy, to the general Current of
Scripture-Revelation; which fully and frequently assures us, that God well knew
what success his Methods and Ways of Reformation would have, and what
entertainment they would meet with in the World from Sinners, where he pleased
not to second and back them with his effectual Power; and yet still he used
them as Means to reach his own Ends. Exodus 3. 19. I am sure the King of Egypt
will not let you go, no not with a strong hand. Exodus 7. 3. I will multiply my
Signs, and my wonders in Egypt, but Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you.

[2] For the Employment and Work which our Author is pleased to assign unto
Christ upon his Coming into the World, he tells us, that was, To make a full
and perfect Declaration of Gods will; to give us the best Rules of Life, and to
encourage our Obedience with the most express Promises of a blessed
Immortality. And if this be all the Business our Author has shaped out for him,
I shall the less wonder, that he can see no Necessity of Christ's Coming into
the World; and as little, that others can see no Necessity that he should be
the Eternal Son of God: But whatever the Matter is, in these and the following
lines, I observe our Author falls short of his wonted Accuracy and Confidence:
He hesitates and staggers, and goes backwards and forwards, and strangely
bewilders himself in Contradictions.

Page 30. he tells us, The secret Purposes of Gods Counsels were concealed from
Ages; and yet before he takes off his Pen, he tells us, The Prophets did not so
fully understand them: Understand them then it seems they did; and fully
understand them too, but not so fully understand them. It would tempt one to
turn Questionist, and humbly ask; If they were concealed before, how were they
understood? And if the Prophets did understand them, how were they concealed?
Again, p. 29. he had let us know, that the Israelites had the best Rules of
Life; and yet p. 30. That God sent his Son into the World to give us the best
Rules of Life. Whence we see how easily our Author could have saved him that
perilous Journey into this mischievous World. Again p. 30. he supposes, That
before Christ's coming, the World had Promises, and express Promises too, of a
blessed Immortality, though indeed not so express: And yet for all that, p. 34.
That Christ only brought to light Immortality; which has a greater Truth in it
than perhaps our Author is aware of: Again p. 33. he acquaints us, That God was
formerly known by the Light of Nature, the Works of Creation and Providence,
and occasional Revelations; and p. 44. That those Natural Notions the Heathens
had of God, and the discoveries God made of himself in the works of Creation
and Providence, did assure them that God is very good, and that it is
impossible to understand what Goodness is, without pardoning Grace; and yet p.
33. he would fain persuade us, That NOW, (since Christ's coming) The only true
Medium of knowing God, is the Knowledge of Christ, who came to declare God to
us. A discovery indeed very surprising: For if Natural Light, without Christ,
could reveal it then, why can it not do it still? how comes it to pass that
Creation and Providence cannot perform the same Office now? If Christ be the
only true Medium now, it would make one suspect he was so then. The Light of
Christ has not weakened the Light of Nature, but improved and sublimated it; he
came not to be an Extinguisher to the Candle of the Lord, but a Candlestick;
not to put out the Eye of Reason, but to provide an Eye Salve for it. Did
Creation and Providence, preach God to be a sin-pardoning God then, and are
they suspended ab officio, and beneficio, in the CourtChristian, and become
silenced Ministers? And yet he seems to Retract this, p. 30. Nor have we any
other certain way of knowing this [the secret Purposes of Gods Counsel
concerning the Salvation of Mankind] but by the Revelation Christ has made to
us. Other ways there may be still, if any will run the Risque, and venture
upon them, but none so certain as this. And here comes in the fine Expedient
for the Salvation of the Terra incognita, without the Revelation of Christ. And
yet once again, p. 30. he assigns the work of Christ, coming in the flesh, to
be, To make a full and perfect Declaration of Gods Will, and yet by and by, as
if he had forgot, or over shot himself, he confesses, it was but One main end
of Christ's appearing in the World, to reveal God to us: And so there may yet be
some little room left for his Priestly Office, his Sacrifice and Interposition
with God, on the behalf of Sinners. And lastly, as I remember, p. 5. he tells
us, that Christ's Preaching the Gospel was the Exercise of his Regal Power, and
indeed all along through that Chapter, the Kingly Office carried it hard-born
from the rest, and ran them sheer out of distance, and yet the wind is vered
about, p. 34. When we speak of the knowledge of Christ, we must consider him as
our Prophet. But really if this be all the work Christ had to do in the world,
Two third parts of Christ's Mediatory Employment are cashiered, and the other
lies at mercy, whenever he shall please to revive the Commission of Natural
Light, to reveal God's sin-pardoning Mercy, and the best Rules of Life unto the
World.

Now that he may give the better countenance to his Sentiments herein, he
thought it meet to lay violent hands upon some Texts of Scripture, which else
would have frowardly and perversely hung back from abetting his Fancies, and so
might have spoiled the Game. A taste of his Excellencies, in persuading or
forceing Scripture to warrant his Notions, he will give us in his Learned Gloss
upon Joh. 14. 6. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, no man comes unto the
Father but by me. But never was Comment so pestered, so thwack'd with a Lirry
of id est's, one clambring on the back of another, a third mounted o'th top of
that, a fourth bestriding that, a fifth in the neck of that, and so on: I am
the Way, id est, I declare the way. No man comes to the Father but by me; id
est, None can thoroughly understand the will of God, but by learning of me.
Whoever knows me, id est, is acquainted with the Doctrine I preach; Knows my
Father, id est, Is Instructed in Gods Mind and Will. Gods Will, id est, the
Gospel. Caetera desiderantur.

Now the very truth is, all this is nothing but a trifling Imitation of his old
Friend Volkelius, de vera Relig. lib. 4. c. 2. p. 173. Et hoc quidem illud est,
quod ipse Christus ait, Joh. 14. 6. Neminem nisi per ipsum ad patrem pervenire,
id est, Neminem Dei Patris Cognitionem assequi nisi per Christum posse; Which
shall never be spoiled by my bungling English, our Author having saved me the
labor, and so clearly translated it to my hands. But is it so indeed? Does
Coming to God imply and import no more than the bare knowing of God? Surely
there is some other, some more excellent Act of the Soul denoted by it: God may
be known by, and yet the Soul never come to God: The Devils know him, and yet
fly away from him: It supposes indeed the knowledge of God; none can come to an
unknown God; but yet it further denotes the Souls address to God in Faith and
Love by Jesus Christ; for though it were revealed, that God is a sin-pardoning
God in himself, yet still the Sinner has need of an Advocate with him, even
Jesus Christ the Righteous, who is a Propitiation for its sins, 1 John 2. 1. In
whose Name, and through the Power of whose prevailing Blood, the guilty
Creature may come and treat with God about his Pardon and Acceptance. In the
next Section we shall find our Author as ingenuous and plain-hearted as one
could almost wish, he opens a Casement in his Breast, and lets us see how the
pulse of his Soul beats, freely owns where he borrowed his Divinity; but here I
want that Candor. For, not content to glean amongst Volkelius his Sheaves,
(which an honest man may do) he steals the very Shocks, and never so much as
once owns his Benefactor. Lib. 3. de vera Relig. p. 173. Deus non nisi per
Christum cognosci potest, ut qui Dei inconspicui Imago est, 2 Cor. 4. 4. eumque
id est ejus voluntatem nobis enarravit: Now will you have our Authors
Translation in Masquerade; Christ has made a True representation of the Divine
Nature, and Will, and it is plain, that in this Sense Christ is called the Image
of God, 2 Cor. 4. 4: It Is Plain! yes, wondrous plain, that Volkelius is of that
Opinion, and for any other plainness we are to seek. For so he. Ibid. Qua de
causa splendour gloriae Dei and character substantiae ejus appellatur, Hebr. 1.
3. utpote clarissime perfectissimeque Divinam voluntatem nobis explanans: But
here I perceive our Author will compound willingly with him, and fairly part
stakes with him. Upon which account (says he) ( as well as with respect to his
Divine Nature) he is called, The Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the
express Image of his Person. And when our Author has yielded him, The May be
so, we remember his Excellency in concluding it Must be so.

I confess, I have neither list nor leisure, to follow our Author through the
tedious Ramble of his Repetitions, because I see he loves no bodies Tautologies
but his own; nor shall I be much concerned to enquire after that odd generation
of Men, who (if our Author may be believed) clamor most unmercifully, that
Christ is never Preached, unless he be Named in every Sentence: For I know well
it is easy to make a Man of Clouts, and then to arraign, condemn, and execute
in Effigy the Creature o^ our own Making: Thus did the Barbarous Heathens
cloth the Primitive Christians in Bears-skins, and then expose them to be torn
in pieces by the Dogs: And thus are Christians dressed up by the bloody Papists
in the Sambenit, or Devils-Coat, and then committed as Heretics to the greater
Mercy of the devouring flames. I know it is an easy thing with our Author to
Name Christ a hundred times, and yet to speak as very little of Gospel, as he
has done. But one thing I must, and desire the Reader, that he will not fail to
take special Notice of: I find our Author over the shoes in Love, and most
desperately doting upon his own Critical Learning; for having observed to us,
Chapter 1. that (...)* Ephesians. 4. 20. signifies not Taught, (as our English
Translation jejunely renders it) but instructed, emphatically Instructed: And
suspecting least by this time, in a dust of words, and hurry of Business, we
might have quite forgot it, he very charitably rubs up our Memory, and referrs
us to the place of its Birth, where that happy Criticisme first drew its
breath, and appeared in the World. It Is Chapter the First, (Reader,) Oh! never
forget Chapter the First; Happy Chapter the First, that first teemed so
precious a Notion, for the Benefit of succeeding Ages: Now because these Papers
of mine and his are like to be long-lived, and perhaps not to survive the year
of their Birth; and yet to be deprived of the Observation, would be a loss
Irreparable; let me beg of our Author to send this enclosed Note to Mr. P.
which I have left open, that he may have the Honor of Letters Patents.

TO THE Reverend Author of the Synopsis Criticorum aliorumque S. S. Interpretum.
SIR,
BEing a great Admirer of, and a small subscriber to your learned Labors, I
was also Ambitious to contribute something to their Intrinsic Value; Be
pleased therefore, when Ephesians. 4. 20. shall call for your Industry, to take
special Notice of the lat^ Observation of Mr. W. S. and instead of Taught, to
read Instructed; and as you will thereby enrich your Work, and do right to the
Author, so will you Oblige Posterity, and particularly,

Your humble Servant, N. N.


Having thus fairly rid my hands of the Encumbrance of our Author, I might
honestly wind up this Section, did I not think it might be acceptable to the
Reader to receive a B^eviate of some of the True Reasons, why it was Necessary
Christ should come into the world, the main Work he had to do here, and the
special Design of that Work in reference to God and Man.

(1.) The Causes rendering it Necessary that the Son of God should once appear
in this lower World, are such as these. 1. The first Cause lay deep (...) the
Bosom, Counsel and Decree of God; who (...) he viewed the Fall and Revolt of
Man, from (...) the world was, so did he purpose effectually to recover again
to himself his Elect by Christ: Therefore is God said, 1 Tit. 1. 2. to promise
(...) Life before the World began; that the Faith of (...) Elect eyes this
Promise, that the Ministers of (...) Gospel do preach this Promise, all of
which (...) only Yea and Amen in Christ* 2. The Compliance of the Son of God
in pursuance of this Eternal Purpose, is very considerable, who was
aut^ritatively sent, and voluntarily came, to speed the Decree and Counsel of
God, Heb. 10. 7. Lo I (...) to do thy Will, O God. 3. The Early Promise of a
Redeemer, almost from the Foundation of the World, made God a Debtor, not to
Man, bu^ to his own Truth, to send him in the Fullness of ti^ into the World,
who before all Time was purpose^ and in the first dawnings of Time was promised
Heb. 10. 7. (...). I^ the Beginning of the Scripture, in the Head of the Book,
it is written, viz. Genesis 3. 15. That the seed of the Woman should bruise the
Serpents head. 4. The renewed and frequently repeated, and gradually ^nlarged
Promises and Prophe^ies of a Redeemer once to be actually exhibited, whereby
God kept alive the drooping Hope, and languishing Faith of his Church, as
Candidates in a state of Expectancy, superadded another Cause of the Necessity
of Christ's coming in the Flesh; Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come. Isa. 9. 6. Unto
us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and his Name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace. 5. The Types and Shadows which from the Beginning represented him to
the Faith of Believers, had all their Strength, Virtue, and Efficacy from Him;
and that also made it Necessary, that Christ the Substance should come to
answer them: for what could the blood of Bulls and Goats signify to the
appeasing of Gods Anger, the removing of Guilt, and the making peace betwixt
God and Man, which the Scripture frequently assures us they did do, and yet
the same Scripture as clearly assures us in their own Nature they could not
do, otherwise than with respect to that Sacrifice once for all to be offered
up to God for that end? 6. And it was Necessary, that the gracious God who had
trusted the World so long with Pardon, Peace, and Life, should at last be
satisfied, and not always be put off without due Compensation to his Justice
and Truth. 7. The Case and Condition of the Elect of God, made by the common
Apostasy Enemies to God, and under the Curse annexed to the Violation of the
Law; upon this one Supposition, that God would pursue his Original Love and
Purposes of Grace to them, that a due Compensation should be provided for his
wronged Justice: Sin had perplexed matters, and involved things in such
Intricacies, that Humane Wisdom could not find out an Expedient, How God might
be Just, and yet the Justifier of him that believes; how Mercy and Truth should
meet together, how Righteousness and Peace should kiss each other: Many Salvo's
have been propounded to the World, many Expedients set on foot, but upon
severer scrutiny, have been found Physicians of no value, not able to heal the
wounds of an inquisitive Conscience, awakened with the sense of the Souls
worth, and Gods wrath in the Judgment to come: All these things does the Lord
Christ alone compromise, adjust all these Accounts, and reconcile these
Intrests: The Justice of God is satisfied, the Law fulfilled, the Truth of God
secured, his Holiness vindicated, and all his Attributes unreproached: It Is
true indeed, God is a free Agent, and absolutely considered might have left the
world to perish under the Curse, but seeing it pleased him to carry on his
design of Love still, notwithstanding the intervention of sin; what others may
pretend, I know not; but to our Apprehensions, as there is but one God the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; so, there is one Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 2 Cor. 8. 6.

(2.) The Work of Christ whilst in the World, was the discharge of his whole
Mediatory Undertaking, as Prophet, Priest and King; To divide Christ, is to
destroy him. As half a Heart is no Heart in Gods Acceptance, so half a Christ
is no Christ, as to any saving advantage the Soul can possibly reap from him.
He was therefore,

1. A Prophet, to acquaint us fully with the Preceptive will of God, in which
rank we must place that great Command of Faith in Christ, 1 John 3. 23. And
this is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ. He acquainted us also with the Promissory Will of God, as the great
Encouragement of our Souls in walking resolvedly with God in ways of New
Obedience; He acquainted us also with the Purposes of God, which should follow
his Promises, and Precepts to invigorate them with Efficacy and Success: And
this he does by the Ministry of his Word, but more especially by the Holy
Spirit, inwardly and powerfully, and yet sweetly, not offering violence to our
Faculties, but making us a willing People in the day of his Power.

2. He was a Priest, and as such he offered himself a true and proper Sacrifice
to God, thereby answering the Sacrifices of the Old Testament, which though
they were Typical, yet in their way were true and Real Sacrifices, and all this
in pursuit of the Fathers Love, and his own. 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
Propitiation for our sins; what Intercessions as a Priest he made for those the
Father had given him, we need no other pattern of, than that Prayer, John 17.
per totum.

3. His Kingly Office, he exercised in gathering, governing, defending,
protecting his Church; abolishing those Laws which were accommodated to that
other Dispensation, and would not fit its present posture, and instituting New
Ordinances of Worship agreeable to the economy of the New Testament: which
Office yet he exercised in such a way, that little of Glory and Majesty
appeared therein to a Carnal Eye, the Grandeur thereof being veiled under the
form of a Servant.

(3.) The general Design of this Work we may assure our selves was exceeding
Glorious, nothing but admirable could be the Product of such an undertaking;
with what Joy and Triumph was it entertained by the Angels, who were less
concerned therein than poor fallen Man. Luke 2. Glory be to God on high, on
Earth peace, good will toward men. 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save
sinners; the chiefest of Sinners: Which Great End that he might attain, he
dealt with God as a Priest, to reconcile him to us; with Us he dealt as a
Prophet, enlightening our Minds in the Knowledge of God, and our selves; and as
a King subduing our hearts by his Spirit of Grace, to accept of those Terms
which might secure the Glory of God, in our Eternal Salvation: But the main
Design I shall express no otherwise than in the words of the Church of England,
Art. 2. -- who suffered, and was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his
Father to us, and to be a Sacrifice, not only for Original, but all Actual sins
of Men. From whence we learn,

1. That Reconciling and Sacrificing Work is only proper for a state of
Humiliation; it is annexed to his Death, Sufferings, Sacrifice. 2. That the
Death of Christ (according to the mind of this Article) supposes God to be
incensed against, and angry with Sinners, and therefore he suffered to
Reconcile God to us. 3. That the Death and Sufferings of Christ are of
sufficient value to secure Gods Honor, and appease his Anger. 4. That Original
Sin, how small a mote soever it may seem in some men's eyes, is yet such a
troublesome Beam in Gods eyes, that it requires the same Blood of Christ to be
a Sacrifice for it. 5. That all Actual sins (even the smallest, if any may be
called small) need the Blood of Christ to reconcile God to the Sinner, without
which they will infallibly destroy the Soul. Thus far the Church of England; of
whose Doctrine our Author has great Reason to be very tender, if not for the
Truths sake, yet for his Credits sake, having subscribed it; and above all for
St. Georges sake Buttolphs-lane; for otherwise it may be easy for some
poching, prolling Fellows, to dismount George-a-horse-b^k, and get into our
Authors Saddle.
CHAP. III. Sect. 2. Of Acquaintance with the Person of Christ.
INterest is beholden to the Eagle for two of its greatest Excellencies, a
quick Eye to discover, and sharp Pounces to seize the Quarry. When once it had
appeared in some pregnant Instances, that the High-road to Preferment lay in
the way of exposing Religion under the Persons of the Non-Conformists, it is
incredible how soon sagacious Interest discerned, and made her advantage; The
old dull Methods of Marrying the Chambermaid, or Trucking with the young
Gentleman, grew as Obsolete as Systematical Divinity; An unhappy happy Wit or
two, had successefully managed the grand Project of Self-Advancement by these
Artifices, and this new and blessed mode of Simony had Wealth and Honor came
Trolling in amain, and then Interest, which ever spies peep of day at a Narrow
Cranny, soon struck into the practice of it: But there was a small
inconvenience which attended the Design, and may possibly (if not timously
prevented) spoil its Expectations: For when every Pedlingwit would be pecking
at the Trade, the Commodity stuck most miserably upon their hands, became a
very Drug; and even scoffing at Religion turned to as little Account, as the
more common and trite way of Whipping and Spurring for the first Occupancy of a
Presentation. It Is usually, and easily observed, that the first Authors of
great Inventions commonly grow Rich by their Novel Discoveries; but when
ordinary Abilities will be tampering and dabling with what they want Brains to
manage, they fall wondrously short of their wide Hopes, and hugeous
Expectancies: And just so has it proved in the Case before us. They who first
taught this too docile Age to Travesteere serious matters, had indeed the
Vogue, and engrossed the Benefit of their Inventions to their own proper Use
and Behoof, but Pretenders soon clapped in (as you know if one Dog has a Bone,
all the rest will be about his Ears) and now the multitude of Candidates has so
brought down the Market, that it will quit for Cost little better than the
plain Dunstable highway of Favor, Alliance, and Bribery. The best Advice
therefore I shall ever be capable of giving our Author and his Copartners in
this Trade, will be; That they improve their Friends to procure a special
Privilege, or golden Bull from his Holiness, That none presume to Preach,
Print, or otherwise to publish, any Invectives, Sarcasms, Satyrs, Drollery, or
Raillery whatsoever, whether with Wit, or without Wit, against J. O. T. J. W.
B. and the rest of the Nonconformists, nor against the Christian Religion under
their Names, during the space of One and Twenty Years, now next and immediately
ensuing the date hereof, without the special Leave, and express License of them
the said S. P. and W. S. or their Assigns.

Some I perceive who are less knowing in this Mystery, have given themselves
causeless trouble to enquire, Why our Author should single out these Persons
and their Writings for his Enemies, when he might with the same Ease and
Modesty have combated the first Reformers of our Church, reproached the
Reverend Bishops, and most eminent Divines; and above all, duelled the
Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of Eugland; and either with Franciscus a S.
Clara, have reconciled them to his own Notions, or if they were stomackfull and
stubborn, and would not bend, most stoutly have confuted them: But these
Persons do not consider, that such a Procedure had been both Dangerous and
Scandalous; Dangerous, because that Doctrine is Armed with Law, and fenced with
Secular Power; and Scandalous, because it would have looked with an ugly face,
first to subscribe them, to gratify a man's Convenience, and then to confute
them to satisfy his Conscience: And therefore this other way was judged more
eligible, which might secure, if not reward the Author, and yet as effectually
destroy the Doctrine: That he fixed upon this Course therefore as more
advisable, never created my wonder, but one thing I confess did; That the
Governors of the Church should appear so tender in a Ceremony, and yet seem so
little concerned for the Substance of the established Religion; that they
should so severely Animadvert upon them who meddle with a Pin, and yet take so
little notice of those who are digging up the Foundation of the Building. But
hence we may learn, That some may with more safety steal a Horse, than others
look over the Hedge; so strangely does the same thing vary from its self, when
done by differing hands, that as one informs us, from Livy, Papyrius slighted
the Pullarii handsomely, and was well rewarded; when Appius Pulcher for doing
the same thing slovenly and rudely, was disgraced.

But it is high time to consider our Author. There are Two Praeliminaries which
usher in the Body of his Discourse in this Section. First, an Account what
notable Feats he has done in the former; and Secondly, a modest account of his
own Ingenuity in this Section: What he has achieved in the former, he sums
up in few words. After this plain Account, wherein the Knowledge of Christ
consists, the sum of which is this, that to understand Christ, is to
understand his Gospel; which contains all those Revelations he made of Gods
Will. I must needs say, I could have been content he had called it a learned
Account, an unparalled Account, a witty, gentile, or indeed almost any other
Account in the world besides a Plain one; for though there be but little of
Truth, yet there is nothing at all of Plainness in it: I had always thought,
(and Thoughts are as free for me as another) that the Formale of the Knowledge
of Christ lay in knowing his Person, that he is God and Man, two Natures united
in one Person; his Offices, that he is our Prophet, our King, our High Priest;
and that the understanding of the Gospel, is the only proper Means to come to
the understanding and knowledge of Christ, Who he is, What he is, in Himself,
and to us; But that the knowledge of Christ should consist in understanding the
Gospel, is an uncouth way of Praedication wherewith I am not yet acquainted.
Jesus Christ is understood in and by the Gospel: True; he that understands the
Gospel, must needs understand Jesus Christ: Very good; but still as a Means
leading to that End, and not the very thing it self: Much less is it true, That
the Knowledge of Christ consists in understanding the Gospel, as it contains
all the Revelations of Gods will. For this was but a part, and the least part
too of Christ's Employment and Undertaking; Christ had something more to do
than revealing to us Gods Will: Suffering the Displeasure, was a harder task
than Revealing the Will of God; It was one thing to Preach a Sermon, and
another to sweat drops of Blood; to have his Soul made an Offering for sin; to
have the Iniquities of us all to meet upon him: Christ had many things to do,
and command as our Lord and Governor; many things to suffer as our Sacrifice,
many to offer as our Priest; and what he had thus done, and suffered, to Reveal
to us as our Prophet and Teacher. But supposing all this to be true, That the
knowledge of Christ consists in the knowledge of the Gospel; and suppose also
further, that the Gospel contains no more than a Revelation of Gods Will,
concerning us and our Obedience; what use can he make of it? Why hence he will
take a happy occasion to reproach some body or other, who have formed Another
Notion of the Knowledge of Christ, very distinct from this, which contains a
greater secret than one would at first imagine, and that is, an Acquaintance
with Christ's Person, which, if we will believe some men, is the only Fountain
of saving Knowledge: And is it grown such an unpardonable Crime in England to
be acquainted with, or to have any Knowledge of Christ's Person by his Gospel?
Are these things grown so inconsistent all oth' sudden? It Is not so very long
since, that our Author could allow, that the Greatness of his Person as (...),
God-man, was of some Consideration, and that Consideration of some good use
too; we were told what Credit his Person gave to his Laws, what repute it
brought to his Doctrine, what value it procured to his Sacrifice, and what
Influence it had upon the great Ends of Religion; and are his Person and Gospel
so fallen out of late, that there is no hopes of an Accommodation? What our
Author may do, I know not; but other men I am sure, have learned to
distinguish betwixt a King and his Laws, though they do not oppose them; and to
put a difference between a Prophet, and his Revelations, without creating
differences between them; they can look upon a Priest and his Sacrifice as two
things, and yet not as contrary things; to consider Christ and his Gospel under
distinct, and yet not under inconsistent Notions. Oh! but the Quarrel lies a
great deal deeper; That they make the Person of Christ the only Fountain of
saving Knowledge: I confess, I could not expect that they should escape without
a Chiding, who say, Christ's Person is the Fountain of saving Knowledge, when
the Apostle himself could not escape a Nip for calling him the only
Foundation, p. 105. And yet as it has been accounted discretion not to throw
away our foul Water till we have got fair; so some I perceive are resolved not
to leave their Confidence in Christ till our Author can show them a stronger
bottom for Faith, nor to despise Christ as the Fountain of Knowledge, till he
has discovered them one both fuller and freer of that which concerns their
Salvation: They will own the Gospel to be the Conduit which Conveighs to us the
Knowledge of God, but they are somewhat bold to assert Christ to be the
Fountain that fills it: They own the Gospel to be the next immediate Cause
which Derives saving Knowledge to us, but yet Christ is the Original Spring
whence all true saving Knowledge of God is Derived; and they are the more
confirmed in it, because Christ himself spoke a word, John 1. 18. That no man
had seen God at any time, the only Begotten Son who was in the Bosom of the
Father, He has revealed Him.

But yet say what you will or can, There is another Notion of the Knowledge of
Christ very distinct from our Authors: The true meaning whereof is no more than
this; That it is better so Excellent a Book had been Written upon a false
Ground, than none at all, and that it is more desirable to run upon a
sleeveless Errand than to sit still.

And this is enough to stay any man's Stomach by way of Repetition, what gallant
Feats our Author has done in the former Section: A Taste of his Modesty, and
Ingenuity follows: For, he will not envy the Author the glory of the Discovery,
and will therefore honestly confess where he had it: For he who would be loath
that any should Rob him of the glory of his rare Discoveries upon Ephesians. 4. 20.
is as unwilling to be accounted a pilfering Plagiary, one that Filches his
Notions from others, and will not own his Benefactors.

Now the great Grievance lies against a Book, Entitled, Communion with God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost distinctly, Written by John Owen, D. D. And here I
must openly profess, that I have no Commission either from this Gentleman, or
those others Concerned in the Reproaches of our Author, to Vindicate their
Names, or Interpose in their Concerns, they need not my Defense and
Vindication; they are of Age to answer for themselves: and would certainly do
it, but that they are Discouraged by an Old French Diverb: Le jeune vault pas
La chandelle. The Game will not pay for the Candle. And perhaps they may be of
his Temper, who could not be persuaded to wrest that dull Creature that is
sometimes free of his Hoof. What I therefore write is by virtue of a general
Warrant: In a Common Invasion, every one is supposed to be Listed against the
Common Enemy; and a charitable Bucket will not be refused toward the Quenching
of a general Fire. Every Christian has his Concerns in Truth; and if it be
lawful to Oppose it, it may be presumed lawful too to Defend it: Not waiting
therefore till I receive express Order, nor fearing the Fate of that noble
Person who was Sentenced to Death by his own Father, because he Fought (though
he Routed) the Enemy without Command; I shall Impartially consider what his
loud Clamor against these Persons fignifies, and whether the Fleece do answer
the Cry of his Hogshearing.

Our Author begins with Doctor Owen, and from amongst all the Books that he has
Published, he has singled out that Practical piece of Communion with God: This
some think was most absurdy, and disingenuously done, to wave his Pol^mical
writings, wherein he has of set purpose Stated and Handled these very Points,
and fall Foul upon a Practical one which meant him no Harm* But they that so
Judge, must Excuse me if I think otherwise, and that it was most Politickly and
Advisedly done; for surely might he think, if ever I take the Doctor Napping,
and Trip up his Heels, it must be where he never Dreamt of an Enemy. And yet so
unluckily has it fallen out, that as if he had been aware of After-claps, and
written his Book by Prophecy; he has so warily Expressed himself, that none need
fear to be his Second, or despair of his Fair, and clear Vindication.

His first and great Quarrel is against these words. Commun. p. 88. Christ is
not only the Wisdom of God, but made Wisdom to us, not only by Teaching us
Wisdom, as He is the Great Prophet of the Church; but also because by the
Knowledge of Him, we become Acquainted with the Wisdom of God, which is our
Wisdom: The sum of which is asserted in Terms, Col. 2. 3. In Him dwell all
the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Reader is bound to presume that some
great Mischief must needs Lurk in these words, if one could find it out, though
as to us poor Dim-sighted Mortals, there is nothing but what might have
Traveled safely upon the Road, without a Hue and Cry, and raising the Posse
Comitatus against ^t. That Christ is the Wisdom of God, and made Wisdom to us,
is the express Language of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 24. 30. That He Teaches us
Wisdom, carrys the same Scripture Credentials along with it. That He is the
great Prophet of the Church, is Voucht by the same Authority, that by our
knowing of Him, we become acquainted with the Wisdom of God* Any man living
might have said, but this Doctor Owen, and a very few more, and have thought no
great Harm neither; What ails then our Author thus dismally to Paratragediate?
whence comes all this Clutterand Din? Had Medaea Torn her Children piecemeal,
and scattered their reeking Entrails, and bleeding Limbs about the fields? Or
had our Author been Invited to Thyestes his Banquet, at the Honor whereof the
amazed Sun muffled his face in Clouds? Or had he perhaps (at least in a Play,)
seen Hippolytus drawn in Pieces with his own Coach-Horses? Or Hercules stark
Raging Mad, with the Centaures poisoned Jerkin? No, not a Syllable of all this:
But one Doctor Owen had unadvisedly Quoted, Col. 2. 3. In Him are hid all the
Treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge, to prove that Christ is our Wisdom, etc.
All this while the Honest Reader stands wondering what should be the Cause of
this high Ferment, and where the Lie should be, that deserves this Stab. But I
shall satisfy him: The Doctor thinks these words are true of the Person of
Christ; and our Author will needs have them applied to the Doctrine of Christ:
The Text (says he) speaks of the Doctrines, and Revelations of Christ. Shall it
then be Compounded by indifferent Arbitrators? If our Author will not exclude
Christ's Person, I dare undertake the Doctor shall not exclude his Revelations:
and so the Controversy shall be all Hushed, and Quiet. Two things I shall
modestly offer to the Reader. (1.) That in this Text, the Person of Christ must
necessarily be Included. And I shall assign these two Reasons.

Reason 1. It Is dangerous to Interpret Scripture at that Rate, as may destroy
the Design of it: and if this Course be taken, I know nothing but that the
Person of Christ may be Distinguished, and Interpreted out of the whole Bible:
If it stand not here necessarily, it stands in all other places but
precariously; and when he sees good, can show us a way how a Doctrine or a
Revelation, may be Born of the Virgin Mary, and suffer also under Pontius
Pilate.

Reason 2. The second Verse leads us plainly to a Person; The Mystery of God,
and of the Father, and of Christ. Hence I am apt to believe, That since the
Father, and the Son, are equally Con^ern'd in the Argument, are joined together
in one Sentence, are Linckt in one even Tenor, and Current of Discourse; if
the Father signify a Litteral proper Father, the Son also will prove a
Litteral and proper Son: And if the Son must be a Figurative, Tropical Son, the
Father likewise in the Issue, will be a Figurative and Tropical Father; either
let both be Real, or both Figurative, fince the Apostle has given us no Reason
to think otherwise of the one than of the other.

Reason, 3. How harsh would it sound in our Ears, to say that God is the Father
of a Doctrine, an Office, and whatever else our Author pleases, and yet it is
plain, that of that Son to whom God is a Father, the Apostle affirms; In Him
are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

Reason 4. It Is not conceivable how all the fullness of Wisdom and Knowledge can
dwell in Christ's Doctrines, and Revelations, without first conceiving them to
dwell in his Person. Commonly, men's Writing^ are not fuller of Wisdom than
their Heads; whereas therefore our Author would In^er, that the Text is not to
be understood of his Person because it is so of his Doctrines: I should the
^ther conclude it tru^ of His Doctrine, because it is first so, and most
absolutely so of His Person* (...) were a strange way of Arguing, that the
Fountain cannot possibly be full, because the Vessel is so; when it is
therefore true, that the Vessel is full in its limited Capacity, because the
Fountain is full ^out such limitation.

Reason 5. The whole Current of the Chapter empties it self into a Person. That
Person or Thing, (be it who, o^ what it will) in which, or in (...) the
Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are said to be hid, ver. 2. Is the same, in
which, or in whom, ver. 9. All the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Who,
or which, v. 10. is the Head of all Pri^cipalitie and Power; in which, or in
whom they were Circumcised. Who, or which, ver. 12. ^as raised from the Dead,
to whose Cross, ver. 14 The Handwriting of Ordinances was Nailed. And who, or
which, ver. 15. Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphing over them in it.

Reason 6. Because our Author sometimes, when his Ingenuity works, can be
content to divide the Matter. Thus, page 32. Christ (says he) is called, Heb.
1. 2. the Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and express Image of his Person; as
the Will of God was fully declared to the World by Him, as well as with respect
to his Divine Nature. And pray why may we not be allowed the same Liberty here
to say: All the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge are hid in Christ, as well
with respect to his Person as to his Doctrine. (2) If this will not do, I have
one thing more to acquaint him with: Let him leave that Imperious way of
perpetual Dictatorship, and fall to Proving, and Arguing, as hard as he can,
for it is past that time of day with the World that has its Eyes open, to
receive Confident assertions, for Demonstrations.

Before I dismiss this Period, I must a little further Examine our Authors
Connexions, and Dependencies of things, and the rather because they seem to
hang together with no better Friendship, than so many Pebbles in a Halter, nor
to maintain a stronger Correspondency each with other, than the parts of a
Thumb-rope made of Sand.

And, 1. He tells us, That he may not do the Doctor wrong, he must tell us what
he means by acquaintance with Christ's Person: And then Quotes the words which
we have just now discharged from our Consideration: But say I, this could not
be, that he might not wrong him, but the contrary, that he might be sure not to
do him right. For (not to Insist upon so small a Matter, that he Mutilates and
Mangles the Doctors words) it is very plain that the Doctor does not there
describe our Acquaintance with Christ's Person, but the Effect of it: That in a
Crucified Christ, we behold the Glory of God, page 78.

2. I cannot but observe, what a Mad and Frantic Inference, he draws from the
Doctors words: So that our acquaintance with Christ's Person, signifies in this
man's Divinity: such a Knowledge of what Christ is, has Done and Suffered for
us, from whence we may learn those Greater, Deeper, and more saving Mysteries
of the Gospel, which Christ has not expressly revealed to us. Now this is sure
an excellent Invention, and whereof our Author deserves the Patent, to Slander,
Revile, and Calumniate a Person, that he may not do him wrong; to Cut a man's
Throat, for fear you should hurt him; to Pick his Pocket out of mere tenderness
of Conscience, lest you should do him an Injury. Our acquaintance with Christ's
Person, teaches us no new Doctrine, but only acquaints us with the Reason of
the Old ones: We learn from the Gospel that God pardons Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin, and from the same Gospel we understand what Influence
the Personal Sufferings of Christ have upon our forgiveness with God. We learn
from the Scriptures, That God hears the Prayers of his People offered in the
Name of Christ: And from the same Gospel we learn what the Intercession of
Christ at the right Hand of the Father, does contribute to the answer of our
prayers. The Person of Christ reveals no other, much less greater, and deeper
Mysteries than are revealed in the Gospel; only that upon the account of
Christ's Person, his Offices, his Undertaking, we have a satisfactory account,
how those things which the Gospel reveals, should be Possible and Feasible.
Thus Romans 3. 26. we find that God is the Iustifier of him that believes: And
Faith that Resolves all its acts into the Veracity and Authority of the
Revealer, is ready to assent to, and acquiesce in that Revelation: But suppose
God will gratify the Inquisitiveness of our Spirits, and clear up Matters to
the satisfaction of our Trembling, because guilty Souls; the Gospel reveals all
this to be in Christ: He is set for^h to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, Romans 3. 25. In him is the Righteousness of God declared: Upon His
account God appears to be Just, even then when He is the most Gracious, free,
and sovereign Iustifier of a Sinner. If then at any time our Faith shall
stagger, how the Blood of Christ could be a Propitiation (...), a Pacification
with God for us; we are presently Relieved from the Consideration of that
Person whose Blood it was, viz. The Blood of Him that is God, Acts 20. 28. and
therefore of infinite Value. But because this will hardly pass when we tender
it in Payment, we have one to be our Voucher, whose Word will go further than
the Doctors Bond, and it is our Authors own dear self. Page 19. This assures us
of the Infinite value of Christ's Sacrifice; God cannot but be well pleased,
when his Son undertakes to be a Ransom. The clear and full account therefore
of the deep Mysteries, and great Difficulties in our Religion, are to be Salved
from a due Consideration of the Person, Natures, Offices, Undertaking, Active
and Passive Obedience of Christ; but the Revelations of all these things are
Wholly, Only, and Entirely due to the Gospel. There is one thing which I shall
touch upon by the way: That for any Doctrine, or Proposition which his
Adversaries do Abett, he exacts Rigorously, and they are bound to produce
express Revelations, Scripture to a Letter, a Tittle; but for any of his own
phancies, A feeble Conjecture, some farfetcht Consequence shall serve the turn
well enough: Such Laws did his Master Volkelius, Lib. 3. de ver a Relig. Cap.
11. p. 62, once Impose upon the world: That whosoever should bring a Text to
prove, that the Church of Old, had the Promises of Eternal Life, must bring one
that did assert it; Apertis Luculentissimisque verbis: In plain express Terms.
Ay, no doubt, it must be written with a Sunbeam, that will enlighten their
minds who have no mind to see; but if it be drawn with a Charcoal, it will do,
when its pressed to serve their Hypothesis. Now though I much Question whether
we be Obliged to abide by these new Laws of Disputation, yet thus much is out
of Question, that our Blessed Savior thought he quoted Scripture, when he only
drew an Inference from it, John 7. 38. He that believes on me (as the
Scripture has said) out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters.

But, 3. As I am dissatisfied with our Authors Inference from the Doctors
words, so I am much more with the Reason that he assigns to make good his
Inference: His Inference is, That the Doctor, from Christ's Person, learns
greater, deeper Mysteries, than Christ has Revealed in his Gospel. The Proof
is this: For so he adds soon after, That these properties of God (his pardoning
Mercy) Christ has revealed in his Doctrine, in that revelation he has made of
God and his Will. The Sinews and Nerves of which Argument, lie visible. The
Doctor asserts, That these properties of God are revealed in the Gospel: Ergo,
It Is plain, that He asserts they are not revealed in the Gospel: That is, in
broad English, he denies, because he affirms: Or he says the Snow is Black,
because he proves, as well as he can, that it is White. Let none ever hereafter
despair of the greatest Impossibilities; this is one of the most hopeful Essays
toward the Squaring of the Circle, the Doubling of the Cube, and setting on
Foot a perpetual Motion: And what cannot that Wit be able to do, that can prove
the Doctor affirms these Mysteries are not, because he says they are in the
Gospel. I confess when first I read this Passage in our Author, I examined the
Doctors words with all possible care; nay, I wrested them almost in pieces, and
wrackt them most cruelly, to try if with my weak strength I could extort any
such conclusion from them, and when I had tired my self, was forced to sit down
by this Determination, that either our Author, or all his Readers, are
certainly Frighted out of their Wits: But yet there is, something follows in the
Doctors, that will yield matter of Cavil: But the Life of this Knowledge lies
in an acquaintance with Ghrists Person, wherein the express Image and Beams of
this Glory of his Father does shine forth: That is (as our Author pretends to
Gloss it from the Doctor) These things are clearly, eminently and savingly,
only to be discovered in Jesus Christ. I was apt to think at first sight, that
he might have some dreadful Pick at those words: In his Person the express
Image and Beams of this Glory of his Father, shine forth. But I soon Cured my
self of that Suspicion, by remembering that page 32. Our Author himself was
pretty well contented, Christ should be so called, upon the account of his
Divine Nature, although to please all Parties, he had found out a Temper, that
he should be so called in respect of his Doctrines and Revelations: And
therefore without more ado, I was satisfied that the Grudge lay against those
other words; The Life of this Knowledge lies in an acquaintance with Christ's
Person. Now if I might presume so far upon my Acquaintance with the Doctors
meaning, as I think any one may, it is no more but this: That whereas the
Scripture every where reveals to us, that God is a God pardoning Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin, Exodus 34. 6. Yet the Matter is Clogged with considerable
Difficulties, and attended with great Objections; for the same Text assures us,
that He will by no means clear the Guilty: Both the parts of this Scripture are
equally revealed, both equally claim a share in Gods Veracity, and till we can
be resolved to Satisfaction, how God may be such a one as pardons Iniquity, and
yet will by no means clear the Guilty, till we can see how this seeming
Contradiction may be Reconciled, we shall either have none, or but a faint, and
Dying knowledge of it. But now Christ he is the very Life of this Knowledge,
for in his Death and Sufferings we see, and know clearly, that Gods Justice is
satisfied upon Christ, and his pardoning Mercy Magnified upon the Repenting and
Believing sinner; and thus to know God to be a Sin-pardoning God, has indeed
Life in it. For thus, to use the words of the Learned Bishop Reynolds, upon
Psalm. 110. A Way is found out that things may be all one in respect of Man, as
if the Law had been utterly Abrogated; and that they may be all one in respect
of God, as if the Creature had been utterly Condemned, page 500. This is all
the Doctor here intends, wherein though he should be mistaken, yet has he not
discovered a Fellonious Intention, and so I hope it will not prove a Hanging
Matter. But yet our Author with his prying Eyes, can see further into a
Millstone, than he that Pecks it: And as our Critical Scholiasts upon the Poets,
discover Elegancies, Figures, and great Rarities which the poor man never
Dreamt of; so can our Author discover Errors, multitudes of hideous Errors in
the Doctor, which he neither Sleeping nor Waking was ever aware of. For, says
he, He explains himself thus: These things are Clearly, Eminently, and
Savingly, only to be discovered in Jesus Christ. Whether the Doctor say any
such thing or no, we shall take the Boldness to Catechize our Author by and by;
and make him produce his Chapter, Paragraph, and Page, e're we have done, or
abide by the shame that is due to a Malicious Slanderer. At present I only ask
which of these Terms it is that he will Duel, or will he throw down the Gantlet
to them all, that we may have Battle Royal?

(1) These things are only clearly to be discovered in Jesus Christ: I see the
most Innocent things may give Offense, But who would have suspected that in
this place? For suppose that Sun, Moon, and Stars, Gods general Goodness to,
his Patience with, and Forbearance of Sinners, might Intimate some such thing,
that there was Forgiveness with God; yet surely there is a more clear account
given of it in Christ's Person, who was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. which the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 53. v. 10. calls making his Soul an Offering for sin: And
that, methinks, clears it up a little more, than if we had been put to spell
out the meaning of Patience and Forbearance, with the Fescue of our own
understanding. And though the Scripture abundantly reveals Pardon of Sin, yet
the Manner how, the Reason why, which are the very Life and Soul of all
Knowledge, is revealed to be from the Mercy of God, through the Blood of
Christ, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, the
Forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace. And the rather may
we be bold to say, that the pardon of Sin is cleared up in the Person of
Christ; because so Authentic, so Infallible an Author as ours is, has given us
leave to believe, page 20. that the Gospel Covenant is sealed with the Blood of
Christ, and therefore we can desire no greater Security. And this I am sure of,
from Heb. 8. 10. that the Sum and Substance of that Covenant, is, I will be
their God, and they shall be my People; and a main Branch of that Covenant, I
will be Merciful to their Iniquities, and Remember their Sins no more. If then
we could but clear this one Point, that the Bliod which Sealed this Covenant,
was not the Blood of a Doctrine, nor of an Office, nor of the Church, but the
precious Blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, even the Blood of a Person; it
would then be clear also, that God's pardoning Mercy is only clearly (or so
clearly however) to be discovered in Jesus Christ.

(2) For the Term [Eminently] if the Bluster be against that, I shall not much
trouble my self, I am no great Friend to, because poorly skilled in
Metaphysical Notions; but as it stands here in Conjunction with other honest
words, I see no harm in it. To me it denotes no more, but that the Pardon of
sin, is Notably, Chiefly, Gloriously, and in a most Special and Excellent
manner, discovered in the Personal Sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ: But if
our Author after all this be not satisfied, but finds himself Aggrieved, the
Law is open, I plead no Protection, let him take his Course, and the Remedy the
Law has given him.

(3) Therefore it must needs be that last word Savingly, that is guilty of all,
and therefore must bear the Charge brought in against the whole Sentence: That
pardon of sin is only savingly discovered in Jesus Christ. I cannot tell, but I
do shrewdly conjecture that our Author has spoken as dangerous a thing as this
comes to, and has given us sufficient warrant to distinguish between a vain,
empty, Insignificant Knowledge, and an Useful, Profitable, and Saving
Knowledge, page 36. There is (says he) a larger Notion of the Knowledge of
Christ, which includes the Virtue and Efficacy of this Knowledge. -- For how
true soever our Speculations be, the Scripture brands all those as Ignorant of
God, who do not love, Reverence and Obey Him. Now if the Doctors Book had had
but the Happiness to have seen the World after our Authors, he might have
Explained himself so as to come off with a dry Head: Notwithstanding what I
have said of Gods Sin-pardoning mercy, and the Knowledge thereof as in Him; yet
there is another Knowledge thereof, which Includes and takes in the knowledge
of this God to be our God, and pardoning our sins, which God is, only in and
through the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore the Scripture brands all those as
Ignorant of God, and his pardoning Mercy, who know him not as their God, in a
Covenant of Grace whereof Christ is the Mediator, and therefore without Him we
can have no Saving-knowledge of, or Interest in God, or his Sin-pardoning
Goodness, whatever our Speculations may be of Mercy and Grace, and Pardon to be
in God.

But after all this Trouble our Author has put me to, and just as much that I
have put the Reader to; the Mischief on it all is this: The Doctor says not one
Word, Syllable, Letter, Jot, or Tittle of all this, but the contrary. I am sure
the Reader is startled, and his Hair begins to stand an end: What, no Truth on
Earth? Is Astraea more than in a Fable gone to Heaven? Well Reader, when thou
art come to thy self, and art a little more Cool and Composed, Consult the
Doctors Book, page 90. Sect. 6. There are some of the most eminent Properties
of God, that there is not the least Glimps to be attained of out of the Lord
Jesus Christ, but only by and in Him; and some that comparatively we have no
Light of but in Him, and of all the rest no true Light but by Him. In which
words, the Doctor evidently sorts all Gods Properties under three Heads. 1.
Such whereof there is not the least glimps to be attained out of Christ, and
under this Head he reckons Gods Love, his pardoning Mercy or Grace to sinners.
2. Such whereof we have comparatively no Light but in Christ; and to this Head
he refers, Gods Vindictive Justice in punishing Sin, etc. 3. Of all the rest he
affirms we have no true Light but by Him: Now concerning the second sort, he
says, page 92. Sect. 10. Secondly, There are other Properties of God, which
though also otherways discovered, yet are so clearly, eminently, and savingly,
only in Jesus Christ. Now Reader, for a tolerable pair of Eyes: Our Author
would make the Doctor say, that Gods pardoning Mercy is clearly, eminently, and
savingly, only discovered in Christ: But the Doctor himself says,
Sin-pardoning-mercy is not at all known, there is not the least glimps of it but
in Christ. So page 91. Out of Christ there is not the least Conjecture of it,
not the least Morsel to be tasted of it out of Christ: That is, God has not any
way, any where, at any time, discovered that he will pardon a Sinner but upon
the Account of his Son. And now Reader, I hope I may fairly protest against our
Authors Bills for the future, or however carry a very suspicious Eye over him,
as being in his Quotations either sick of sapine Negligence, thick Ignorance,
or transparent Malice; and let all men know by these presents, that
henceforwards I shall not take his Word for a single Farthing.

But how false or impertinent soever this be, I knew he did not raise all this
dust, and make such a heavy ado for Nothing; whatever the Doctors Principles
and Assertions were, he was resolved to pay him home, and load him soundly with
ill-favored Inferences, and misshapen Conclusions, and in that one Knack lies
our Authors Masterpiece. So that (says he) it seems the Gospel of Christ
makes a very imperfect and obscure Discovery, of the Nature, Attributes and
Will of God, and the Methods of our Recovery; we may thoroughly understand
whatever is revealed in the Gospel, and yet not have a clear, and saving
knowledge of these things, until we get a more intimate Acquaintance with
Christ's Person. There was never any Man that made better use of id est's, and
so that is, than our Author. So that! The Doctor had said, That Christ has
revealed the Properties of God in his Doctrine, etc. and what would you now
think follows from hence? Why surely, one would think; That therefore the
Gospel of Christ makes a perfect and clear discovery of the Nature, Attributes,
and Will of God: Nay, there you are out (says our Author) for hence it
follows, that the Gospel makes a very imperfect and obscure discovery of them:
But what Necessity may there be to draw such a Conclusion from such a Doctrine?
I will tell thee Reader in thy Ear, Sub Sigillo Concessionis, as a great
Secret; Otherwise as excellent a piece as ever blessed the World with New
Divinity, had got a knock in its Cradle, and would have retained a soft place
in its head all the days of its life: Now that which he would fain fasten upon
the Doctor, is a piece of the greatest Foolery Imaginable: As if he made the
Person of Christ, no part of Gospel-Revelation; whereas it is indeed his great
Principle, that Christ is the sum and substance of it: He could never once
fancy it possible to have a through understanding of the Gospel, but we must
ipso facto have also a through understanding of Christ's Person; nor to have a
through understanding of the Gospel, and Christ the Subject of it, but we must
have also a through understanding of Gods Nature, Attributes and Will, and of
the Methods of our Recovery by Jesus Christ: But this is the Product of our
Authors So that; which always agrees with his Premises just like Brains and
Stairs, Harp and Harrow.

If therefore any one will do the Doctor Justice, he must read our Authors
words backwards, with a pair of Hebrew Spectacles, and that will give him a
truer Account of the Doctors Sentiments. The Gospel of Christ makes a very
perfect, and clear discovery of the Nature, Attributes, and Will of God, and of
the Methods of our Recovery, but we can never thoroughly understand what is
there revealed, unless we understand the Person of Christ, who is so
considerable a part, and indeed the whole of Gospel Revelation. And by such a
knowledge of Christ revealed in the Gospel, will the Person of Christ be justly
advanced, and the Gospel which reveals him greatly recommended: Shall we then
smile at, or lament our Authors simple Conclusion? This sets up a New Rule of
Faith, viz. Acquaintance with Christ's Person, in whom dwells all the Treasures
of wisdom and knowledge. And here a vein of his old thredbare Fallacy discovers
it self, which I now perceive (like the poisonous string in the Lamprey,) he
resolves shall run through his whole Discourse; Dividing those things which God
has joined, and supposing those things inconsistent, which are indeed
subservient one to the other. Christ's Person is Revealed by the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and not opposed to it; Christ as a Prophet reveals himself to our Faith
as God-man, as Mediator and Redeemer, and as vested with all those Offices for
the discharge of his whole Mediatory Employment. To advance his Person is not
to degrade his Gospel; the Magnifying of a Prophet is no disparagement to his
Prophecy: The Honoring of a King is no reproach to his Law: The Gospel is
therefore Excellent, because it reveals to us so Excellent a Person as the Word
made flesh, the Person of Redeemer: New Rule of Faith therefore we own none,
and wish heartily that they who condemn us, whilst they pretend to abhor
Idols, did not commit downright Sacrilege; that they set not up New Rules of
Faith, upon a pretense that the Scripture is not sufficient to direct our Faith
and Obedience in things pertaining to God; but it is Common for some to exclaim
against feeding on the Devils flesh, who yet will sup soundly of the Broth that
he is boiled in: But these things our Author has been told so often of, that I
see it to no purpose to tell him a story, unless I could find him Ears.

But these are but Velitations and light Skirmishes, our Author is preparing
for a most terrible Charge upon the Doctor: These whiffling* Slanders do but
make way for the Show, like the Turkish Spabi, good for nothing but to fill up
the Trenches, or blunt the edge of his Enemies Weapons, we are now waiting to
receive the formidable Impression of his Ianizaries.

Two things he will Confound us all with; First, by showing what Additions,
This Dr. O. and some others make to the Gospel: And then Secondly, what an
unsafe way of Arguing they use:

And, [1] He will show us, What Additions these men make to the Gospel, from an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person. I must needs say, I was extremely startled to
hear a Charge of Additions to the Gospel brought in against any Man; I
presently expected either unwritten Traditions, or immediate Revelations, or I
know not what African Monster should stare me in the face: And I know nothing
at which my Nature more recoyls, nothing more abhorring to my Temper, than such
saucy Additions; and the rather, because I presently remembered that dreadful
Curse, Rev. 22. 18. If any one shall add unto these things, God shall add to
him all the Plagues that are written in this Book: If Men will be Adding, God
will be Adding; if Men will add their whimsical Inventions, God will add his
Righteous Judgments; And for that Reason I never liked, either the Addition of
Officers to those Christ has commanded to govern his Church, nor the Addition
of Canons to those by which he has appointed his Church to be governed; I
always thought it safest, to leave the Doctrine, Worship, and Government of
Christ as we found them; we may be chidden for adding, or substracting, but
never for being no wiser than the Gospel; and when we have done our Best, and
chopped and changed, we shall hardly ever make better than those Christ made for
us: If therefore our Author can but prove his Declaration as he has laid it, I
am his absolute Creature, his prepared Man, and shall be sure to find for him
against the Doctor, and a thousand more Innovators: But at last I perceive, all
this is but the old stratagem of his Neighbors of Billings-gate, where the
crafty Slut calls her Opponent Whore first, lest she should be prevented with
as bad language, and better Proof.

But there are no less than Three Additions that this one single Doctor has
made to the Gospel. In which (as he says) is summed up all true Wisdom and
Knowledge, and not any one of them to any purpose to be obtained, or is
manifested, but only in, and by the Lord Christ; Now though our Author had
almost pored his eyes out with seeking for these things in the Gospel to no
purpose, yet still he was so perspicacious as to espy one sorry, single, little
word [ by] which the Doctor had fallaciously added, to include the Revelations
made by the Gospel. Whether that little word was added fallaciously or no, I
shall not at present determine; but this I will say, that it was as
mischievously and enviously added, as ever any word of that Bigness was added
in the world; of set purpose no doubt, and propense Malice, to spite our
Authors design, and most inhumanely and barbarously, to cross all his Projects:
For it is plain, that the Particle [ in] referres to [ obtaining,] and this
other Particle [ by] to [ Manifesting,] which by resolving the Doctors words
into their distinct Propositions, is more than evident.

1. The things mentioned are not to be Obtained but In Christ. And, 2. The
things mentioned are not Manifested but By Christ.
[Obtained in him,] that is, Through his Merit, Mediation, Intercession or
Procurement: And, [Manifested by him,] that is, By his Preaching, and the
Preachings and Writings of his Evangelists and Apostles. Now had but the Doctor
left out that one word [ by] as a good Natured man would have done, our Author
would have had a fair Ear of advantage to lay hold on, for reviling him, as
excluding the Revelations of the Gospel; and therefore I must say it again, it
was not so Civilly done of the Doctor, nor so like a Gentleman, as might have
been expected from him, to insert that one word, to the apparent prejudice,
hazard, if not utter disherison of our Author, his Cause, Learning, Rhetoric
and Reputation: But yet he thinks it was fallaciously Added, because his first
undertaking was, to show how impossible it is to understand these things
savingly and clearly, notwithstanding all those Revelations God has made of
himself, and his Will, by Moses and the Prophets, and by Christ himself,
without an Acquaintance with Christ's Person: He that cheats me once proves
himself a Knave, but if he over-reaches me a second time, he proves me a Fool;
Remembering therefore how Matters stood between our Author and my self, and that
I was under bond never to trust him more, I took down the Doctors Book, and
with the best Eyes and Spectacles I had, viewed the place, and what I find
there the Reader shall have as cheap as I had it: P. 87. Com. All true wisdom
is laid up in, and only to be obtained from and by the Lord Jesus Christ. So
thought I, hitherto we are safe, and the Person of Christ and his Gospel are
very good Friends. Again p. 88. All that wisdom which God lays out for the
discovery and Manifestation of himself, is in Christ crucified, held out in
him, by him, and only to be obtained from him: Very good, there we have [ by]
again, and Gospel Revelations are not shut out of doors. Yet again p. 90. There
are some Properties of God, (as pardoning Mercy) the least glympse whereof is
not to be obtaine^ out of the Lord Jesus Christ, but only In him, and By him.
Hitherto we are alive, and alive's like. Once more, p. 98. The Riches of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God, are only hid in, and revealed by Christ: And to
give our Author his full Dose, p. 88. God is not known upon any other Account
(to Salvation) but only the Revelation of the Son. And now instead of
disparaging the Doctor, I doubt we shall err on the other hand, and too much
magnify him, as having written by Revelation, who twenty years before could
foresee the Objections that would be levelled against his Writings. Well,
(says our Author) let that pass; Oh the Charity of the Man, that will not
ruin his Enemy all at once! and indeed it is not good Husbandry to eat up a Man
at one Meal: Polyphemus himself would reserve Ulysses for a Breakfast, when he
supped so liberally over night with picking the Bones of his Mates; and yet
there was as much Discretion in the Case, as Frugality, not to show his Teeth
when he could not Bite, or however not to fasten them where it might break his
Fangs. But it will be seasonable to examine the particular Additions.

(1) The first is, concerning the knowledge of God, his Nature, and Properties.
And here the Doctor has made a great Addition, viz. that The Love of God to
sinners, could never have entered into the heart of Man but by Christ, p. 90.
Now our Author promises us, that he will not examine particularly every thing
the Doctor says: Of which we have had good proof all along; for it is not his
Genius to trouble himself with any more than what may conveniently serve his
purpose, but without considering either Antecedents or Consequents, to Nibble
at some Expression, that seems most liable to Exception; but herein we beg
not his favor, only demand Justice; That he may not Usurp a Liberty to
suppose, that the Doctor asserts Revelation to be wholly silent in this Matter.
Revelatition silent! Alas, it rings loud with the continual sound of Gods
pardoning Mercy to Sinners, only the Doctor judges, that Revelation directs us
to this Mercy of God through a Mediator, for the obtaining of it: When
therefore our Author asks fo pertly, whether the Doctor be not a confident Man
to lay down such a Position: I only teturn, that I have known our Author far
more confident upon far less Grounds; when the Doctor has a Foundation for his
Confidence, let him be so and spare not: A great deal less Confidence may be
sinful when it wants a Basis proportionable to bear its weight; and a great
deal more Justifiable, when it is born up with sufficient Warrant: Tell not me
of the Doctors Confidence, but examine his Reasons for it, and let us see what
our Author can do to dismount it. Truly he offers us but one thing, but I
assure you, it is a knocker: The Experence (says he) of the whole World confutes
him: Never was Man so confuted and confounded as he that stems the Experience
of the whole World; for though I ever looked upon Experience as a very ticklish
way of Confutation; and the best way of employing them is to Experience in our
own Souls the Virtue and Efficacy of certainly revealed Truths, and not to make
them the Umpires of questionable Doctrines, yet I should be loath to run counter
to the universal Sentiments of Mankind, and the Experience of the whole World
shall carry a mighty stroke in my Judgment; but has our Author taken their
Experiences by the Pole? and do they one and all give in their Suffrages
against the Doctor? Yes, Both Jews and Gentiles, who knew nothing of what
Christ was to do in order to our Recovery, did believe God to be gracious and
merciful to sinners. I must own it, That Jews and Gentiles are a sufficient
enumeration of particulars; they did once divide the World betwixt them, and if
they both agree in their Verdict against the Doctor, Nemine contradicente, he
is gone for ever, being overborn with Epidemical Experience.

1. For the Jews, the Day is like to go for our Author, if it be true, what he
tells us, That God assured them he was a Gracious and Merciful God, pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin, which certainly he is; and then that They knew
nothing at all of what Christ was to do for our Recovery; but all the stick
lies there, and we must enter a Friendly Debate with him upon the issue. For,
1. Whatever Manifestation of Gods Sin-pardoning Mercy was given to the Church
of Old, it had reference to the Blood of Christ, who was as really sacrificed
to their Faith, as he was crucified to the Faith of the (...), Galat. 3. 1. The
Jewish Sacrifices were Types designed, and appointed by God, to represent that
one Sacrifice, which Christ should once offer upon the Cross to God; and
without reference to the Expiation of Sin, Atonement and Propitiation of God
made by him, and manifested by them, it would have puzzled the Faith of any
particular person, that God would pardon sin, notwithstanding that Revelation,
Exodus 34. 6. for is it not immediately added, -- And that will by no means
clear the guilty? God in that place, reveals to Moses his Name, that is his
Nature; and if we consult particulars, we shall find, that it is as fair a
Letter in Gods Name, not to clear the Guilty (under which Character all the
world stand before God, Romans 3. 19.) as to pardon iniquity; but all this was
cleared up, and made easy by a believing attendance to those bloody
Sacrifices, which though weak in themselves, yet receiv^d a Sacrament al
strength from Him, who traveled in the greatness of his, to reconcile God and
Man by the Blood of his Cro^s. 2. There Is nothing more vain and idle, than to
(...) that the Jews knew nothing at all of what Christ was to do, in order to
our Recovery. For, 1. It was sufficient for that Dispensation, that God had
Revealed a Mediator, who should take up the Controversy between God and
sinners, and this he did, when it was early day with the world, to Adam, when
received into a Covenant of Grace: *It Is true, the more minute Circumstances of
when, and how He should come, in what manner he should accomplish his work,
might be veyled with some Obscurities, and perplexed with some difficulties at
the first; yet still they had a Promise in the Lump, that the Seed of the Woman
should bruise the Head of the Serpent, which the Apostle interprets, Heb. 2.
14. by destroying him that had the Power of Death, even the Devil: And as it
seemed good to the Wisdom of God to give forth the Promise at first in gross,
so in process of time to graduate and heighten the discovery of the Messiah:
That there should come a deliverer out of Sion, to turn away ungodliness from
Jacob, Isa. 59. 20. was evidently laid before their Faith; to these Revelations
did true Believers attend, and by this Key did they open the difficulty, how
God should be a God pardoning Iniquity, and yet by no means clear the Guilty:
And as the prefixed time of Christ's appearing in the World drew nearer, so the
Prophesies, and Promises of his Person, Nature, Work, and Design thereof, with
the Circumstances attending it, were multiplied, and more explicitly made out
to them; that so as they were growing up out of the State of Childhood, and
emerging from under their Bondage, the discoveries of a Savior might enlarge
their Hearts and Minds in Knowledge, Joy, Love and Peace: By Isaiah it was
revealed, that he should be born of a Virgin, Isa. 7. 14. that he should be
Immanuel, God with us, therein discovering both his Natures in one Person, and
his design to bring God and Man into one Covenant: By the fame Prophet was it
distinctly revealed, what should be his Work, and Employment, his Dignity and
Authority, and the Success of all. Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto
us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and his Name
shall be called Wonderful; Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father,
the Prince of Peace, of the increase of his Government and Peace there shall be
no end: By the fame Prophet it was revealed, Chap. 53. by what means mainly he
should accomplish the Ends of his coming into the World; by being wounded for
our Transgressions, bruised for our Iniquities, healing us by his stripes; by
Gods laying upon him the Iniquities of us all; that it pleased the Father to
bruise him, to make his Soul an Offering for sin; by the travel of his Soul, by
pouring it out to death, being numbered amongst the Transgressors, and making
Intercession for them; Verse. 6. 10, 11, 12. By the Prophet Daniel was revealed,
his Death, the precise Time of it, and for what he dyed, Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26.
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy Holy City, to finish
the Transgression, to make an end of sin, to make Reconciliation for Iniquity,
to bring in everlasting Righteousness, -- And after sixty two weeks shall the
Messiah be cut off, but not for himself: And is all this Nothing? just Nothing
in our Authors Arithmetic? If this be his Nothing, for Charities sake* let him
tell us what is one of his somethings: No; all this while the Jews knew nothing
at all of what Christ was to do, in order to our Recovery; But it became our
Author, who was to assign little work, very little to Christ when he was come,
to allow just nothing to be known of him before he came. But then it seems the
Apostle Paul was besides the Book, as well as the Doctor, for he protests, Acts
26. 22, 23. That he spoke none other things than those which Moses and the
Prophets did say should come, that Christ should suffer, and that he should be
the first that should rise from the dead: Upon our Authors Principles, it were
easy to prove, that Paul never spoke one word of Truth in the whole Course of
his Ministry; and the Apostle Peter was as lamentably mistaken as he: 1 Pet. 1.
10. Of which Salvation the Prophets have enquired, and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the Grace that should come unto you; searching what, and what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ, that was in them did signify, when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow: And yet we have the testimony of Christ himself, a witness greater than
all Exception. Luke 24. 25, 26, 27. O fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken, ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his Glory? And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself: No
doubt many lazy and drowsy Jews, not duly attending to the Concernment of
their Souls in these matters, knew little, or to little purpose, of what God
spoke to them by Sacrifices and Types, what that economy pointed at; they
might not possibly regard the Prophesies or Promises of a Messiah, nor is it
any wonder, when we consider how little sleepy Formalists, dreaming Professors,
and sottish Hearers understand of him at this day, who know no more of Christ,
his Person, Office, Work and Design than that ignorant Papist who being asked,
Who Christ was? answered, he believed he was as good a man as St. Patrick; Or
that other who concluded that Christ was something that was good, or else they
would never have put it into the Creed: But then there were diligent Enquirers,
and Conscientious Searchers, whose Faith engaged them in the pursuit of Eternal
Life, and these saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced in the Sight. But, 2. It s
an odd and perverse way to take the measure of the Jewish knowledge of Christ,
from our own clearer Light: We see clearer than they, yet will it not follow
that they were stark blind; though it be Midday with us, it was not Midnight
with them; and for my part, I more wonder that they at the Break of day saw so
much, and we at Noon comparatively see so little; and if some men's Designs take
place, we shall in a short time see less than they, and what to the Jews was a
difficulty, must be to us a Crime, viz. to have any Acquaintance with the
Person of Christ.

2. And if indeed the Jews knew nothing at all of Christ, they could not then
mock the Gentiles, who could not well be in a worse case, nor come under a more
dismal Character than to be without Christ. But to come a little nearer to our
Author. 1. What if some of the Gentiles also knew something, and something very
considerable of a Redeemer? I take Job to have been in that number, and yet he
knew that his Redeemer lived, and that he should stand at the latter day upon
the Earth; Job 19. 25. Which place our Author cannot question referres to
Christ, seeing the Liturgy of the Church of England, in the Office of Burial,
applies it so; and I hope it shall never be said, that as they Subscribe the
Articles in Jest, so they Worship God in Jest too: But to purchase his Favor,
let it be supposed that the Gentiles knew nothing at all of Christ; yet are we
sure they knew God to be a sin-pardoning God? For our Authors Discourse always
halts of one Leg at least, and wears a Crutch, if it be not like Homers Vulcan,
(...), foundred of all four. 2. The Jews, they understood the Doctrine of the
Pardon of sin to be in God, but then they understood by Promises, Prophecies,
Types, Sacrifices, and the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, that God had
provided a Redeemer; the Gentiles, they knew Nothing of a Redeemer, but then
they knew as little of the Pardon of Sin: But here our Author will knock the
Matter Dead by an Argument. Those Natural Notions the Heathens had of God, and
all those discoveries God made of himself in the works of Creation and
Providence, did assure them that God is very good, and it is not possible to
understand what Goodness is, without pardoning Grace. Not possible? that is a
thousand pities! I have sometimes sat admiring our Authors singular Happiness,
in defining to an inch so precisely, Necessaries and Impossibles, which are the
two extremes of the Modes of Being: And yet our Author can at one stride or
jump, pass from Necessity to utter Impossibility: Some did but venture to say,
that God could not pardon sin, without some intervening security to his
Justice: And there grew such a Hubbub, and Outcry upon it, as if the Turks and
Tartars had overrun all Christendom; and yet our Author, who can climb up all
the stairs, from easy to difficult, from difficult to impossible, has resolved
upon the Question, that from henceforth all shall adjudge it impossible to
understand what Goodness is, without pardoning Grace. But is there indeed such
a close Connection, so inseparable a glewing together of these two, that we
cannot prescind them with the sharpest act of the Understanding? Is it easier
to cleave a Hair, or divide an Indivisible, than to part Goodness and pardoning
Grace? I question not when he shall be at leisure, he can slit a thinner matter
a great deal than this is: But yet, 1. The Apostle Paul, Acts 14. 16, 17.
assures us, That God left not himself without a witness, in that he did good,
and gave them rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons. It was more than he owed
to Condemned Sinners, to afford them any kind of Goodness; he might have rained
Fire from Heaven, and showers of Brimstone upon their heads, and it was
goodness that he did it not; in stead of those fruitful seasons, he might have
sent Famine and Cleanness of Teeth, and there was much Goodness in that; yet
whether they could from hence bless themselves with a well-grounded Hope that
he would pardon their Iniquities, I much question. And, 2. The Servant in the
Parable, Math. 18. 26. could understand the difference between forbearance, and
acquittance: Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. Time and Day were
considerable Favors in his Judgment, though his Master did not throw him in
the Bond. 3. I am sure God himself understood the difference between a Reprieve
and a Pardon; between that Goodness which he shows in forbearing, and that
which he manifests in forgiving, Romans 9. 22. He endured with much
long-suffering the Vessels of Wrath, fitted to destruction: A presumptuous
Conclusion therefore had it been, from Gods general Goodness, and indulgent
Patience, to argue his Forgiveness, and pardoning-Grace. 4. Adam in the state
of Integrity understood very well, God to be good, he could not look besides a
Demonstration of it; and yet no Notion of Gods* Pardoning Grace was concreated
with him, whereof he could have no use in his worship of, and walking with God:
A threatening against sin he had, but not the least intimation that God would
pardon it, till it was revealed upon another Account.

We are not here enquiring * what presumptuous and vain hopes secure sinners
might form to themselves of Indemnity; nor how their hearts might be fully set
in them to do evil, because judgment against an evil work was not speedily
executed; nor what flattering thoughts might tickle their breasts, that God was
such a one as themselves, because he kept silence at their proceedings, and
spoke not his Fury in Thunder and Lightning; nor do we enquire what Natural
earnest desires they might express, to obtain the Favor of God; what projects,
plotts, and contrivances they invented to relieve their guilty Consciences,
wounded with apprehensions of wrath; how they skinned over their Sores with some
Services, and lickt themselves whole with their Sacrifices and Oblations: But
the Enquiry is this; What solid Ground they had from Gods common, and general
Goodness, his Governing the World, his Patience, Forbearance, and
long-sufferance with, his Bounty to Sinners; to conclude from thence, that he
was a Sin-pardoning God? When I seriously consider into what inextricable
Labyrinths and Mazes those poor Heathens did run themselves, how they were
bewildred in their own Inventions; how they tired themselves off their Legs in
their own ways, and spent themselves to their skins with Sacrifices, if by any
means it might be possible to purchase the good will of a Deity; I presently
conclude, they had no settled fixed Apprehension of any such thing in God. For
though they might hear a rumor, that there were a people in the World, toward
whom God showed himself propitious and favorable, and that the way of the
peoples part to reconcile this God to them, was by killing of Beasts, and
offering up them to him in Sacrifice, and might therefore hence fall upon this
practice of Sacrifices, yet not understanding the true use of them, what
reference they had to a promised Mediator, they must needs fluctuate, and toss
up and down in uncertainties about so weighty a Concern. Hence was it, that
least they should not hit upon the True God, in that Crowd and Throng of
Deities wherewith they had overstockt the Commons, they set up an Altar To the
unknown God; and least they should miss the right Sacrifice, and most
acceptable Offering, sometimes they Sacrificed the worst, sometimes the best of
Men; and sometimes to please their God the better, they would let him choose by
Lot which he would have: They tried Conclusions with almost all sorts of
Creatures, and all to answer the demands of an importunate Conscience, which as
Gods Officer was always haling and dragging them before the Bar of Gods
Justice, to answer for their Delinquencies: Either then they had no Notices of
Sin-pardoning Mercy, or what they had came not in from the Works of Creation
and Providence, but were some scattered Beams, and broken Splinters of
Traditional Knowledge, derived Originally to them from the People of God, who
themselves had received it by pure Revelation, in and through a Redeemer.

All this while our Author sits fretting himself like Gumm'd-Taffata, that when
he has been, for two whole pages together, preparing his Reader to swallow his
Pills, yet we should cunningly pass it over with a dry Foot, and never bestow
the least Consideration of it: That he may not therefore think himself
neglected, we shall give him a full and a fair hearing. The Light of Nature
(says he) and the Works of Creation and Providence, and those manifold
Revelations God has made of himself to the World, especially that last and
most perfect Revelation by Jesus Christ, assure us that God is infinite in all
his Perfections: They do so, let him make his best of that. And therefore that
he is Powerful, and can do whatever he pleases. Very good, go on: So Wife
that he knows how to order every thing for the best. Better and better; and yet
p. 30. he tells us, Long and sad Experience proved that all the Means he used
to reform the World, proved ineffectual: So Good that he designs, and desires
the Happiness of all his Creatures, according to the Capacity of their Natures.
Stick a Pin there. So Holy that he has a Natural Love to all good Men; (And so
Gracious too, that he made them Good, else they never had been so.) but he
hates all Sin and Wickedness; (It Is well Gods Hatred of Sin is as Natural to
him as his Love of Good Men.) And will as certainly punish all Obstinate and
Incorrigible Sinners; but yet that he is patient and long-suffering toward the
worst of Men, and uses various Methods to reclaim them, and is as ready to
pardon them when they return to their Duty, as a kind Father is to receive an
humble and penitent Prodigal. Where there are some things that wound our
Authors Cause to the Heart, and nothing prejudicial to the Truth which he
opposes. For, 1. He grants, that Gods Love to good Men, and his Hatred of Sin,
are both equally Natural, and therefore I suppose Essential to him. 2. That
Gods punishing obstinate Sinners, is equally Natural to him with his rewarding
Good men* But, 3. The Fallacy of all is, that lapsed Man stands related to God
as a Father; whereas he should have proved, and not supposed, that the Light of
Nature of Scripture discovers any other Relation of a Revolted Sinner unto God,
than that of a Creature to his Creator, and a Subject to his Governor; before
he be taken into that special Relation of a Son to a Father, by Adoption in
Christ. 4. A Supposition that God is ready to pardon Sinners when they return
to their Duty, is ambiguous, vain, and (as he takes it) false* Ambiguous, for
who can prophecy whether he means an entire* perfect, and universal return to
Duty according to the first Covenant, or no? And Vain; for admitting that God
is ready to pardon Sinners upon their Return, Man is but where he was, till he
be enabled by Grace to return: And as False as Vain and Ambiguous; for we find
no Revelation that God will pardon past sins upon our Return for the future,
without reference to that Compensation which he has provided for his wronged
Governing Justice by Jesus Christ. 5. There Is a great Cheat put upon us in
those words, The Light* of Nature, the works of Creation and Providence, those
manifold Revelations God has made of himself, especially that last and most
perfect Revelation by Jesus Christ, assure us, etc. If he supposes that any one
of these singly considered, will assure us of all that follows, especially
that God is thus ready to pardon Sinners, i'ts the very thing in Question, and
ought to have been strongly proved, and not weakly supposed; but if he take
them jointly, including the Revelation made by, and through Jesus Christ, we
grant it; but then the misery on it is, this is the thing he should have fought
against; the Doctors own Assertion, at which he has such an aching tooth; That
Gods pardoning Mercy could never have entered into the Heart of Man but by Jesus
Christ; but now see how neatly he would shuffle off the business. These
Properties of God are plainly revealed in the Scripture without any further
acquaintance with the Person of Christ. But this will not do his work: For, 1.
What Is now become of the Light of Nature, if after all, we must be beholden to
the Light of Scripture? But thus the poor Gentiles after all his zealous
stickle in their Cause, are left in the lurch, to shift for themselves as well
as they can. 2. That these Properties of God are plainly revealed in the
Scripture, is very true, but then the plainness of their Revelation lies in
this, that God will pardon Sinners upon the Account of a Mediator; Perhaps he
would put a trick upon us by that word [ Further] and therefore to content him,
let him understand, that we own all these Properties of God to be plainly
revealed in Scripture, without any further Acquaintance with Christ's Person
than what is therein Revealed. But our Author joggs on still. Had Christ never
appeared in the World, yet we had Reason to believe, that God is thus wise and
good, [ viz. to pardon Sinners,] and holy and merciful, not only because the
Works of Nature and Providence, but the Word of God assures us he is so; but
let me wedge in a word for all his Haste. 1. The Word of God assures us not he
is so without reference to a Mediator: And if Christ had never appeared in the
World first or last, perhaps we had had no Word of God; and if we had, there
would not have been one syllable in that Word of the Pardon of Sin, but of the
Wrath* and just Vengeance of God due to it. 2. Jesus Christ was once to appear
in the World, to reconcile God and Man; and as without Revelation we had never
known, so without his Interposition we had never enjoyed the Pardon of Sin. The
truth is, Christ was a Teacher and a Prophet, to reveal the Nature and Will of
God, before his Appearance in the flesh; The Spirit of Christ signified
beforehand the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet.
1. 11. and those Sufferings had a Virtue and Efficacy to procure the Pardon of
Sin long before they were actually undergone; for in Gods Acceptance he was a
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; yet still our Authors Larum is not
run down: The appearance of Christ did not first discover the Nature of God to
us: No sure; God had revealed himself to be such a God long before, yet still
upon the Account of that Propitiation and Atonement which in infinite Wisdom
and Grace he had provided. Acts 10. 43 To him give all the Prophets witness,
that through his Name, whosoever believes on him, shall receive Remission of
sins: It Is much to a little, that our Author will flam off all this with a fine
Tale of a Tub, that it is not the Person of Christ, but a Doctrine, a Gospel, a
Church, an Office, or something, or nothing, provided it be not Christ himself,
that is here intended; but the Apostle has hedged out that Evasion, v. 39. It Is
he that was slain, and hanged on a Tree, he that was raised again the third
day, and v. 42. he that is ordained of God to judge the quick and the dead: And
yet perhaps our Author with one Cast of his Office, can make it out how a
Doctrine, a Church may be stain, and hanged on a Tree too; and if they be no
better than some that have troubled the world, as no great matter if they were;
however I shall not concern my self in its Confutation. For ought then that I
can see, the Doctor may keep his Principles to himself, and his Confidence too,
that Gods pardoning Grace could never have entered into the heart of man, but
by Christ; that is, that none could have had any security (whatever God is in
his own Nature) that ever God would or could have pardoned Sinners without some
Provision made for the vindicating the Honor of his Justice, as Ruler of the
World, by a Mediator; which only could be the Lord Jesus Christ. And to shut
up this matter, we will stand to the Determination of the Church of England,
Art. 7. The Old Testament is not contrary to the New, for both in the Old and
the New Testament, everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Christ, who is the
only Mediator between God and Man; wherefore they are not to be heard, which
feign, that the Old Fathers did look only for transitory Promises. Again, Art.
18. They are also to be held Accursed that presume to say, that every man shall
be saved by the Law or Sect that he professes, provided he be diligent to
frame his Life according to the Light and Law of Nature; for, Holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus, whereby men must be saved: But
this Anathema is become to our young Fry, Brutum Fulmen.

Now after all this Lirry of our Authors, he finds it seems, that he and his
Antagonists, have not discoursed ad idem: The Question has been about the Sun
in the Firmament, and the Answer was concerning the Staff that stood in the
Chimney-corner; For (says he) considering what these men make of Gods Love,
pardoning Mercy, Justice, Patience, etc. these Properties could never have been
discovered but by a too familiar Acquaintance with Christ's Person, for Nature
and Revelation say Nothing of them. But why then did he not fix the true
Notions of these things in the first place, and never torment his Reader with a
wild, rambling, impertinent Story, which he now confesses was not one word to
the purpose? For that which they call pardoning Mercy (he says) is not to be
seen in Scripture-Revelation, and perhaps that which he calls so, may be seen
in the Discoveries of Nature, and found growing upon every Hedge: We shall go
near to entertain more Charitable thoughts of the Schoolmen, and the old
Systematical Divines hereafter; for they would have set the Terms of a Question
to rights, and stated the due bounds of the Meaning of words, before they had
made a noise and blunder about the Confutation of their Adversaries: what our
Author means by these things, we must leave in the Clouds as we found it, what
others mean we are pretty well secured: But we are not so secure of our Authors
Honesty in this matter, who jumbles together those things which the Doctor had
separated, and puts them all (Pell Mell) into the common Box, as if he had
asserted, That the Love of God to Sinners, his Justice against Sinners, his
Patience with, and Long-suffering of Sinners, were none of them discoverable
but by Christ; whereas the Doctor plainly and in terms asserts that Gods
Justice, Patience, Long-sufferance, may be otherwise known, as we have heard
before, and shall see again by and by: The Rise of our Authors Fury and
Indignation against the Doctor, is from these words, p. 93. Com. God has
manifested the Naturalness of his Righteousness unto him, in that it was
impossible that it should be diverted from Sinners, without the interposing of
a Propitiation. Now (says he) this is such a Notion of Justice as is perfectly
New, which neither Scripture nor Nature acquaint us with: And if it be so, I
could heartily wish it underwent the Deleatur of an Expurgatory Index: but how
strangely is our Author wheeled about! it was but p. 42. that he delivered it
with as much Confidence as most men are guilty of, That the Light of Nature,
the Works of Creation and Providence, besides Revelation, do assure us that
God has a Natural Love for all good men, but that he hates sin, and will
certainly punish incorrigible sinners; from whence we might have been prone
enough to have dropped into such an Error, that if Hatred of Sin, be as Natural
to God, as his Love to good Men, he cannot but hate the one, and love the
other: for God cannot act against his Nature, and must act according to his
Nature. Nay, we should have concluded, that it holds more strongly a great
deal, for his hatred of the one, than for his love of the other; seeing there is
something of sin in good men, in the best of Men, which may allay his Love
toward them, considered in their single and Personal Capacities, but there is
nothing at all in sin, not the least that may qualify his Indignation against
sin: And had we not been snib'd, we should have ventured further to say, that
as God has a Natural Love to good Men, and will not fail to reward them; so he
has a Natural displicency against sin, and therefore will not fail to reward it
according to its demerits: And then because we are assured from a surer hand,
Romans 6. 23. That the wages of sin is death; which by the opposition, clearly
intends eternal death; we could not much doubt, that a righteous and holy God
will give to every one their wages, without the interposition of that
Propitiation, whereof our Author makes so light: Thus I say we had concluded,
but that our Author limits the Certainty of punishment to incorrigible, and
obstinate Sinners: but this is but a (...), and will not much mend the matter;
both because those corrigible ones are not so wholly corrected, but that still
some remaining sins lodge in them, which are the Object of Divine abhorrency,
and also because those Corrigible ones are only pardoned, and received to
Grace through the Interest which they have in the Sufferings of Christ; hence 1
John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins: which Faithfulness of God, has the Foundation of its Exercise in the
satisfaction of his Vindictive Justice, which being once answered, God that
cannot lie, promises the pardon of Sin through Christ, which because he is
faithful and just, he will make it good to the truly penitent Sinner: But
what Reason will our Author favor us with of his Blunt Negative? Why, All
Mankind have accounted it an act of Goodness (without the least suspicion of
Injustice in it) to remit Injuries and Offenses, without exacting any
punishment. I much doubt whether our Author was ever Principal Secretary of
State to all Mankind, that he should be so privy to their Sentiments; his own
daring Fancies, and crude Conceptions are no just Standard of their
Apprehensions; and I am well assured that some of Mankind, and such whose
Learning and Judgment may vye with his, and may be supposed to know Mankind as
well as himself, yet think not with him in this business; but I shall lay a few
things in his way, let him remove them.

(1.) The Strength of his Argument lies in a most gross and palpable Absurdity:
viz. That there is the same Reason for Gods pardoning sin against his most holy
Law, that there is for a private Persons charitable remitting a trespass
against himself. That God as he is the Governor of the World, may wave the
Execution of the Sentence threatened against, and due to the violation of his
Rules of Government, because a private Person may depart from his Right in a
Six-penny matter; but these things are wonderfully mistaken: For, 1. Our Author
confesses, that God will certainly punish all obstinate and incorrigible
Offenders: but if sin be considered only as an injury against a private
Person, God may pardon even Impenitency and Incorrigibility it self: And if it
be an act of Goodness to remitt such an Injury without the least suspicion of
Injustice; the greater the Offense is, the greater will that Goodness triumph
in remitting the greater Injury. The degree of sin alters not the Case: He that
can pardon a Penny justly, may also a pound, who shall set limits to him how
far he shall depart from his Right? 2. That the Case is not the same between
God and Man, is evident from hence. Man may depart from his Right to his
Servant, may Manumitt him, and release him from all dependence* on him, from
performance of all duty to him, as his Master; but it is impossible to*suppose
that God should discharge and acquitt a Creature from its dependence on, and
its subjection to himself. 3. God is to be considered, not only as our
Proprietor and Owner, but as our Governor and Ruler: Now the end of Government
being the good and welfare of the Community, every violation of the Law claims,
either that Judgment and Execution pass upon the Offender, according to it; or
if not, that good Security be put in, that neither the Honor of the Legislator
suffer, Offenders be encouraged, nor the Common good damnified, which was
certainly done by Jesus Christ: And God himself has declared how odious such an
Indifferency of spirit is in a Magistrate, Prove. 17. 15. They who justify the
wicked, and condemn the Righteous, are both an abomination to the Lord.

(2.) There Is a great suspicion, nay clear evidence of injustice in a private
Persons departing from his right in some Cases; we will suppose a sum of
Money, which is all the Livelihood of a Personand his Numerous Family; shall he
not grievously sin, who shall depart from his Right, so far as to forgive this
Debt. and turn all his Family a grazing upon the bare Common of Charity, which
might have been plentifully provided for in a way of Righteousness and Justice?
But still he prosecutes the Comparison: He is so far from being Just, that he
is Cruel and Savage, who will remit no offense, till he has satisfied his
Revenge: Which were true, 1. If spoken of a private Person; Vengeance belongs
not to any in that state, it is a flower of the Crown; we are not to avenge our
selves, we may prosecute our own Right lawfully, and yet even that managed with
a revengefull Spirit, is sinful. 2. A public Person in punishing according to
Law, ought not to be called cruel and savage, but just and righteous; when the
holy God executes the Penalty of his holy Law, he does not satisfy his
Revenge, but vindicate his righteous Laws from Contempt; he will not have them
trodden under foot, to please every saucy and malapert Caviller, that shall tax
him with savage Cruelty: And surely, there are Terms more becoming the Majesty
of a holy God, which our Author might have bestowed upon the righteous Judge of
all the Earth, in his Process against Sinners. That he is holy in all his
ways, righteous in all his works; that the same Law, which is the Rule of Duty
and Obedience, is also the Rule of Punishing the Delinquent. But still he will
be importunate: That part of Justice which consists in punishing Offenders, was
always looked upon as an Instrument of Government, and therefore the exacting
or remitting Punishment was referred to the Wisdom of Governors, etc. What he
means by an Instrument of Government, I cannot well tell; but this I know, that
Atheism will have God too to be an Instrument of Government, a politic Engine*
to bridle the many-headed Multitude, and keep the Herd of the Vulgar in some
awe: And I have learnt it from our Authors great Friend also, that the Articles
of the Church are an Instrument of Peace, and no matter whether they be an
Instrument of Truth; but I would gladly be satisfied in a few things 1. Who
they are that call Gods punitive Justice an Instrument of Government, and what
warrant they have so to call it? I have read indeed that the Law is an
Instrument of Government, but that the Righteousness and Justice of the
Lawgiver, in giving to every one his due, should be an Instrument of
Government, seems to me an Arbitrary Term, only invented that men might seem
to say something, when indeed they say just nothing. 2. I would have a
satisfactory Reason, why That part of Justice which consists in Punishing
Offenders, should be an Instrument of Government; and yet the other part which
consists in rewarding the Complyant and Tractable, should not be such; and why
God may not as well choose whether he will reward the Righteous, as whether he
will punish the Wicked. And then, 3. Whether this will be an Instrument of
Government, or of Anarchy and Confusion; for if after all Obedience, and
Disobedience, the Law be not the Rule of dispensing Rewards and Punishments,
Good night to both; If Laws be not executed, both they and the Lawgiver will be
despised; and this great Instrument of Government will be like Jupiters Log,
which made a noise without execution; and the wicked will be tempted to do
evil, the Righteous discouraged in their Obedience* But let his Antecedent sink
or swim, I am as little satisfied with his Consequent; That therefore the
exacting or remitting of Punishment was referred to the Wisdom of Governors,
who might spare or punish as they saw Reason, without being unjust in either:
For, 1. God has not left it to the Wisdom of Governors, whether they shall
secure the Ends of Government or no; Nay, we are assured that the Jews under
their Theocracy, were tied up (in many Cases especially) and not left to their
discretion, Numb. 35. 33. Thou shall take no satisfaction for the Life of a
Murderer, he shall surely be put to death. 2. What if God has obliged himself
to the contrary, that he will not remitt Punishment, but has made his holy Law
the Rule of his dealing with us, as well as of our walking with him? Numb. 14.
6. 18. The Lord is long-suffering, and of great Mercy; and by no means clearing
the guilty. Nay, what if this be the immediate result of Gods Nature, supposing
an Offender? the Text makes this as essential to God as any of his other
Attributes, and if our Author can exclude one, another when it shall serve the
Scene, will exclude all the rest, and then we shall have a God to our Authors
hearts desire.

In the Conclusion of this Point, our Author unbosoms himself to us, and
ingenuously discovers the bottom of his heart; namely, that the Reason why he
is so zealously engaged against the Vindicative Justice of God, is because he
was well aware, that it would put in strongly for the Necessity of Christ's
Death: And he understood his Interest well enough; for the Justice of God once
admitted, enforces the Necessity of Christ's Death, if it be supposed, that God
will declare himself just in the pardoning of a Sinner; and the Death of Christ
also reciprocally will prove the holy peremptoriness of Gods Justice against
Transgressors: For, what else could call for the Death of the Lord Jesus
Christ? The Lord Jesus Christ was the only begotten, and dearly beloved of the
Father; free from Sin, in whom no guile was found, 1 Pet. 2. 22. and not only
void of Sin, but full of Grace, exact in his Obedience, Matthew. 3. 16. he
fulfilled all Righteousness, and he durst avow it, John 8. 29. That he always
did those things that pleased his Father; so that his Eternal Father, in the
view and Prospect of these things, declares that he was well-pleased with him,
Math. 17. 5. Now let us consider, how the Father dealt with this Dear, this
Holy, this only Son, Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Father to bruise him, he has
put him to grief, he laid upon him the Iniquities of us all; what shall we say
to these things? the Father was well-pleased with his Person, with his
Obedience, and yet well-pleased with his sufferings also; he was made a Curse,
who was blessed for ever, Gal. 3. 13. he dyed a poenal Death, who had no Guilt,
Romans 8. 32. God spared not his own Son; (...) he spared him not in exacting
Punishment; Death came into the World by sin, and yet Christ dyed, who never
sinned, Romans 5. 12. The Law in its Penalty had nothing to do with him, who had
not offended the Law in its Rule: So that I profess, I know no greater wonder
in the world, than that the Father would have him suffer, and that he should be
Capable of Sufferings; till the wonder be removed by viewing Christ in the
stead of others; and thus the Scripture assoyls the difficulty, Isa. 53. 10.
His Soul was made an Offering for sin; Nay, he was made sin for us, though he
knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.
21. He so loved the Church, that he gave himself for it: And appearing in this
Quality; Death, the Officer of Gods violated Law might justly arrest him, and
the Father be pleased to bruise him, delighted in his Sufferings upon one
account, who was so infinitely satisfied in his Person upon another: And yet
all this while our Author can see no necessity of Christ's Death. I should
rather have thought (says he) that Gods requiring such a Sacrifice as the
Death of Christ, was not because he could not do otherwise, but because his
infinite Wisdom judged it the most effectual way of dispensing his Grace. Then,
1. It seems though Gods infinite Wisdom saw this the best way, yet it might
have consisted with his Wisdom to have pitched upon a worse; and then it will
be a Question, whether that had been Wisdom or no: For we are told, p. 48. That
Wisdom consists in the choice of the fittest and best Means to attain an End,
when there are more ways than one of doing it: If then Wisdom consist in
choosing the fittest and best Means, and the Death of Christ was the best Means
for dispensing of Gods Grace, either it was impossible for God to choose any
other way than this, or it is possible for God to act in a way not consisting
with Wisdom. But, 2. Our Author had highly obliged the World, had he discovered
how sin might otherwise have been expiated than by the Sacrifice of Christ's
Death. The Jews have pitched upon a Cock, and at last upon their own Death: But
it is twenty to one, when our Author shall substitute any in the room of the
perfect Sacrifice of Christ, we shall find as many real Inconveniences in it,
as he has found imaginary absurdities in the Necessity of Gods requiring
satisfaction to his Justice, and Christ's Tendering it upon the Cross. But, 3.
Who ever asserted simply that God could do no otherwise than to require the
Sacrifice of Christ's Death? Alas, our Author is wide the whole Heavens in this
Matter; It must first be supposed, that God will treat with the sinner, and
that Christ will accept the Terms of being a Mediator between God and Man; The
Necessity proceeds upon a presupposed Voluntariness, both in the Father and in
the Son; and when you have supposed them, there are who will dispute it with
our Author when he pleases, that upon supposition God will accept and justify
a sinner, a just Compensation must be made to wronged Justice.

I find our Author and his Confederates now and then speaking a good word of
Mr. R. B. and I do the more wonder at it, because I did not think they had had
a good word for any man but themselves; I shall therefore give him a taste out
of his learned Labors, and if he likes it, he may have more at the same rate.
It Is in his Reasons of the Christian Religion, Part 2. Chap. 4. Sect. 6. No
Religion does so wonderfully open, and magnify, and reconcile Gods Justice and
Mercy to Mankind, as Christianity does. It shows how his Justice is founded
in his Holiness, and his Governing Relation; It justifies it by opening the
Purity of his Nature, the Evil of Sin, and the use of Punishment to the right
Government of the World; and it magnifieth it, by opening the Dreadfulness, and
Certainty of his Penalties, and the Sufferings of our Redeemer, when he made
himself a Sacrifice for our Sins.

But the storm is not yet over, nor our Authors Fury quite spent. Dr. O. had
said, Com. page 94, 95. That there are many Glympses of the Patience of God
toward Sinners, shining out in the Works of his Providence; but all
exceedingly beneath that discovery which we have of it in Christ; for in him
the very Nature of God is discovered to be Love and Kindness; whatever
discoveries were made of the Patience and Lenity of God to us, yet if it were
not withal revealed, that his other Attributes, his Justice and Revenge for
Sin, had their actings assigned them to the full, there could be little
Consolation gathered from his Patience and Lenity: It were very hard if a
Spider could suck no poison out of these words, and I should conclude she had
renounced her Nature; but what was there in all this that could exasperate a
sweet natured Gentleman? Whilst a sinner hangs by the mere forbearance of God,
he hangs but over Hellfire by a single Thread, and if that breaks, he falls
irrecoverably into Everlasting Burnings; and it can be little Consolation (the
Doctor was gentle, he might have used a harsher word, and said just none at
all,) to an awakened Conscience, to have a place in Gods forbearance, when he
has none in his Forgiveness, or to depend upon mere patience, without an
interest in Gods pardoning Mercy: God may have patience with, when he has no
pardon for a sinner; he had so for the Old World, for Sodom, for Jerusalem,
which yet perished under his just displeasure: A sensible Soul will be apt to
argue thus, I am reprieved, but is my Pardon sealed? God visits not my
Iniquities upon me, but will he remember them no more? Those that are the
familiar Acquaintances of Nature, and of the Cabal to Common Reason, have told
me, that Forbearance is no Acquittance; that Patience abused, turns into Fury;
Nay perhaps it may be in Judgment that a Sinner is forborne; for God has
sometimes suffered the Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 14. 16. And
endured with much long-sufferance the Vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction:
But now through Christ the Nature of God is discovered to be Love and Kindness;
for seeing Provision is made for, and regard had of all his other Attributes
and Essential Perfections, God can secure to himself the Glory of them all, and
yet the Sinner escape wrath to come: And indeed it is altogether as
unaccountable why God should be merciful to the reproach of his Holiness, as
why he should be severe to the disparagement of his Mercy; As the Goodness of
God naturally discovers it self in doing good, (where all due requisites are
found) so does Justice as readily exert it self upon the Sinner, where a
Propitiation does not interpose; And if Conscience were rightly instructed in
its Office from the Word, it would mind the Sinner, that God can be just in
destroying, without the least Impeachment of his Mercy and Goodness; since
Mercy it self is not obliged to plead for the Sinner, without respect had to
the other Properties of that God who is Essentially what he is: But has our
Author never a Stone to throw at the head of this Truth? Two things he offers,
most lamentable Ignorance, and horrid Blasphemy.

(1) Here Is most wretched Ignorance. A happy Change (says he) this, from all
Justice, to all Love. No Sir, don't trouble your self, here is no Change at all,
happy or unhappy: God is the same holy, just, righteous, gracious and loving
God that ever he was, only, (says the Doctor) he is otherwise discovered:
Justice and Mercy are not contrary things in God; he can be all Love and Mercy,
and yet punish the Sinner that cannot plead the Death of Christ for his
Discharge; and he can be all Justice too, and yet pardon the believing,
repenting Sinner through Jesus Christ: The Change is not made in God, with whom
is no* variableness nor shadow of turning, but the Change is made in the State
and Condition of the Creature, who once standing upon his own bottom, and so
considered by a holy and righteous God, was the Object of just displeasure, but
now being found in Christ, and so eyed by God, is in another Capacity, and meet
to enjoy the benefit of that Grace and Love, to which before such Qualification
he had no right, and whereof he was utterly incapable.

(2) I wish Ignorance had been the worst that might be charged upon his
Discourse; for certainly here is a vein of the most unparalled Blasphemous
Drollery, that ever faced the World with an Imprimatur; except Friendly
Debates, Ecclesiastical Policies, and some few others of the same Kidney: And
first he will represent the Holy God in his taking Vengeance, or requiring
Satisfaction, like an angry passionate Man; and the Grace of God upon the
Account of Christ's Death and Sufferings, to the Kindness of a revengefull Man
when he has glutted himself with Revenge, and his Passion is over. I think it
might become our Author, or the proudest Worm on Earth, to have spoken more
reverently of the way of Gods dealing with repenting Sinners through our Lord
Jesus Christ: That discomposure and perturbation of Mind to which frail man is
obnoxious, falls not upon the great God; he can turn the wicked into Hell, and
all those that forget God, without Passion; Fury is not in me, says God, Isa.
27. 4. An earthly Judge in his private Capacity, may weep when he pronounces
Sentence of Death against a Malefactor, and yet remember that he is a Judge;
and cut off from the City of God the wicked of the Land: Nihil minus quam
irasci punientem decet: Nothing is more uncomely in him that punishes than
Passion: And though we read of Gods Anger, Wrath, and Fury; yet it becomes us
to conceive of God according to his Dignity, even when he represents himself to
our Capacity; Though God humble himself, we have no warrant to abase him;
whatever things are attributed to God which are common to Men, it is our Duty to
garble out all the Imperfections and Frailties that those Qualities are mixed
and attended with in Men, before we ascribe them to God.

But this is not the worst, he will strain his impious Drollery a few Notes
higher: The sum of which is, that God is all Love and Patience when he has
taken his fill of Revenge, as others use to say, the Devil is good when he is
pleased. This is indeed the sum of all our Authors blasphemous Froth, but
neither the total sum, nor any particular of what the Doctor has ever
asserted: The sum of the Doctors words is this: That God is the righteous
Judge of all the Earth, and that it is a righteous thing with him to render to
every Man according to his Works, and yet he has pleased to admit of
Satisfaction to be made by his Son Jesus Christ, who most willingly offered
himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice to God; In which Son of his, whoever shall
believe, God is ready to pardon and forgive him: And now must the plain Truth
of the Gospel be thus muffled up, and disguised in ugly Expressions, to render
it liable to scorn and contempt? Thus have the Papists arrayed the Martyrs of
Jesus in the Sambenit or Devils-Coat, first showing them as Heretics, and then
sacrificing them to the flames. I see he has furnished himself with a
Creep-hole, It Is not as he, but as others say;

Sed male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.

As it is applied it is his own, and yet it hits not neither: For the Devil is
never so pleased as to become Good, nor God ever so displeased as to become
Evil: Nay, the Devil is then worst when he is pleased, for the greatest evil
pleases him best, and God is gloriously excellent when he is displeased, for
the greatest Evil is the Cause of his displeasure. But let this pass for an
Ornament of our Authors style, which is indeed embellished with Figures, but
none more beautifies it than this, which we may well call a Satanismus.

He has not yet done, he has not loaded the Truth with Reproach to his mind,
and therefore one id est will do it. That is, he would not believe God
himself, should he make never so many Promises of being good and gracious to
Sinners, unless he were sure he had first satisfied his Revenge. But let him
not be angry: We believe every Promise that God has made of being gracious to
Sinners, but we say, we cannot find one such, without Provision first made for
the securing Gods Righteousness. Show us a Promise that is, Yea and Amen, and
not in Christ. Produce that Promise wherein God is engaged to justify a
Sinner, and not be just himself; quote us the place from whence we may flatter
our selves, that God will destroy any of his Attributes to save a Sinner.
However therefore our Author has represented God, he has thus represented
himself. 1. That he is a Holy God, A God of purer eyes than to behold evil, and
that he cannot (which is the Word so displeases the Man) look on iniquity; he
cannot but see it wherever it is, as he is omniscient; and yet he cannot see
it, cannot look on it, wherever it is, without Abhorrency: He is a holy God,
and from his Natural and Essential Holiness does it arise, that he cannot
behold sin with Approbation, and therefore must and will punish it: Thus has he
represented himself, Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee; The foolish shall not stand in
thy sight, thou hate all the workers of Iniquity. 2. God further testifies of
himself, that he is the righteous Judge of all the Earth, Governing and Judging
the World according to his own holy Nature, and the Rules of his holy Law; and
not according to our Authors good Nature, and the Rules that he shall prescribe
to him; and therefore, 3. Agreeable to his holy Nature, and holy Law; it shall
not be with the Righteous after the way of the Wicked, nor with the Wicked
after the way of the Righteous, for the Judge of the whole Earth must do right;
This God has revealed, and we believe, and as much more as shall be made known
to us to be of his Revelation. But that God is so indifferent about Sin, as
these men would persuade us, that those Scoffers, Zeph. 1. 12. The Lord will
not do good, neither will he do evil, did charge God wisely, we do not
believe; but that he insists upon the Honor of his Attributes, the Credit of
his Laws, the Vindication of his Authority; which Ends if they may be otherwise
attained than by Christ, and his Sacrifice, yet our Author has not yet
discovered to us the Way; and however he has confessed that Christ is the best
and most effectual Means of attaining them.

There are a few drops which follow this Storm, yet behind. The Doctor had
said, p. 96, 97. That God does sometimes bear with Sinners, and forbear them
long, and yet there may be no special design of Mercy in it neither: But now
evidently and directly, the End of the Patience and Forbearance of God which is
exercised in Christ, and discovered in him to us, is the saving, and bringing
unto God those toward whom he is pleased to exercise them; God is now taking a
Course in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, that we may not be destroyed,
notwithstanding our sins: which a little before, p. 97. sect. 15. he explains
to be, by leading us to Repentance. Now I knew it would be no difficult task to
a willing Mind, to put an ugly Vizor upon the fairest Face, which thus he has
done. As before, the least Sin could not escape without a just Punishment, etc.
so now the Justice of God being satisfied by the Death of Christ, the greatest
Sins can do us no harm, but we shall be saved notwithstanding our sins. But I
doubt our Author will be miserably disappointed in his Markets, and lose Money
by his dirty Ware. 1. The least Sin cannot escape without Punishment. Very
true, we own it; The wages of Sin is Death: the Threatening is levelled at Sin,
as Sin, and therefore against all sin: A quatenus ad Omne valet Consequentia:
and therefore go scold with the Apostle, that which will bring him off, will
bring off the Doctor. 2. The Justice of God is Natural and Essential to him.
Well, let him mend himself how he can, we are of the same mind still, and are
like to be so. 3. He cannot forgive sin, without punishing it: Go on;
somewhere or other the Punishment must lie, which amounts to no more but this,
that God cannot forgive sin, but in such a way as may secure his Glory. 4. The
Justice of God is satisfied by the Death of Christ: It is so; but that
Satisfaction is applied to particular persons, in that way that God has
appointed, that no other of his Attributes may be damnified. 5. Now the
greatest sins can do us no hurt. Nay, there our Author is quite out: For
Unbelief, Impenitency, Unregeneracy, obstruct the Sinners having any share in
the Satisfaction of Christ, or the Benefits procured by it: But, 6. The Doctor
had said, We shall be saved notwithstanding our sins; He does say, we shall not
be destroyed; and let that amount (if he pleases) to We shall be saved. That
is, 1. Former Sins repented of, shall not be charged upon the Sinner to
Condemnation. 2. Such sins as are consistent with the state of Grace, the
Power, and Predominancy of Godliness shall not eventually ruin the repenting
Sinner; and for those that are inconsistent with that state, he that undertook
to satisfy for them, will also take care they shall not commit them, that he
may not lose the Fruit of his Death and Sufferings, and therefore he has
promised that he will put his Fear into their hearts, that they shall never
depart from him. And now I think our Author has either lost Money by his
Discourse, or got it over the Shoulders: All his hopes were to persuade us,
That the Doctor designed to assert, that the satisfaction of Christ would save
sinners, notwithstanding their sins lived in, continued in, delighted in, and
dyed in; in sensu composito: but let an ordinary Understanding, with ordinary
diligence read over that Paragraph, and he shall find all conspiring with that
great Truth, Without Holiness no man shall see God: And thus he has talked his
pleasure about Mercy and Justice.

As to Gods Wisdom, which most gloriously appears in this design of Saving
sinners by Christ, the Doctor had said, Com. 98. That Gods Wisdom in managing
things for his own Glory, is clearly discovered in Christ: And if Wisdom
display it self in the works of Creation and Providence, and in his holy Law,
yet still Wisdom is most eminently revealed in a Mediator; and he was the more
emboldened thus to speak, because he had encouragement from the Apostle, 1 Cor.
1. 24. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the
Greeks foolishness, but to them who are saved, both Jews and Greeks, the Power
of God, and the Wisdom of God: And here I confess our Author had just Cause of
Complaint, That the Apostle should so unluckily place this Wisdom in a
crucified Christ, to the utter undoing that laudable Invention of Christ for an
Office, a Church, a Doctrine; and this might well vex every vein of his heart:
But still the Doctor proceeds (and for ought I can see, minds our Author no
more, than you would be concerned about that peevish thing that infests your
skins as you walk the streets with impotent Noise,) showing, That this Wisdom
of God is such a Mystery, such hidden Wisdom, such manyfold, variegated,
curiously wrought Wisdom, that the Angels desire to pry into it, and the Wisdom
thereof lies much in this; That by Christ, things are recovered into such a
state, after the Confusion wherein they were involved by the Curse, as shall be
exceedingly to the advantage of Gods glory. P. 98, 99. This indeed was pungent,
and galled that tender part, which cannot endure to hear too much Good spoken
at once of Christ's Person: For, (says he) if Justice be so Natural to God, that
Nothing could satisfy him but the Death of his own Son, this may discover his
Justice, but not his Wisdom. Why so? Oh the Reason is plain: Wisdom consists in
the choice of the best and fittest Means to attain an End, where there are more
ways than one of doing it, but it requires no great wisdom where there is but
one possible Way. Where I am stumbled at our Authors Philosophy, as much as at
his Divinity. For, 1. Saving to our Author his good Learning; Wisdom lies also
in Managing fit Means in such a Way as may reach their Ends effectually, that
there be no disappointment in the Issue by male Administration; and herein is
Gods Wisdom seen, that he carries on, as well as lays the Design of saving
Sinners, with admirable Success, maugre all the Counterminings, Projects and
Contrivances of Hell; One way that reaches the End effectually, is worth a
thousand, that prove addle, and bring forth nothing but Wind; and he might have
learnt so much from the Fable, (...). 2. Wisdom lies in reconciling differing
Interests, in adjusting the various Pretensions and Claims of the concerned
Parties; these Contrasto's of bandying Parties clashing one with another,
render Healing designs difficult: The Justice of God demands Satisfaction, the
holy Law of God abetts that Demand, the Truth of God backs both their Claims;
and before Grace and Mercy can be actually exercised toward the Sinner, some
Expedient must be found out to content those Demands; and all this God has
done in Christ, in whom Mercy and Truth have met together, Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other, Psalm. 85. 10. 3. Its Wisdom to find out a Means
to reach an End, though there be but that one Mean to be found in the whole
Circle and compass of Beings. We should not much reproach that Physician that
should discover to his dying Patient an effectual Remedy, though it prove the
only one in the world; and we will own him for an Aesculapius, that will
prescribe to our Author a good round dose of Hellebore, and yet it is more than
probable, it is the only Drug upon Earth that can purge out that frantic,
insulting, petulant humor which in his Writings fills both Pages: At length
seeing there is no other Remedy, our Author will allow some small Wisdom to
appear in the Design, but then the Knowledge of it all is owing to the
Revelations of the Gospel, and not to any fanciful Acquaintance with Christ.
Still we are haunted with that old Fallacy, which by this time I had hoped had
been quite worn out at the Elbowes; That because the knowledge of this Wisdom
is owing to the Gospel Revelations, therefore nothing is due to him, who is the
Reason and Ground of this wise and happy Contrivance: And so this Bolt also is
soon shot.

(2) The second Addition the Doctor is charged with, is: That a great part of
our Wisdom lies in the knowledge of our selves, and that both in respect of
Sin, and Righteousness, and that we cannot attain to these but in and by Christ.

And, [1] For Sin, the Doctor had said, p. 110. Com. That our disability to
answer the Mind and Will of God, in any of that Obedience which he requires,
is in Christ only to be discovered. And the Doctor has herein asserted two
things: 1. That there is in every man a Natural Impotency to answer the Will of
God: And he seems not to be so peremptory in it as the Scripture, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves,
all our sufficiency is of God: It Is God that works in us to will and to do of
his own good pleasure; and if we be deceived by these and many other such
Testimonies, the Church of England was misled by them as well as we: Art. 10.
The Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam, is such that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own Natural strength. Our Author durst once appeal to
the Experience of the whole world; will he stand before the same Tribunal, and
be judged in this Case? There are such universal Complaints about this very
thing, and such dismal stories all men tell of their Impotency, and disability
to answer Gods Laws, that that Man should labor under insupportable prejudices
that will control all men's Experiences; I know They talk most of the Easiness
of keeping Gods Law, who never tried it, and perhaps if they were well pumped,
they mean nothing but how easy it is to break it: Let any man set himself in
his own strength to discharge one single Command of God in its full extent and
latitude, keeping it with his whole heart, laying out his whole strength and
might therein, which that holy Law challenges, let him attend to the Purity and
Perfection of that, and severely compare himself thereby, dress himself in that
Glass; and when he has made some fruitless Essays, and been foiled and baffled
with vain attempts, he may then perhaps see more need of Christ than before,
and may spare the Experience of the whole World; for his own singly will
convince him of his disability to answer the Law of God, in all or any of that
Obedience which he therein requires. 2. The Doctor conceives, That this
Impotency of ours is discovered clearly in the Death of Christ, wherein he is
warranted by the Apostle, Romans 5. 6. For when we were yet without strength, in
due time Christ dyed for the ungodly. In his Divinity we see, a Sinner, and one
without strength, are convertible terms, and that the Death of Christ supposed
it. All the difficulty here will be, How our Author shall expose this Truth,
and represent it to its greatest disadvantage; but he has a singular Talent
that way, and whereof we need never to despair. That is, (says he) It Is
impossible for us to do any thing that is good, but we must be Acted like
Machines by an external Force, by the irresistible Grace and Power of God; And
the business is done:

But, 1. Our Author is hugely out, in supposing the Doctor to assert that, It Is
impossible to do any thing that is good. Some good thing a Man may do, and yet
not do all that is required in doing it; the Material part of a Duty he may
do, and yet not perform it in such a way that it may answer Gods Law, or be
acceptable to him. Bonum oritur ex integris, there must be a right Principle, a
right End, and all circumstances must concur to make it entirely good: I
think there are none that deserve the Name of Christians, who do not pray to
God for his Grace to enable them to do their Duty; but if indeed they could
perform it in their own strength, I see not what that Prayer would signify
more than a Complement; Quid foris quaeram cum domi habeam? Why should a rich
Man turn a Beggar? And indeed the Heathens Principles hung together with more
Consistency, who would not trouble their Gods for what they had in their own
Power, nor thank them for that which they had earned with their own
fingers-ends. Quia unusquisque sibi virtutem acquirit, nemo sapientum de ea
gratias Deo egit. Since every man is the Procurer of his own Virtue, no wise
man ever gave thanks to the Gods for it.

2. He is no less mistaken, if he presumes upon his Power to tie the Doctor to
use what Expressions he pleases in signifying his own Thoughts; it may be he
will not use that term of irresistible, it will satisfy him, if Grace work
efficaciously in determining the Will: And if by irresistible Grace no more be
meant than a powerful and effectual production of the principle of Grace in
the Soul, it is no more than what God has promised in the New Covenant, Ezekiel.
36. 26. A new heart also will I give them, and I will take away the heart of
Stone out of their flesh, and I will give them an heart of Flesh: And he that
removes the only resisting Principle in the Soul, [the Heart of Stone,] may be
said well enough to act irresistably in the working of Grace: Nor can I see any
danger in ascribing such a way of working to the Holy Spirit; nor did the
Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. -- who believe according to the working of his mighty
power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him up from the dead: where
the Apostle is not afraid, nor ashamed to ascribe the working of Faith to the
same Power that raised up Christ from the dead; and he that had a mind to make
a fluster with Greek like our Author, could take a fair Opportunity to tell
him, what (...), (...), do signify, and then to rub him up with (...), and
with (...). And whether these denote not the Creatures Impotency, and Gods
Efficacious Power, let the Reader judge.

3. Our Author is much mistaken, if he thinks, that the work of Gods Grace and
Spirit in Conversion of a Soul to God, may be compared to the moveing of a
Machine: Perhaps he had seen about Billingsgate, the Maugeing of a Crane, where
a lusty Fellow with a Mastiffe-Dog in a Wheel, will take you up an incredible
weight, otherwise unmanagable, and he being taken with the Omnipotency of the
Engine, knew not how to bestow his pleasure better than upon the Operation of
the Holy. Spirit. But Gods Spirit knows how to act effectually, and yet not
offer violence to any of the Faculties of the Soul: He can lead the Creature
powerfully, and yet in a way agreeable to its Frame and Constitution; He that
has engaged, Ioh. 6. 37. That all that the Father has given him, shall come
unto him, knows well how to bring them in without committing a rape upon their
own wills; he can make them willing, and yield by surrender, and not need to
take them by storm; he can powerfully, and yet gently and sweetly lead his
Creature; he makes no Assault and Battery upon it. When then the Psalmist
prays, and we with him, Psalm. 119. 36. That God would incline his heart to his
Statutes, there is enough in his Prayer to imply his own disability, and Gods
Power, and yet enough in the Souls Inclination to exclude all Force and
Violence.

But still he presses upon the Doctor, who p. 106. had said: There are Four
things in sin, that clearly shine forth in the Death of Christ, 1. The Desert
of it. 2. Man's Impotency by reason of it. 3 The Death of it. 4. A New end put
unto it. Against the two former, he has sufficiently Discovered his feeble
Passion, the third he waves, and now against the fourth he Rises up with
incredible Zeal and Fury. For, says the Doctor, Sin in its own Nature tends
merely to the Dishonor of God, the Ruin of the Creature; but now in the Lord
Jesus Christ there is the Manifestation of another, and more Glorious end, viz.
The praise of Gods glorious Grace, in the pardon and forgiveness of it, God
having taken order in Christ, that that thing which tended merely to his
Dishonor, should be managed to his Infinite Glory. And here our Author has
need of all his Machines and Engines, that he may disorder things so as to
serve his turn of them, and therefore upon good advise no doubt reserved them
all for this place.

1. One Machine which he plies, is that old Rotten Engine, called Invidious
Representation; and this will do good Service still for want of a better. That
is (says he) lest Gods Justice and Mercy should never be known, to the World,
he appoints and Ordains sins to this end, that is Decrees that Men shall sin,
that he may make some of them Vessels of Wrath, and others the Vessels of his
Mercy, to the praise of his Grace in Christ. It Is a sad Drudgery to satisfy
wilfully blind Malice: For what more plain from the Doctors words, than that he
speaks not Hot or Cold of Gods Ordaining men to sin, but of his putting a New
end to sin, upon supposition that it is already in the World. Cannot God bring
Good out of Evil, but our Author must go Mad? It Is a very Ruful cause that
needs such Subsidies to maintain it. Let any one Read the Doctor again, page
112. Sin in its own Nature tends merely to Gods Dishonor. In the Lord Jesus
Christ, there is the Manifestation of another end: And as he said before, page
106. There Is a New end put to it: of Gods Ordaining, and Appointing, and
Decreeing men to sin not a word, not a syllable, only he says, that supposing
sin to be already in the World, carrying on its fatal Designs of Dishonouring
God, Damning Souls, God has in Infinite Wisdom, Curbed and Restrained its
Natural Tendency, Overruled its native malice against, and thirst after the
blood of souls, and made it Comply with his own Glory. So said Austin: God is
so Good that He would never suffer sin to be in the World, if He were not also
Omnipotent, to bring Good out of the Evil.

2. Another Machine which our Author plies upon those words, is, That famous
Engine of Archimedes, of which he used to boast, that Give him but a place out
of the World where to fix his Engine, and he would undertake to Unhinge the
Earth from its Center. The same Confidence has our Author in this Machine,
which indeed never failed him: And no less truly, than commonly called a
Downright falsehood. Let the Reader mark it well; he charges the Doctor for
saying, page 112. Com. That the glorious end whereunto sin is appointed, and
ordained, is discovered in Christ for the Demonstration of Gods Vindictive
Justice, in Measuring out to it a meet recompense of Reward. Now remember the
old Caveat, Hic nervus est sapientiae nihil fidere: Take the Book and read with
all the Eyes you have, and can borrow, and there you shall find the clear
contrary. The Comminations, and Threatenings of the Law, do manifest one other
end of sin, even the Demonstration of Gods Vindictive Justice, in measuring out
to it, a meet recompense of Reward; but here the Law stays, with it all other
Light, and discovers no other use or end of it at all; but in the Lord Jesus
Christ, there is the Manifestation of another, and more Glorious end, etc. And
now after all this sorrow, we shall have a fine Scene of Mirth for our
Divertisment. Nature (says he) would teach us, that so Infinitely glorious a
Being as God is, needs not sin, and misery to recommend his Glory, and
Perfections: What Nature will teach us, so great a Darling of hers, the Privado
to all her Mysteries cannot be Ignorant of; but in my Judgment he fetches a
huge Blow to do Nothing: We believe God was perfectly happy from all Eternity
in the Enjoyment of his own Self and Infinite Perfections, and needed not have
recommended his Glory to his Creatures; he made not the World because he needed
it, but by our Authors good leave, or without it; supposing that God will
recommend his Glory, he must have something out of himself, to which he may
recommend it: And on like Supposition that He will Manifest his pardoning Grace
and Mercy, there must be a fit Object capable of that Grace and Mercy, unless
our Author from his too much familiarity with Nature, can tell us how God can
Pardon one that is no sinner, or forgive him that is not guilty. Though every
sinner be not an Object qualified to receive Mercy, yet he must be a sinner
upon whom pardoning Mercy is exercised; though all Misery be not a fit Object
of pity, yet Pity supposes Misery; some of Gods Attributes create their
Objects, as Omnipotency, but others do suppose them as Sin pardoning Grace; and
so God may be said to need Sins and Misery to recommend some of his
Perfections, I am sure supposing sin and misery to exist, God has recommended
his Son to us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5. 8.
Of the same bran is that which follows: God would not Truckle and Barter with
the Devil and Sin for his Glory. It Is like he would not, but when the Devil and
Sin had confederated against God, I know not why God might not Overreach them
in their Designs, and as he has made the wrath of Man, so he might also the
policy of Satan to serve and praise Him; and thus he fixes a New end upon sin,
which the Devil never dreamt on, or however did not design: But I perceive our
Author is wondrously pleased with the fine Notion of Trucking and Bartering,
and that we might not loose the beauty of it, he warns us amongst the Errata,
(I would there were no worse) that for Truckle, we read Truck. Oh be sure
(Courteous Readers) you do not mistake, for there is some weighty Controversy
depends upon it, which the Coffee-house, and the Inch of Candle must determine.
But further Nature teaches him, That God had much rather be Glorious in the
Happiness and Perfection and Obedience of his Creatures, than in their sin and
misery. Nature is an excellent School Mistress I see, and this is one of her
highest Mysteries, that God delights in Obedience more than Sin: But what now
if Sin and Disobedience have got in? for my part I question whether Nature will
teach him that God had rather, much rather, or however how much rather he had
be more Glorious in exacting one Attribute than another; or whether God may not
equally glorify himself in the Execution of his just Displeasure against Sin
obstinately pursued, as in the glorifying the Penitent and Reformed sinner; but
this I know, that the former has more deserved Eternal Punishment, than the
other can pretend to merit Eternal Life: But perhaps he has Balances that will
turn with the Twentieth part of a Grain, and in these he knows how to weigh
which of Gods Attributes weigh heaviest: And that he can do, for he tells us,
That pardoning Mercy, and vindictive Justice are but secondary Attributes: What
warrant he has to marshal Gods Attributes in this order, I dare not enquire;
which are first rate, which second rate Attributes is a Nice enquiry; but I
expected a Dish of Coleworts before he had done, for these have been served up
to us in the Racovian Catechism: Let these things be as they will, I observe,
1. That vindictive Justice, and pardoning Mercy are both equally Gods
Attributes. 2. They are not the less Essential and primary Attributes, because
they were not Eternally exercised, for then neither would Omnipotency be such:
God was Eternally Omnipotent though he Created not the World from Eternity, and
he was also Eternally a God of pardoning Mercy, and a God of punitive Justice,
though to the Exerting the outward Acts proper to those Eternal excellencies
there was required an Object capable of receiving them: This, Nature and
Scripture teaches us, and we are not much concerned in our Authors Theology;
but to close up all, he gives us an Inference from his Doctrine, and a Reason
of that Inference; His Doctrine was this: Vindictive Justice, and Pardoning
Mercy are not Primary but Secondary Attributes. His Inference is this:
Therefore God cannot Primarily design the glorifying of them: His Reason is
this: For that cannot be, without Primarily designing the sin* and misery of
his Creatures. That is, God cannot Primarily design one thing, except he
Primarily designs another; and so we shall have two Firsts, without a Second.
This is very thin Stuff, it shines through.

[2.] The Reader has heard to his great Contentment, how admirably he has
acquitted himself in the Matter of sin, if he can but play his part as well in
the Matter of our Righteousness too* he will deserve the Whetstone, and that
may save him the Labor of going to the Counter-door. As it is with your
Artificial Fencers, that never knew further than the Discipline of the School;
they have all the Terms of Art, know their Postures, and with good Credit can
play a Prize upon the Stage; yet when these men come to Sharp, when the Point
of a real Enemies Sword is ready pressed at the heart, it puts them often out of
their forms, their School-play, and Systematical skill: Thus possibly it may
fare with our confident Bravo's, who can talk very confidently of appearing
before God in their own Duties, and a Righteousness finely Composed out of
those Materials, yet possibly their Blood may freeze in their Veins, and the
Color forsake their bold Cheeks, when God shows himself in his glorious
Majesty, and they must be in a moment, as they must be for ever: None ever
Ranted higher than Bellarmin, nor Hectored the World with Arguments against
Imputed Righteousness, yet when he saw Death was in good Earnest, he was glad
to Lower his Top-sail, and cry out, Precor ut inter sanctos suos, non estimator
meriti, sed veniae largitor me admittat: And in his very Ruff against that
Doctrine, retreated to his Tutissimum est, li^. 5. de justificatione. What
Doctor Owen asserts herein, is briefly thus much, Com. page 113. All men are
persuaded that God is a most Righteous God, Hab. 1. 13. and therefore the
Ungodly cannot stand in the Judgment. Hence the enquiry of every one convinced
of Immortality, and the Judgment to come is, concerning the Righteousness to
appear before this Righteous God: The first thing that offers it self for
Direction and Assistance is [ the Law] which has many fair Pleas to prevail
with a Soul to close with it for a Righteousness: It was given out by God
himself for that end, it contains the whole Obedience that God requires of the
Sons of Men: It has the promise of Eternal Life annexed to it: [ Do this and
Live.] But there are two things that discover the Vanity of seeking
Righteousness in this Path, 1. That they have already sinned, and come short of
the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. So that though they should for the time to come,
fulfill the whole Law, yet there is a Score upon them already, they know not how
to answer for. 2. That if former Debts were blotted out, yet they are no way
able to fulfill the Law for the future; many other Devices men have found out,
but in the Issue the matter comes to this. They look upon themselves, 1. As
sinners obnoxious to the Law of God, and the Curse thereof, so that unless that
be satisfied, it is in vain from thence to seek after an appearance before God.
2. As Creatures made to a Supernatural end, and therefore bound to answer the
whole Mind and Will of God. Now both these being beyond the Compass of their
own endeavors, it is their wisdom to find out a Righteousness that may answer
both these to the utmost; now both these are to be had only in the Lord Christ,
who is our Righteousness: Who, 1. Expiates former Iniquities. 2. Fulfils the
whole Law by his active Obedience, Romans 5. 10. We are saved by his Life. And
now the Doctor has told you the short of his Story: But our Author confutes him
much shorter, and without Cicumlocution replies: This is a mighty comfortable
Discovery, how we may be Righteous without doing any thing that is good or
Righteous. I Will warrant you a whole Cart-load of Books has been Written of
this Subject, all which with Laconick Brevity our Author has blown away with
one Puff: And is not this a Compendious way of Dispatching Controversies out of
the World? It is a Truth that none is Righteous but he that does righteousness,
and as great a Truth, that None is righteous before God, because he does
righteousness: Without Holiness no man shall see God; and without something
more than his own holiness no man shall see God, or it were better he had never
seen him. But more distinctly: 1. It Is seasonable to enquire what is the Mind
of the Church of England in this Matter, and She speaks freely, Art. 11. We are
accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ; by Faith, and not for our own Works. Pray ask her then, Whether
we may be Righteous without doing any thing that is Righteous* for which we are
so accounted in the sight of God? And whereas he says with a Scoff, This is a
mighty comfortable Doctrine: The Church in that very Article determines in
earnest: Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most whole some
Doctrine, and full of Comfort. Either then that Article Confutes his Assertion,
or his Assertion confutes the Article. Again, Art. 13. Works done before the
Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasant to God,
for as much as they spring not of Faith in Christ. -- And for that they are not
done as God has Commanded them to be done, no doubt but they have the Nature
of sin. Hence it were easy to argue against our Author: Those works which are
not pleasant to God, which have the Nature of sin, cannot justify the doer of
them: But all works done before the Grace of Christ, the Inspiration of his
Spirit, which spring not from Faith are such* therefore they cannot justify
the doer of them before God. Either then we must never be justified, or else we
must be justified without good Works, as that for which we are justified at
least; though the Article would conclude something more. It Is very uncomely to
see ill taught Children to spit in their Mothers face; and we account that an
evil Bird that defiles its own Nest. 2 It will be no less seasonable to enquire
into the mind of the Spirit also: And the Apostle Paul seems to speak high,
Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness: And more modesty would become
him than to quip the Apostle, and tell him This is a comfortable discovery how
a man may be righteous, without doing any thing that is righteous. Again, In
the business of Election, the Apostle argues thus, Romans 11. 6. If it be by
Grace, then it is not of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace; but if it be
of Works, then it is no more Grace, otherwise Work is no more Work. 3. It Is
seasonable to enquire whether our Author had not better have understood the
Doctor better, before he had undertaken to answer him: For when he asserts that
we are justified by Christ, he excludes not the way and means that God has
appointed to make the righteousness of Christ to become ours. He that says we
are justified by Christ, does not deny we are justified by Faith, and therefore
not without doing something that is good: Nay, he excludes not Inherent
righteousness from the Soul, nor Gospel obedience from the Life, only he
excludes them as too defective and imperfect to make us stand before God in the
judgment. And herein he seems a more dutiful Son of the Church of England than
our Author, let the 12th. Art. judge: Albeit Works which are the fruits of
Faith, and follow after Justification cannot put away our sins, and endures the
severity of Gods judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in
Christ, and do spring out ( necessarily) of a true and lively faith, insomuch
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by
the fruit. Whence it is obvious: That if our good Works which are the fruits of
Faith, which follow Justification, cannot endure the severity of Gods judgment,
What shall become of those that are only the fruits of Nature, and go before
Justification? Again, If those Works which are pleasing and acceptable to God
in Christ, yet cannot endure the severity of Gods Judgment; Where then shall
those appear, that being done before Justification, have the Nature of sin, and
are not pleasant to God? As the 13th. Art. determines; To whomsoever then this
is comfortable Doctrine, I am sure it was once so to our Author, who by
Subscribing these very Doctrines, got a Living of very comfortable Importance,
and might have had the Civility with them of Ephesus to have owned; By this
Craft we get our Living. But if our Author like not the Doctors way, let him
prescribe his own, only let him be sure it be a better, and safer way; That he
will: The Scripture tells us expressly, he is righteous that does righteousness,
and without Holiness no man shall see God; that the only way to obtain the
pardon of our sins is to repent of them, and forsake them, and the only thing
that gives a right to the promises of Future glory, is to obey the Laws, and
imitate the Example of our Savior, and to be transformed into the Nature and
Likeness of God. We must crave his leave to take his words in pieces, that we
may the better deal with them.

(1.) The Gospel (says he) makes a different Representation of it, tells us
expressly that he is righteous that does righteousness. But say I, This is no
representation of our justification different from what the Doctor has
assigned. And let the words be Interpreted how he will, they make nothing
against the Doctors assertions. 1. Let these words [He is Righteous] signify
[He is Inherently righteous, or holy] and then the plain Sense is; that he that
does righteousness, that practices an Uniform, and Universal conformity in his
Life to the Gospel, may- charitably be judged by others, and certainly known by
his own Conscience to be such a one; as a Tree is known by its fruits: For so
are we warranted by our Savior to make a Judgment, Mat. 7. 16. And the same
warrant we have from the Church of England: Art. 12. -- Insomuch that by them
[good Works, that necessarily spring of a true and lively faith,] a lively
Faith may be as evidently known, as a Tree discerned by the Fruit. 2. Let the
words be interpreted of that Righteousness by which, in which, and for which we
stand accepted as Righteous before God; yet it meets in the same point; he that
from an honest and good heart brings forth holy Fruit, most certainly justified
in the sight of God, and is accepted of him; we may argue ^ hope (without
Offense) from the Effect to the Cause, and yet the Cause and the Effect are two
things. He that is sanctified, is justified; and yet Sanctification is not
Justification: we may safely conclude an imputed Righteousness from an imparted
Righteousness, and yet that Righteousness which we have in Christ may be
another thing from that Righteousness which we have by influence from Christ,
as our Head.

(2.) Says he, The Gospel tells us, that without Holiness no man shall see
God. It does so indeed; but does it tell us, that Holiness is inconsistent with
our Justification by the Righteousness of Christ? Or does it tell us, that upon
the account of our own Holiness, we shall be justified before God?

(3.) The only way to obtain the Pardon of Sins, is to repent of them, and
forsake them. That without Repentance there is no possibility of obtaining
Pardon of Sin, we freely grant; they must be Sinners that need a Pardon, and
they must be penitent Sinners that are qualified to receive one: The Gospel has
annexed by express Promise the Pardon of Sin to Repentance. 1 Ioh. 1. 9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. But what an absurd way of procedure is
this, to jumble and confound things together, which ought to have their several
Apartments, and distinct Interests allotted to them in one and the same Effect:
The Grace of God as the great Spring and Fountain of all Mercy, must have a
place in the Pardon of a Sinner; and the blood of Jesus Christ, as the
Meritorious Cause, justly challenges a great room therein. Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom
we have redemption through his blood, even the remission of sins, according to
the riches of his grace; and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, will come in for a
share too, as it gives us an Interest in what he has suffered by way of
Atonement to God, and Expiation of our sins; and godly sorrow for, hatred of,
and turning from sin in Purpose and Resolution, at least must have its proper
Concern therein too: But to assert, that Repentance is the only way of
procuring Pardon, excluding Faith, and the Propitiation made in the Blood of
Christ, needs more grains of Allowance than he will afford to any he deals
with, to make it justifiable. But the vanity of this Fallacy lies in this: That
he opposes the Righteousness of Christ, and the Means whereby it is applied to
our Persons: As if one would stiffly contend that we are justified by Faith
alone, and therefore not by the Righteousness of Christ; whereas we are
therefore justified by Faith, because we are justified by Christ; we are
justified by the Righteousness of Christ alone, as that which God only
considers in the Justification of a Sinner, to answer his Law, his Justice: and
we are justified by Faith alone, as that which makes Christ ours. Say the same
here: Repentance is a Means to qualify us for the receiving the pardon of Sin,
God will never give forth a Pardon to that Sinner that is not brought upon his
knees, thoroughly humbled for his Transgressions, yet still that which God
respects in the pardon of a Sinner, is the Blood of his Son; without shedding
of which, there is not, there cannot be any Remission, Hebr. 9. 22. But no man
shall persuade our Author to distinguish betwixt Christ's procurement of so
great a Mercy, and the Way of the Gospel appointment for the Applying it to our
selves.

(4.) The only thing that gives us a right to the Promises of future Glory, is
to obey the Laws, and imitate the Example of our Savior, and to be transformed
into the Nature and Likeness of God. For my part, I conceive far otherwise;
That though our Holiness give us a Meetness and Fitness to partake of the
Inheritance of the Saints in light, yet it was the Lord Jesus Christ that
procured our right and title to it, and the Promise of it. The Church of
England was of the same Opinion, when it decreed, Art. 13. That works done
before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasant
to God, neither do they make men meet to receive Grace, etc. And then we may
presume, will not make us meet to receive Glory, much less give us a right and
title to the Promises of it: And Art. 12. That the works which follow after
Iustistification, are those that are pleasing and acceptable to God; and I
think we may equally take it for granted, that upon our justification with God,
we have a right to the Promises of future Glory: But, if this be true, that the
only thing that gives us this right, be Obedience to, Imitation of Christ, and
Conformity to the Nature of God; we may have a Right to, when we have actual
Possession of Glory; for till then, it will hardly be true, that we have obeyed
all Christ's Laws.

But our Author had Wit in his Anger, and was aware of an Objection that was
coming against him, and wisely lays in for it as well as he could. It might be
returned to all that he had said, How can so imperfect an Obedience as ours is,
so every ways lame and defective, and short of the exact Law of God, ever give
us a right to the Promises of future Glory? Yes, (says he) for though it be
not exact, and perfect in every thing, yet if it be sincere, we shall be
accepted for the sake of Christ, by virtue of the Covenant that he has Sealed
with his Blood: But I am afraid, he has conjured up a Spirit that he cannot lay
again with so sorry a Charm. For, (1.) I do not find that God has abated any
thing of his Law, but is as peremptory as ever; for, [ Do this and live,]
Nothing will please God less than exact and perfect Obedience, though in the
Covenant of Grace he is pleased to admit Another, a Mediator to do it for
Believers. I had rather he would hear the Reverend and Learned Bishop Reynolds,
upon Psalm. 110. p. 492. In point of Validity or Invalidity, there can be but
Five things said of the Law: 1. Either it must be Obeyed, and that it is not;
for, all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. Or, 2. it
must be Executed upon Men, and the Curse and Penalty thereof inflicted, and
that it is not neither; for, there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. Or, 3. it must be Abrogated or extinguished, and that
it is not neither; for, Heaven and Earth shall sooner pass away. If there were
no Law, there would be no Sin, for sin is the Transgression of the Law: And if
there were no Law, there would be no Judgment, for the World must be judged by
the Law: Or, 4. it must be Moderated, and favorably interpreted by Rules of
Equity, and that it cannot be neither; for it is inflexible, and one jot or
tittle must not be abated. Or, lastly, the Law it self remaining, the
Obligation thereof notwithstanding, must, toward such or such Persons, be so
far forth dispensed withal, as that a Surety shall be admitted, (upon a
Concurrence of all their Wills who are therein interested; God willing to
Allow, Christ willing to Perform, Man willing to Enjoy,) both to do all the
Duties, and to suffer all the Curses of the Law, in behalf of that Person, who
in Rigor should have done or suffered all, so that the Law, nor one jott or
tittle thereof is abrogated in regard of the Obligation therein contained, but
they are all reconciled in Christ, Thus far he. But, (2.) That Sincerity which
he talks of, is indeed allowed in the Gospel, in the Matter of Inherent
Righteousness and Sanctification, there it has a proper and excellent place,
but comes not into the business of Justification at all: And (3.) This
Sincerity will be but a Cover-slut for the Omission and Neglect of our Duty;
for if Sincerity will do the work without Universality and Integrity of
Obedience, the best way will be to shroud our selves under a profound Ignorance
of Gods Commandments, and then the less we know of Gods Will, the safer we are
under the shelter of Sincerity. And, (4.) The Question will be, How much
shortness of Obedience will this Sincerity compound for? It may be our Author
will prescribe a Dram of Sincerity to a Scruple of Disobedience, but then
Another will make a Grain of Sincerity, a very little upon a knifes point,
serve to sweeten a whole Pound of Defect in Duty; and thus every Mountebank,
with a dose of his Electuary of Sincerity, will pretend to heal men's
Consciences of those wounds that Sin has given them. (5.) Whereas our Author
adds, that we shall be accepted for the sake of Christ, it is a mere Iuggle;
for when he comes to enquire, What Influence the Righteousness and Death of
Christ have upon our acceptance with God; he professes he can find nothing in
the world, but that God will pardon us, if we believe and obey the Gospel, p.
320. which doubtless he would have done without him: But this is only to make
the same use of Christ, that Politicians do of the Foxes Case, to piece the
Lions skin when it is too short; just so must Christ serve to eke out the
shortness of their Obedience with his own, and when they have stretched their
own Righteousness upon the Tenters as far as it will hold, to be beholden to
Christ for the Rest: God for Christ's sake does indeed accept our imperfect
Duty, Obedience, Service, and pardon the shortness of it, according to the
Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, but not that it should thereby stand for our
Justification, which we have only upon the Account of what he has done and
suffered for us, made ours by accepting him upon his own Terms.

(3.) We are come with much ado to the third and last Addition, that these men
make, or are supposed to make to the Gospel, Viz. Concerning our Wisdom to walk
with God. To which (thinks Doctor Owen,) there is required Agreement,
Acquaintance, Way, Strength, Boldness, and aiming at the same End, and all
these, with the Wisdom of them, are hid in the Lord Jesus. It were worth the
while to transcribe the Doctors discourse upon all these Heads, but our Author
has saved me the Labor; The sum of all is this: That Christ having expiated
our sins, and fulfilled all Righteousness for us, though we have no Personal
Righteousness of our own, but are as contrary to God as Darkness is to Light,
and Death to Life, and an universal Pollution and Defilement, to an universal
and glorious Holiness, and Hatred to Love; yet the Righteousness of Christ is a
sufficient, nay the only Foundation of our Agreement, and (upon that) of our
walking with God. Now without doubt our Author would have his Reader believe,
that the Doctor has said all this, and that he intends we may have Communion
with God, whilst we continue thus: I confess, at the reading hereof, I was
amazed, knew not what to think. Have I been all this while so narrowly watching
the Doctor, that a false Print, much less a false Doctrine, could not escape
me, and is our Author come after me, and finds all this filth and abominable
stuff? Once again therefore (because I durst not trust my own Eyes or Ears,
and am under a Vow never to trust our Authors Tongue or Pen, speaking evil of
the Doctor,) I took down the Book, and what I find I will transcribe, and let
all the world judge. Com. p. 119. The Prophet tells us, that two cannot walk
together unless they be agreed, Amos 3. 3. Until Agreement be made, there is
no Communion; God and Man by Nature, (or whilst Man is in the state of Nature)
are at the greatest Enmity; He declares nothing to us but wrath; neither do we
come short of him, yea we first began it, and continue longest in it: In this
state, the wisdom of walking with God, must needs be most remote from the Soul:
He is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all; we are Darkness, and in us is no
Light at all; he is Life, a living God; we are dead Sinners, dead in Trespasses
and sins; he is Holiness, and glorious in it; we wholly defiled, and an
abominable thing; he is Love, we Hatred, hating and being hated; Surely, this
is no Foundation for Agreement, or (upon that) of Walking with God; Nothing can
be more remote than this Frame from such a Condition. Let now the Reader (and
it is no great matter whether he be ingenuous or disingenuous, partial or
impartial) compare what the Doctor has written, with what is fixed upon him: The
Doctor says, Whilst we are such and such, we can have no Communion with God,
cannot walk with him. Nay (says our Author) the Doctor says the clean
contrary; that though we are as contrary to God as Light is to Darkness, etc.
yet the Righteousness of Christ is a sufficient Foundation for Agreement: So
again, p. 121, 122. Com. There must be moreover a Way wherein we must walk with
God; and Christ is that way, Isa. 35. 8. an Highway, a Way of Holiness. No
(says our Author) though we be as contrary to God, as universal Pollution to
universal Holiness, yet the Righteousness of Christ is a sufficient Foundation,
etc. As the Doctor says. The Error then of the Doctor being so gross, the
Confutation must needs be as easy; for I observe, our Author is very kind to
himself, and will not set himself a hard Task: One Text will easily do it; 1
John 1. 6, 7. If we say, we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness; we
lie, and do not the Truth: but if we walk in the light, as God is in the light,
then have we fellowship one with another, and [then] the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son cleanses us from all sins. Where he has fallaciously foysted in a
little word [then] though somewhat bigger than the Doctors [by] to seduce the
unwary Reader into a Conceit; then when we have walked in the light as God is
in the light, for some competent time, at last we shall have some benefit by
the blood of Christ to cleanse us from sin. And now he falls to please himself
in his old Humor of either ignorantly mistaking, or maliciously abusing the
Doctors words: Our only acquaintance with God, and knowledge of him, is hid in
Christ, which his Word and Works could not discover, as you heard above: It is
very true, we have heard our Author bespatter him thus above, and shall do so
again beneath, before, and behind, on the right hand, and the left; but that
the Doctor ever spoke a syllable that opposes the Person of Christ, and the
Revelations of the Gospel; that he supposes any Mysteries learnt from an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person, wherein the Gospel is deeply silent, is a
shameless Falsehood; which because we would give it a more gentle Name than it
deserves, may be called a Sherlocisme.

One blow more he must give the Doctor for a parting blow, and then he will
give us leave to take a little breath. The Doctor it seems had said; That in
Christ we design the same End that God does, which is, the Advancement of his
Glory. And is he a Christian that denies it? Ought not all that wear the Livery
of a Redeemer, to pursue the great End of Advancing Gods glory? If the Doctor
had affirmed twice Two to make Four, our Author is bound in Conscience to deny
it; but is there never a Paraphrase that may dress them up in some ugly hew? O
yes, one of his id est's will do the feat: That is, (says he) by trusting to
the Expiation and Righteousness of Christ for salvation, without doing any
thing our selves, we take care that God shall not be robbed of the Glory of his
Free Grace, by a Competition of any Merits, and Deserts of our own. That little
policy there is in these words, lies in that short Parenthesis, which with more
cunning than honesty he has wedged into his own gloss, [ Without doing any
thing our selves.] But where, when, in what Book, Chapter, Section, Page, or
Paragraph, has the Doctor encouraged any to look for salvation by Christ,
without doing anything our selves? Cannot we design the Glory of God, trusting
to the Expiation and Righteousness of Christ, but all Obedience must presently
be excluded? And yet his Parenthesis is capable of a double sense: 1. As
excluding Obedience simply and absolutely, and so they are none of the Doctors
words, but a crafty Insinuation of our Authors, to mislead us into this
Opinion, that the Doctor has quite cashiered Obedience from having any place in
our Salvation; a thing so abhorred by all his Principles, so contrary to all
his Writings, that nothing could have been either more unjustly forged against,
or basely fixed upon him: 2. They may be construed as excluding Obedience in
some respects, for some Ends and Purposes; and thus though the Doctor has not
said it in that place, yet I suppose he will say it, and maintain it when he
has done: That Believers may, and ought to expect Salvation from the Expiation,
and Righteousness of Christ, without doing any thing themselves, for those
special and particular ends for which Christ Suffered. We do nothing (in
Comparison of our Duty and those Obligations that are laid upon us) yet
whatsoever we do, it is not to satisfy Gods Justice, to appease his Anger, to
Justify our selves, to Purchase and Merit eternal Life: And hereby God has
taken Care that he be not Robb^dof the Glory of his Free Grace, nor Christ of
the Glory of his Sufferings, by a Competition of any Merits, and Deserts of our
own: And let all the Sons of Men take Care also at their utmost Peril how they
do it.

Some men, I see, are wonderfully pleased with their own unsavory Eructations,
though they offend their Neighbors with their Onyons and Garlic; and
accordingly our Author is so highly taken with his own Crudities, and
undigested Notions, that he is resolved to give us them over again in a Scheme
of Religion; (for this is all the Mode, since Systematical Divinity grew out of
Fashion, and that some do begin to affect the Title of Schematical Divines:) In
which admirable Product of his Wit and Fancy, he brings nothing New, his
Railing faculty like an old Skrub-broom, being worn to the Stumps, and offers
as little Proof as Novelty, and therefore gratis Negatum might serve for an
answer to gratis Dictum; yet that he may not Complain that we Overlook his
Excellencies, I shall Sprinkle a few soft Drops upon him as he goes along.

1. In the entrance of his Scheme, he stumbles at the same Block he once broke
his Shins at; supposing these men to assert: That God appointed and ordained
sin for the glory of his Vindictive Justice, and Pardoning Grace. A Charge so
Idle, Vain, and False, that nothing can atone, but his pleading invincible
Ignorance: God did not appoint and ordain sin, that he might glorify his Mercy
and Justice thereby, but upon Supposition that sin had been Introduced, he
Overrules it, he appoints it to another End, orders it to another Purpose,
than in its own Nature it could ever have reached. And this the Doctor calls
Putting a New end to sin, p. 106. And was God ever denied the Liberty, before
the other day, to bring Good out of Evil?

2. He lays it down as their Doctrine: It pleased God that man should sin, but
when he has sinned He is displeased with it. This seems to be a piece of Wit,
designed to make the Devil Merry; but all the Humor of it lies in the
Ambiguity of one poor word. It pleased God to permit sin, and yet when man had
sinned he was justly displeased with it. Gods permission had no Influence upon
man's Transgression. But how would he have Insulted over that man that should
openly Preach and Write: That against the Holy Child Jesus, whom God anointed,
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, and the People of Israel were gathered together
for to do whatsoever Gods Hand, and Gods Counsel determined before to be done,
and yet when it was done according to the Determination of his own Hand and
Counsel, he was extremely displeased with it? And yet I could tell him of one
that has so said, who Scorns his most scornful Censure: It may please God that
a thing may be done, and take no pleasure in the thing done, nor in the
Instruments that did it. It pleased him to suffer his own People to be
afflicted by the Heathen, and yet he was sore displeased with the Heathen that
helped forward the Affliction, Zech. 1. 15. It pleased the Father to bruise his
Son, and yet he was displeased with the Instruments that bruised him: God can
do the same thing Righteously, which Men and Devils do unrighteously. Judas
delivered up Christ out of Covetousness, the Jews out of Envy, Pilate out of
Fear, or to pick a Thank from Caesar, but God Delivered him for our Offenses.

3. He charges them with this Doctrine: That nothing can withstand the Decrees
of God. We have scarce another Instance wherein he has Heartily represented
their Judgment, and was not able to throw some Dirt upon it.

4. He proceeds to play the Lucian, and Scoff at Gods Justice; It Is impossible
(says he) for God to forgive the least sin without a complete and perfect
Satisfaction: Let him but grant that God cannot forgive the greatest sin
without complete and perfect Satisfaction, and they will undertake to prove
from thence, that none is so small but needs a Satisfaction.

5. He proceeds: This falls hard upon those miserable Wretches, whose ill
fortune it was to be left out of the Roll of Election, without any fault of
theirs: To be left out of the Ro^l of Election by Fortune, is a piece of
profane Nonsense, which at once discovers the depth of his Intellectuals, and
the height of his Boldness. What more Desultory, than that which Heathens call
Fortune? What more stable and fixed, than that which the Word of God calls
Election? The Old Church of England would have Taught him to have Spoken
otherwise of that Tremendous Mystery. Art. 17^* Election to Life is the
everlasting purpose of God, whereby, before the Foundation of the World was
laid, He has constantly Decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to deliver from
Curse and Damnation, those whom He has chosen in Christ out of Mankind, and to
bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, etc. Now though he believes
little of all this, yet he might remember he had Subscribed the whole, and
considered also it is the Doctrine of that Church whereof he is a Member, and
therefore might have Covered their Nakedness, and at least Perfumed them with a
few good Cheap words against their Burial: It were tedious to pursue the
particulars, I only say: If this Scheme of Religion as it stands here upon
Record, be the Subject of his Scorn and Reproach, I hope we may read it
backwards, and then 'twill be his own Creed; some few Slanders indeed which
were inserted as a Haut*goust, to give it the better Grace, we may Omit, but
for the rest no doubt he will own it to be the Standard of his Belief.

God from the Beginning never Designed to Glorify either his Justice, or
Mercy, and because there would have been Occasion abundantly Administered both
to Punish and Pardon too, though man had never sinned, therefore he never
concerned himself how things would go. And indeed it had been to no purpose,
for God to Decree any thing, since if he had, all his Decrees, and Appointments
had been easi^y withstood: And therefore man sinned whether God would or no,
and full sore against his Will; for if he could have prevented it, we may be
sure he would; but when man had sinned God was not much displeased with it, for
you must know that his Justice is so Facile, and Easy an Attribute (and if it
be one at all, it is but a Secondary one) that he can easily forgive the
greatest sin without Satisfaction made to it. This is very good News [if it be
true] to all the World, especially seeing there is no such thing as the Roll of
Election, and by Consequence no preterition neither, but all men stand upon
even Ground, and every one upon his own Legs, which they may the better do
because they have many ways left (if need were) to pacify Gods anger, in case
he should happen to be a little displeased with sin, viz. By their own Temporal
sufferings, Repentance, and Obedience, which though they answer not Gods Law,
yet being sincere, its well enough: By this it appears that God is not
Essentially Just and Righteous, seeing He can Pardon the greatest sin, and
serve his own Glory, without any regard to the Death of Christ, or Inflicting
upon sinners Eternal Sufferings. But now this is but one part of the Glory of
God, that He can pardon sin without Propitiation made by Christ, the other is
that he can reward the sinner too, without the Righteousness of Christ: And
therefore there is more ado than needs about a pretended Difficulty how to
Reconcile Gods Justice and Mercy. For neither is Justice so severe as to
require Satisfaction, and the Merit of our own Obedience is so Considerable,
that we need not much be beholden to Mercy. And to speak in a word, the Demerit
of sin is short of Infinite, and therefore the Creature may Expiate its own
sins by enduring Finite, that is Temporary Torments; whereas then men Talk that
to Unite these two Extremes, and reconcile such Contradictions was a work of
Infinite Wisdom, as well as Goodness; they Talk Idly; for (as I said before)
whatever there was of Goodness in it, there could be no great Wisdom; and
therefore it is vainly said, that to Effect it God should send his Son into the
World to satisfy all Righteousness in his Life, and to make a full
satisfaction for sin by his Death; for neither could his Blood be of Infinite
value ( though for Fashion sake, we call it the Blood of the Son of God) nor
Expiate an Infinite guilt, or make satisfaction to Gods Justice (if so be he
had stood upon it:) And therefore to Instruct you aright in these Matters, sin
had no such Infinite guilt in it as Christians speak of, nor did Gods Justice
exact such Satisfaction: For he is more Glorified by Conniving at, and
Indulging of sin at cheap Rates, ( for the Naturalness of Gods Justice to him
is a Position to be abhorred) without any Security given, or Compensation made
to it; that is, he is so Merciful that whereas sin may possibly have some
Grains of Evil in it, yet in God there are not only Drams, but Ounces of such
Mercy which he will freely dispense, without regarding what becomes of his
other Attributes; which you will confess to be a glorious kind of Mercy, and
such, as Impenitent sinners cannot wish for a better. And since as I have often
said, and must Inculcate it again, the Justice and Vengeance of God ( if they
should prove more than Names) yet require no Consideration to be had of them,
but that their Claims may be easily waved or slighted, or slubber'd over by
general Mercy without reference to Christ, his Death or Sufferings, and God can
Pardon as many and as great sins as He pleases, without fear of being reputed a
Remiss Governor: Hereupon a most glorious and comfortable Scene of Affairs
appears to sinners, for now God can embrace sinners as a kind Father, and
account them Righteous without any Adoption through Christ; nay, as we told you
above, though Christ had never appeared in the World. And this is enough in all
Reason to make sinners Transported with Joy: But yet I have better News than
this; For as God never required that his Justice should be satisfied, so he is
not so Punctual and Strict that his Laws should be Obeyed: For if we be but
Innocent once by Pardon, what is matter for a Righteousness by keeping the Law
(or any other way) to make us accepted with God, for the former will deliver us
from Hell, and that is all that we need care for? But indeed you cannot well
conceive what it is to be Pardoned, but must presently be flusht up with a
Conceit of Eternal reward. There is one thing I would acquaint you with, but
it is a great Secret: If Christ has Satisfied at all, its for sins of Omission,
as well as Commission; that is, though we never Repent, Believe, Turn from sin
to God, yet if there be any thing at all in it, I Am inclined to this, that the
very Neglect of the Terms of the Covenant, shall not hurt us; but we may be
Reputed by God to have done all, and never regarded to keep any: And now God,
and sinners may very well agree together (for though Communion be an ill
favored word, yet I allow they may Converse) For what should hinder them?
Original sin they have none, and for Actual sin, there is no such Demerit in it
as should necessarily enforce Gods Justice to Insist upon a Reparation of its
Honor, and therefore let none trouble themselves with those Mormo's, some have
made of Justice to affright Children; nor on the other hand make such a do to
be clothed with the white and spotless Robes of Christ's Righteousness; for
though I cannot deny God to be Holy, yet his Justice sleeps like a Sword of
State in a Velvet Scabbard. Let all therefore set their hearts at rest; do but
repent as well as you can, and you shall be Saved with a notwithstanding Gods
Justice, and notwithstanding you have no Interest in the Satisfaction of
Christ.

These may reasonably be supposed some of our Authors Fundamental Doctrines,
seeing he so vehemently Persecutes their Contraries, which for
Distinction-sake, may well be called, The Religion of his own Itching Noddle.

Our Author had promised ^s a Discovery of what Additions some men had made to
the Gospel; and he has now saved his Recognizance, and showed himself Master of
his word, at as wild a Rate as ever was Indicted from Bedlam. There is but one
thing more calls for his Abilities, and that is to Render the Practice of it as
ridiculous as he has done the Principles, and then perhaps we may obtain a
short Cessation from this hot Service. Now the Practice hereof (he says)
consists in accepting of Christ, and coming to Him, and applying his Merits,
and Satisfaction and Righteousness to our selves for Pardon, and Justification,
and in those Duties which are consequent upon such an Union and closure with
Christ. And is it possible that these things should hear ill with them who
would pass for Christians? Or must we Renounce the Scriptures to Gratisie a few
Raving Men, who are fallen out with all the World and their own Understandings?
Accepting of Christ must be Reviled; and yet to this are we directed, that we
may become the Sons of God, John 1. 12. As many as received him, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God. Coming to Christ, must be loaded with
Scorn; and yet our Savior has expressly encouraged All that labor, and are
heavy laden, to come to him that he may give them rest, Mat. 11. 28. If these
Phrases be not rightly understood, let us be Instructed in the Spirit of
Meekness; but by no means let the very Expressions of Scripture, be the Theme
for every conceited Buffoon to exercise his Railing Faculties upon. The first
thing that offers it self, is a gross Self-contradiction: For whereas he had
Confessed, that The Practice of these men's Religion consists in accepting of
Christ, etc. And in those Duties which are consequent upon such an Union, and
closure with Christ; yet in the very next words, before he had finished his
Period, or made a Pause, he represents it thus. Christ having satisfied for our
sins, it is a plain and necessary Consequence that we have nothing to do, but to
get an Interest in the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ, that they may
be Imputed to us; for he is very Ignorant of Christ, that hopes any thing else
will avail him to Salvation. Nothing to do? Yes: We have those consequential
Duties to do, which follow upon our Union and closing with Christ. Nothing to
do? Why, we have enough to do for Time and Eternity; enough to fill up every
corner of our Hearts, every Moment of our Time, with Service, and Obedience to
Him who has Reconciled us to God, by the Blood of his Cross: If Malice were
not sometimes blind, there would be no Living by it in the World. Now (says he)
that we may thus come to Christ, its absolutely necessary that we be sensible
of our Lost and Undone condition. And dares he prescribe it as a safer way to
keep up an Insensibility of it? A senseless regard to our Sin, and Misery
thereupon, is no very hopeful way to put a sinner upon a serious enquiry after
the proper Remedy: I wish we were sure of our Authors Thoughts herein, and
whether he does indeed own that All men are by Nature in such a Lost and Undone
condition. The Church of Englands Thoughts are Evident, Art. 9. [Of Original,
or Birth-sin:] Original sin stands not in the following of Adam (as the
Pelagians vainly talk) but it is the corruption of the Nature of every Man,
whereby Man is very fa^ gone from Original Righteousness, and is inclined to
Evil. -- So that in every Person born into the World, it deserves Gods Wrath
and Damnation. Surely here is something that deserves our most serious Thoughts:
That which deserves Damnation at Gods Hands, deserves consideration at ours. He
that can carry about with him daily a depraved Nature, inclined to evil,
running counter to Gods Will, and not lament it with a bitter Lamentation, has
taken some of our Authors Hypnoticks; and how to bewail it without being
sensible of it, is a Mystery perhaps as deep as any of those we owe to his
Discovery. And is not this to Reproach Christ himself? Mat. 9. 12, 13. They
that be whole have no need of the Physician, but they that are sick: Ay (says
he) these are Metaphors, and I will Rail them out of Credit and Countenance
immediately. Well, you shall not fall out with Christ for a Metaphor, if I can
help it: Read the Next words; I come not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance: And they must be sensible sinners that will regard the Call of
Christ, or think they need Repentance. Another Quarrel he has against the
Practice of their Religion, is: That they hold it absolutely necessary, that we
be sensible how Impossible it is for us to Atone the Wrath of God, to have any
righteousness of our own, that can bear the severe Scrutiny of his Justice. Be
it so, if there be no Remedy; It seems then if we could work up our Imagination
into a Presumption, that Gods Anger against sin is very small, and our
Righteousness very great, so great as to endure the severe Scrutiny of Gods
Justice, we might purchase this Gentleman's favor: But the Gospel has taught us
otherwise, Romans 3. 10. That there is none righteous, no not one: That by the
deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in Gods sight, ver. 20. But he
lays about him, and Reproaches the Spirit of Bondage, the Spirit of Adoption,
and at last falls a Reviling Christ's own Words. We shall (says he in his
fleering way) never Value, and Prize Christ, and go to him for Salvation, till
we are Convinced of the necessity of him, and driven to him by the Threatenings
of the Law; and the Promise of Ease and Rest is made only to the weary and
heavy Laden, and those only shall be satisfied, who Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness. Really, this Doctor Owen, and his Fellows, are dangerous
Persons, I wonder not now that some think it not fit they should live a day;
That ever they should be so bold to read, or quote Matthew. 5. 6. Blessed are
they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled; or
that other place, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all you that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest; or to mention, Galat. 3. 24. Wherefore the Law
was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ: But did they make the
Scriptures? or coin, and invent these words of their own heads? or has our
Author a License to expose the Expressions of the Holy Spirit, as well as the
Doctors? Surely, an awful regard to the Authority of Jesus Christ speaking in
them, might have commanded some Reverence to them, and controlled this
unbridled liberty of prostituting Sacred Matters. But thus much, and too much
of what they make of Conviction. And now (says he) being thus stung with Sin,
it is time for us to look up to Christ, as the Israelites did on the Brazen
Serpent that we may be healed: But is this Gentleman indeed a Minister, a
Teacher of others, the Rector of St. George Buttolphs-lane, and knows not that
he reproaches Christ himself? Ioh. 3. 15. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal Life: And does not Christ
himself authorize the Parallel? That as none were healed in the Wilderness, but
those only who sensible of pain, looked up to the Brazen Serpent, as Gods own
Institution, to which a Promise of healing was annexed; so neither can we
receive any benefit by Christ, till under a deep sense of our sin and misery,
we accept of, and close with a Redeemer, whom the Father has held forth to be a
Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, for the Remission of sins. But this
is not all: Now we must begin to see his fullness, and perfection, and
suitableness to the wants and necessities of our Souls, that he is our
Atonement, our Wisdom, our Righteousness, and all that we can desire or need.
Well; and if they do conceive Christ to have both fullness and suitableness of
all Grace and Mercy in him, I hope it is neither Felony nor Treason neither: We
have an Assurance, Heb. 4. 15. That Christ is such a Priest as is touched with
a feeling of our Infirmities, and was in all points tempted like unto us, yet
without sin; (there is great suitableness,) and we are encouraged to come boldly
to the throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in
time of need, (and there is fullness): And surely our Author does sometimes pray
to Christ, (at least he is enjoined by the Litany to say,) O God the Son,
Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us miserable Sinners: Now if he can
indeed discover no suitableness, no fullness of Grace in Christ, to answer the
needs and wants of those miserable Sinners, he had better save his Breath to
cool his Pottage.

It is further charged upon them, That when the sense of their sins and
unworthiness makes them afraid to come to Christ, they have recourse to their
Acquaintance with Christ's Person, to answer their Doubts, and quiet their
Consciences. Which charge (though it has a Tincture and dash of our Authors
good Nature in it) they can easily bear, and do confess, that when the sense of
their sins, and Unworworthiness, at any time discourages them from Comeing to
God for the Pardon of sins, they do relieve themselves from the Gospel, which
has spoken great things of the Ability, and Readiness of a Mediator, to save
humble and repenting Sinners, that are willing to receive him as God has
offered him in the Covenant of Grace; They do there find that Christ came into
the World, to save the chiefest of Sinners, such as had been Blasphemers,
Persecutors, and Injurious, and yet have obtained Mercy, that Christ in them
might show forth all long-suffering, for a Pattern to them that should
afterward believe on him to Everlasting Life, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16, 17. And do
further believe, that to deny this, is at once to renounce the whole Gospel;
and if it be not a Fruit of downright Infidelity and Atheism, yet most
apparently leads thither.

Our Author having destroyed the Living, begins to prey upon the Dead; and has
therefore raked Mr. Shepherd out of his Grave, to show us that he has some
skill in Necromancy: We read of one that had his dwelling amongst the Tombs,
possessed with an unclean Spirit, but so outrageous that none could tame him, no
Chains would hold him, so fierce that none durst pass by the way: And as I
remember, Q. Curtius, tells us of the Hyaena, That her great delight is to dig
up Carcases, and insult over them; And what was the Character of a great
Prince, that he never spared Man in his Anger, nor Woman in his Lust; may be
accommodated to him whose Ambition would Triumph over the quick and the dead. I
know well* that a few of our Authors Squibs and Crackers will pass for a
Confutation of the clearest Truth, with them who are of the same distempered
Spleen with himself; but with those holy and pious Souls, to whose Conversion,
Consolation and Establishment in the Gospel, God has blessed the Labors of
that worthy Person, their Repute is not to be shaken by the feeble Attempts of
grinning Malice and Envy, whose only Reason for their hatred of things
excellent, is because they are Excellent.

I think there cannot a more proper defense of wronged Innocence be found out,
than to repeat the foul-mouthed language of Detraction: Hear therefore what our
Author says. The Reason of all this is very plain from our Acquaintance with
Christ, for he is our Physician, and therefore we must not think of healing our
selves, but must go to him with all our diseases and sores about us, that he
Alone may have the Honor of healing us. Mock on: He is a Fountain set open for
sin and for uncleanness, and therefore we must go to him with all our
Filthiness, to be cleansed and washed; for if we be first clean, there is no
need of a Fountain. He is all Fullness, and therefore it is not fit that we
should carry any thing to him, as if he needed any thing from us: He is our
Righteousness, and therefore if we have any, we must leave all behind us when
we go to him, etc. So that all we have to do in this great work, is to go to
Christ weary, and sick, and filthy, and naked, stripped of every thing but our
sins and impurities, to receive Ease, and Health, and Fullness, and Beauty from
him. Were we worthy to know how much of this our Author does deny, he should
soon understand how much of it we own; but to serve us up a Medley, an Oleo of
Truth and Error, reproached Truth, and falsely imputed Error, this I must
needs say, (if he were the best Friend I have) is Intolerable; and yet in this
Mist of Aequivocations he hobbles on; Will he deny Christ to be a Physician, a
Fountain, that he has in him a Fullness, that he is Righteousness to Believers;
that it is the Duty and Interest of the weary, heavy laden Sinner to make
Addresses to him? Socinus, Volkelius, will allow it lawful to pray to Christ,
though they indeed deny it to be a Duty so to do. If our Author can heal
himself, and need not Christ to be his Physician; if he can cleanse himself,
and need not that Fountain which God has set open for Sin and for Uncleanness;
if he be full, and needs not be beholden to Christ for a supply; and has a
righteousness of his own, which will cover his Nakedness, he has then a happy
turn on it; only let him not be angry with those poorer sort of Creatures that
are willing to take Christ's Counsel, Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me
Gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white Raiment that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy Nakedness do not appear: But I
cannot sufficiently admire the Contradiction of his Conclusion: -- And thus we
must apply Christ to our Souls, and then what a blessed Change and
Metamorphosis is there presently made in us; for though we continue as we were,
we have all in Christ. A change made in us, and yet to continue as we were; A
change and no change, to be as we were, and yet not what we were, is somewhat
surprising: They were just now charged that they went filthy to Christ, that
they might be cleansed; nak^d to Christ, that they might be clothed; empty to
Christ, that they might be filled; sick to Christ, that they might be healed;
and yet after all, here is a Metamorphosis, a change made in them, and still
they continue as they were; which has outdone, I dare say, all Ovid, who never
durst, (and yet Poets and Painters dare do almost any thing,) feign poor
Daphne to be changed into a Laurel, and yet to continue fair Daphne still. As
to my own thoughts, I have been taught from the Scriptures, to own Christ as my
Physician, but I never had such a Crotchet in my head, That a blind man should
have his Eyes opened, and yet his Eyes continue as they were; that the dead
should be raised, the Lepers cleansed, the deaf made to hear, and yet all be in
statu quo; as they were. Nature is much delighted with Variety, and therefore
that he may not always scrape upon one string, our Author will find or take
Occasion to fall upon one Mr. Watson; who it seems illustrating Christ's
entering into Covenant with a Soul, by the Manner of making a MarriageCovenant
amongst men, has introduced Christ and a Believer thus mutually engaging each
to other: Christ says to a Believer, With my Body, yea with my Blood I endow
thee; and a Believer says to Christ, With my Soul I thee worship. That Christ
does really endow Believers with his Body and Blood, and all the Benefits
procured by his Sacrifice, is out of doubt to all that are not Infidels. John
6. 51. The Bread that I will give, is my flesh, that I will give for the life
of the World. V. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you. V. 54. Whose eats my flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has Eternal Life. That Believers do enter into a mutual Covenant with
Christ, to give up themselves in Spirits, Souls and Bodies, to love, serve,
honor their Redeemer, is also evident, from Ephesians. 5. 24. Christ is the head of
the Church, and the Savior of the Body, and therefore the Church is subject to
Christ: Now what a a pitiful flam does he return to this? As if (says he)
Christ and a Believer were married by the Liturgy: The form of the
Marriage-Covenant in the Liturgy is not so absurd as he would render it, but
that it may with decency express the Process of Christ and a Believers joining
in Covenant: But I fear, if we should sift the business a little more narrowly,
we shall find our Author as far to seek in the Liturgy, as he is cross to the
Articles of the Church of England; for Mr. Watson brings in the Spouse saying
to Christ, With my Soul I thee worship; but the Liturgy teaches the Man to use
those words to his Spouse, With my Body I thee worship: So that I see no great
Danger that ever Christ and a Believer should be married by the Liturgy.

Again he cites Mr. Watson: A Soul in Christ is actually united to him, and one
with him, and being so, no sentence can fall on him, but the same must light
upon Christ himself: That true Believers are one with Christ, is very clear
from the Gospel; and it would be much our Concern to clear up this one point,
that we are true Believers; for the other is clear; 1 Cor. 12. 12. As the Body
is one, and has many members, even so is Christ; and therefore, there is no
condemnation to them that a^e in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. A silly Jerk he has at this too. And who would
desire to be more secure than Christ is? Why none that I know of. And so a
short Horse is soon curried. What Mr. Watson had said before, in the Apostles
words, that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ; that he
illustrates by this similitude: As a Woman in Marriage, though she owe never so
many Debts, yet the Arrest does not light upon her, but upon her Husband: And
it has been owned as a Maxim in the Law, Uxo^i lis non intenditur: But let that
be as it will; If the Main Fort hold out, we can spare him the Outworks; let
it be acknowledged a Truth, that There is no C ondemnation to them that are in
Christ, and let the Metaphor escape as well as it can: O blessed Privilege!
(says he) who would be afraid of running into debt with God, when he has such
a kind Husband to discharge all? Any one surely that has an ingenuous spirit,
as they all have who stand in that Relation to Christ: Jesus Christ does not
only take the Soul into a Conjugal Relation, but qualifies it that it may fill
up the Duties of that Relation, with Love, desire to please, f^ar to offend,
readiness to obey, with a spirit of thankefulness and fruitfulness, with a
Heart studying, What shall I render to the Lord for all his Benefits? Who would
be afraid? O vile, and abominable heart that could form such a Conclusion of
Sin, out of the premises of abounding Grace; Who would be afraid? Nay, who
would not tremble at the heart, to think least it should be drawn into sin, to
the wounding of him afresh, that was wounded for me on the Cross: How shall I
do this wickedness, and sin against my Redeemer? Shall he be crucified by me,
that was crucified for me? There Is no such Argument in all the world against
sin, as the Consideration of what I owe to him who loved me, and gave himself
for me. I deny not but the Doctrine of Grace may be turned into lasciviousness,
by them that never came under the Authority and soul-subduing Power of it; but
when a self-condemned, self-abhorred Sinner, comes to see what Christ has done
and suffered for him, what he is to him, what he has wrought in him, the Result
whereof is Justification before a holy God, and Sanctification of Soul, such a
one will retort upon the Tempter his own Temptation, with the greatest
Abhorrency; Shall I continue in sin that Grace may abound? God forbid! Romans 6.
1, 2.

Still Mr. Watson prosecutes the Privileges of the Saints. -- This is their
glorious Privilege, Christ's beauty and loveliness shall be put upon them. Ay,
(says our Author snearing,) How vile and impure soever they are: The old Crambe
again: They shall have Christ's beauty put upon them, and yet continue ugly
still; they shall have Christ's whiteness on them, and yet be as sooty and
swarthy as before; but this is none of Mr. Watsons sense, but our Authors
Nonsense, who durst tell the World as the Purport of these men's Expressions,
That upon receiving Christ, there is a blessed Change made, and yet we continue
as we were. But Mr. W. proceeds in the Privileges of those that are engraffed
into Christ, and made members of his Body. Nothing that ever was a member of
Christ can be lost to Eternity. Can he lose a Member of his Body? then his Body
is not perfect. No, fear not ye Saints, neither Sin nor Satan can dissolve your
Union with Christ. Our Author is now turning Catechist, and asks this wise
Question: But what if Sin should make them no Saints, would not that endanger
the dissolving the Union? Yes indeed, it would endanger it, as much as a Man is
in danger of dying, when his Head is chopped off; but I hope we may ask one
Question for another: What if Christ will preserve them so effectually, that
they shall not sin to that height, as to become no Saints? why then the Union
is not dissolved; and so there is a Pot-lid for our Authors Pot. But Mr. Watson
Reasons further, (our Author says sweetly, but I say it is no great matter for
that, if he does it but strongly,) If any branch be plucked away from Christ,
it is either because Christ is not able to keep it, or because he is willing to
lose it. And our Author Queries again, Why not because it will not stay? And I
will tell him why, Because he has given it a will, and desire above all things
in the world to stay with Christ. All Mr. Watsons unhappiness is, that he had a
good Cause, but not the Luck to hit upon our Authors convincing Argument; who
p. 184. assures us, That this New Life, wherein our Conformity to the
Resurrection of Christ consists, is an immortal Principle of Life, which can no
more die, then Christ can die again, now he is risen from the dead. And to shut
up all, Mr. Shepherds Sincere Convert is brought upon the Stage, p. 77. though
I could not meet with it till p. 113. Weaknesses do not debar us from God's
Mercy: The Husband is bound to bear with the Wife as the weaker vessel, and can
we think, that God will exempt himself from his own Rule, and not bear with his
weak Spouse? It would have been something difficult to have made sport with
such Innocent Expressions, but he had an id est left in his Budget, that never
fails him: Weakness (says he) that is, no strength, no grace, no nor so much as
a sense of Poverty: How false this is, Mr. Shepherd will satisfy any one that
will but consult the next Question, p. 116. Upon what Conditions may Christ be
had? and he answers: Give away thy self to him, give away thy Sins to him, give
away thy Honor, Pleasure, Profit, Life to him, give away thy Rags, thy own
Righteousness: You will say, you will have Christ with all your heart; but will
you have him upon these Terms, upon these four Conditions? And now the total
sum, the result of all that these men mean by Accepting of Christ, our Author
gives us, with his wonted Candor. It is to be content to be saved by Christ,
without being either humble, or holy, or fair, or beautiful, any otherwise
than as he is pleased to make us so by his Satisfaction for our Sins, and the
Imputation of his Righteousness to us. Nay, that is a Rapper; let him but look
up to what he quoted from Mr. Shepherd: Christ has taken upon him to purge
his Spouse, and make her fit for himself; and that she can never be, without
being holy, humble, beautiful, by inherent Grace. Shall I but entreat the
Readers patience a very little, to lay his finger upon these words: The result
of all that they mean by coming to Christ, is to be content to be saved by him,
without being holy, humble, or beautiful, etc. and I will promise him, for his
Patience and Pains, he shall within a Page or two hear our Author most
effectually confute his own Slander, and raise a Mighty Blister upon his own
forgetful Clapper.

And now our Author comes to consider what Duties are consequent upon such an
Union and closure with Christ. As first, A mighty love of the Soul, for her
Savior, Head and Husband; and Another is, Obedience to our spiritual Husband.
And now Reader, where did thou lay thy finger? Are these the Men that are
content to be saved by Christ, without being holy, humble, etc? Are these they
that were charged, p. 56. with trusting to the Expiation of Christ for
Salvation, without doing any thing themselves? Or are they the same men that
were reproached, p. 62. as saying, They had Nothing to ^oe, but to get an
Interest in the Satisfaction and Righteousness of Christ; and yet now are so
hot for loving of Christ, that their great Crime is, that they over-love him,
and are sick of love for him, and are all for Obedience to Christ too,
resigning up themselves to his Will, to be governed by his Laws, and in all
things to glorify him in New Obedience? Yes, but then it is very hard to find a
proper place for Obedience in this New Religion: Well, but if we can find a
proper place for it in the Old Religion, it is no great matter what place it has
in the New: And indeed I would not have it Controverted, what place in Religion
they will allow to Obedience, who are of no Religion, who are open Scoffers at
Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Scriptures, and all Religion. Ay, but it is very
hard to deduce it from an Acquaintance with Christ's Person: Very Hard! what a
word was that? why it is simply impossible to deduce any Religion at all from an
Acquaintance with his Person; for all the acquaintance we have with him, is by
an acquaintance with his Gospel, from whence we understand him to be God and
Man; from thence we learn him to be King, Priest and Prophet; thence we learn
what he has done and suffered for us; and what he is now doing for us at the
Right hand of the Father. But why should it be so very hard to find a proper
place for Obedience in these men's Religion? Why? Reason will tell you, that if
there be any room at all for it, it must be either before our closing with
Christ, or after it: Now indeed he argues close and home, and pursues his
business as snug as you can desire. 1. Then this (Obedience) is not necessary
at all to our coming to Christ, and closing with him: Not necessary? that is
very strange! Coming to Christ, is with them a Main part of Obedience, and to
Obey without Obedience, is not so easy as he imagines. He that answers that
Call of Christ [Come unto me] therein obeyes him: and believing in Christ, has
been reputed a considerabe part of Gospel-Duty, 1 Ioh. 3. 23. This is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ: That
there are several Duties which flow from Faith, the Scripture, Church of
England, and all men living do acknwowledge, but that this Believing is also a
Duty, they must equally acknowledge. So that here is one proper place, or at
least a Corner of a place, where he may wedge in Obedience, if he pleases. 2.
(Says he) When the Marriage is consummated, there is less need of it than
before: Nay, there his Nonsense is too open; He supposes them to own
consequential Duties, such as follow the Marriage-covenant, and yet now he
would persuade us, that there is less need of them, than before the
Marriage-Covenant. If he can invent a way how consequential Duties should go
before the Marriage Covenant, by my consent he shall have the sole honor of
the Discovery: In my poor Judgment, (and I am persuaded most men are of my
Judgment) consequential Duties do follow, or to humor him, following Duties
ought to be consequential. There was once a Learned and Friendly Debate betwixt
a Mayor and his Brethren, what the Question was, I am not very certain, but one
wiser than the rest, had reduced the Matter to this Head: That if they could
but make it out, that Edward the third reigned before Edward the first, they
should carry the Cause: And if our Author can find any place, proper or
improper, for consequential Duties, before that thing to which they are
consequential, he shall be Registered amongst the great Benefactors to our
understandings. But yet in spite of Fate, he will not allow any place for
Consequential Duties after Marriage, for then we have less need of them than
before. A fine Argument if well Improved, to satisfy men in the Lawfulness of
committing Adultery: But why not? 1. Then we are adorned with the Beauty of
Christ: Ergo, we need no Inherent beauty. Then we are Justified: Ergo, we need
not be Sanctified. 2. Then we are Holy with Christ's Holiness: Ergo, we need not
be Holy. 3. Then we are delivered from the Guilt of sin by his Expiation: Ergo,
we need not be delivered from the filth of sin. 4. Christ must look to see the
Debt discharged [to God] which he has taken upon him: Ergo, we owe no Debt of
Gratitude to the Father for his Son, to the Son for his Love. 5. We are then
righteous with his Righteousness, which gives us an actual right to Glory:
Ergo, we need no Inherent righteousness to make us meet for Glory, and to
partake of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. All I shall say is this, If
men may Argue at this Rate, they are the most formidable Disputants; we may
cast our Caps at them; and it is as safe to handle the Torpedo, as to touch them
with a long Pole. But such Merriment he is pleased to Divert his we aried
Reader withal, and sometimes for Variety it may be Grateful, but really too
much Nonsense in a Discourse is very odious.

For the Place (or rather no Place) of Obedience thus far: An enquiry in the
Reasons of it, seems also necessary. And for that, he says, It Is concluded on
all hands, that this (Obedience) is but a Consequential Duty, that which ought
to follow the Espousals. But the Reason of it is not Evident: The Reason of the
thing not Evident? Why, the thing it self is not evident: Would he have an
evident Reason of Nothing? A Foundation for a Castle in the Air? Can he find no
place for Obedience, and yet would he have a Reason for it? But for all this
Ranting, his Conscience tells him that they do allow a place for it, and can
produce a Reason for it too, and perhaps a more proper place, and stronger
Reason than our Author is able to show.

[1.] Some tell us (says he) it is due upon the account of Gratitude, and
thankfulness to our Savior. And methinks, a great deal of Obedience will rest
upon that Basis: Has he come into this World (whither none that loved his ease
would come?) Has he taken our Nature upon him, and (as if that were a light
Matter) our sins? Has he endured the Displeasure of men, and (as if that were
little) did it please God himself to put him to Grief? Did he Die for sinners?
Does he Intercede for them? Has he revealed the whole Counsel of God to them
concerning their Salvation? Has he given them the Holiest Laws, and the best
Encouragement to Obey them? Did he Promise, and has he sent his Holy Spirit to
dwell in their Hearts? Is it he through whom their Duties are accepted, and
shall not these Obey? Here Is enough, and yet there is much more to Engage all
the Love, Service, Obedience, of Redeemed ones for ever: And so the thing is
(at least) a hairs breadth longer than it is broad. But here our Author is at a
Loss; he cannot so well understand this: But whose fault is that? Must the
Truth suffer because he cannot see it? The truth is, he has Puzzled, and
Perp^exed himself with an Idle scruple in his Head, and Vulcan must come with
the great Hammer to deliver his Brain of a Minerva; though I know no Obligation
lies upon me to cut the Rope, as often as he will Snickle himself: Yet hour,
let us here the Difficulty: -- Unless our Obedience be due to Christ, in
thankfulness to him for saving us without Obedience. This is a Knot becoming
the Sword of Alexder: Christ never engaged to save us without Obedience, and
therefore he might have spared his pains to enquire how it should be due upon
that Account: We therefore owe him all our Obedience, because it is through him
that such Imperfect Obedience may find acceptance with God: Which is nothing
more difficult than this; We live to him, because he Died for us, and rose
again.

Yet there is a more fomidable Objection in the rear, against the grounding
Obedience upon the bottom of Gratitude. This is (says he) Hardly reconcilable
with that Essential Condition of accepting Christ, wherein those Spiritual
espousals consists. Well, though it be hardly, yet if it be reconcilable at
all, we shall not create him the Trouble of being a Conciliator. There are
rational Divines enough in the World, for whose Heads this Province may be
reserved. Two things we must here find out if we can: 1. What is the Essential
condition of our accepting Christ. 2. How Obedience due upon the account of
Gratitude, comes to be so hardly reconcilable to that Essential condition.
((...)) What is the Essential condition of our (...) Christ. For here lies the
Intrigue, and h^ (...) so disguised Matters, and Inck't himself (like (...)) in
Confusion, that it will be hard to (...). Now for that he quotes plain I. O.
Com. page 63. viz. That the Soul consents to take Christ on his own Terms: This
is the Essential condition, that has Created all the Pother: The Souls
consenting to take Christ, is the Essential condition of taking. But now (2.)
How is Obedience upon the account of Gratitude, irreconcilable to its consent
to take Christ on his own Terms? Davus has made a diffity, but where is an
Oedipus to resolve it. Christ's Terms are, that the Soul shall give it self in
Love and Obidence for ever: He requires that the Soul should be wholly and
entirely his, and not for another; and this is so far from being
Irreconcilable to (what he calls ridiculously) the Essential condition of
accepting Christ, that it is directly Included in it. And this he might have
been Taught from the Doctor, had he not been too Proud to Learn. Ibid. This
accepting Christ by the will, as the Souls only Husband, Lord and Savior, is
called receiving Christ, John 1. 12. and is not intended for that Solemn Act
only, whereby at first entrance we close with him, but also for that constant
frame of abiding with him, and owning him as such. So that it would have been
an Impossible task to part them, but very easy to reconcile them. Obedience is
so far from being excluded by the Souls accepting Christ upon his Terms, that
its simply impossible to accept him upon his own Terms; but we must Cordially,
and with an Evangelical Universality obey him all our days. It Is something late
(I confess) yet let us hear what he further quotes from the Doctor: The Soul
consents to take Christ on his own Terms, to save save him in his own way, and
says, Lord I would have had Thee, and Salvation, in my way, that it might have
been partly of my Endeavors, and as it were by the Works of the Law; but I am
now willing to receive Thee, and to be saved in thy Way, merely by Grace. We
have already seen that what he has Quoted and Summoned in these words for, was
marvellously Impertinent to the pretended purpose; But that which will not make
a Shaft, will make a Bolt. Never did our Author meet that thing, but he could
make some use on it: As they that study the Philosophers Stone, though they miss
of the main Design, yet stumble upon some pretty Experiments by the way, that
makes them flatter themselves they have not quite lost their Oil and Labor.
Thus, however our Author may be Frustrated in his primary Project, which was
Confuting the Truth, yet probably he may find or make some advantage to slur
the Doctor: You may see him here like the great Hanibal, making his way over
the Alps with Fire and Vinegar. If there be Matter for a Slander above Ground
he will have it, and if not, Acheronta movebit. That is (says he) without doing
any thing, without obeying thee: If to receive Christ upon his own Terms, as a
King, and abiding with him in that relation, giving up it self to Christ as a
King to obey him, be doing nothing, I cannot help it; but let our Author do but
thus much, and he shall receive a Testimony from God that he has done all. It Is
true, the Doctor excludes all his own Obedience for those ends, to which a
proud Ignorant Jew might have abused them, viz. To exclude the FreeGrace of
God, and the reconciliation made by Christ: And this we ought to be Jealous of,
lest we ascribe any more Interest and concern to our own Duties, than the
Gofpel allows: The Question then shall never be stated by me thus: Whether we
must Obey or no? Keep the Commandments of Christ or no? And that upon Peril of
Eternal Damnation? But whether out of this Obedience of ours, may be gathered
that righteousness in which we may safely venture to appear before the Judge of
all the Earth in the great day; as that which we resolve to stand and abide by,
venturing our all upon it? This is that the Doctor thinks the Apostle reproved,
Romans 9. 31, 32. Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not
attained to the Law of righteousness, because they sought it not by Faith, but
as it were by the Works of the Law. Where the Apostle Intimates, that though we
do not directly seek a righteousness by the Works of the Law, yet to do it
Obliquely and Indirectly, is destructive; and that the Doctor intends no more,
no other than this, is evident from the words our Author calls in; And though I
would have walked according to my own mind, yet now I give up my self to be
wholly guided by thy Spirit. This Netled our Authors Conscience, and he takes
Sanctuary in the most wretched Subterfuge that ever betrayed it is Confider;
What a pretty Complement does the Soul make to Christ? We are now sheer gone
from the Truth of the Principle, to the Truth of the Heart in receiving it. If
it proves a Complement in the Mouth of an Hypocrite, yet in Thesi its a Truth;
That whoever receives Christ upon his own Terms, does ( renouncing his own will
and way) give up himself wholly to be ruled by the Spirit, speaking in the
Scriptures. At this wi^d rate I have often heard a silly Quaker answer this
Proposition: Jesus Christ that Died at Jerusalem, is the Savior of the World:
Ay (says he) but do thou witness that from the Light within?

[2.] Others make Obedience necessary upon the account of Christ's Fullness: But
this (he says) makes it no otherwise necessary, then as we are necessarily
passive in it. However, if it be necessary upon any account, it is enough to
make him blush that flatly Charges it upon them, to say it is not necessary: But
to be passive in our Obedience, is all the Soul means, in giving up it self to
be ruled by the Spirit of Christ. Then the Soul means Nonsense: For to give it
self to be ruled by the Spirit, has something of Activity in it: Our help and
asistance to give up our selves is from the Spirit, but the giving up is an an
act of the Souls. It Is the Believer that obeys, and yet the ability to obey is
from the Holy Ghost: It Is the Creature that works, and yet its God that works
in him, to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. It Is the man
that believes, and yet he believes according to the working of Gods mighty
Power, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. What is it else that he prays to the Spirit for? O God
the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have Mercy upon us
miserable sinners? But all this might have been Superseded, had our Author duly
Recollected what he has Subscribed, and openly given his Assent and Consent to,
in the 10th. Art. of the Church of England. We have no power to do Good works
acceptable to God, without the Grace of God preventing us, that we may have a
good Will and Working with us when we have that good Will. Allow but the Doctor
the Benefit of the Clergy, and he will need no more to bring him off, though
that very Article would prove our Authors Neck-verse. In the Work of Grace, the
Spirit Acts according to the Nature of the Subject, which is here the Rational
Creature; He gives not new Natural Powers, but a new Moral ability to Exercise
them; he bestows not a new Will Physically, but enlarges it from its Fetters,
discharges it from its Slavery, and powerfully (though Gently) enclines it to
Gods Testimonies, not destroying its radical self-determining Power; and hence
I conclude our Author is but sorrily Skilled in the true meaning of souls, when
they Profess a subjection to Christ. The Soul meant honestly, she had no Mental
reservation, none of these Quirks and Tricks, but plainly and sincerely
Designed to give up her self in all Obedience to her Lord and Savior; She in
her Text intended very singly, but our Author has Commented upon it Knavishly:
I said so indeed in haste, another would have said perhaps Foolishly; for what
more Idle Chat could he have Learned from the good Women his Neighbors at
Billings-gate, than a willingness to obey against ones Will.

This is all our Author is willing to own of the Grounds of our Obedience, but
I shall help his weak and frail Memory a little, though to his great Regret.
Doctor O. Com. page 212. Obedience ( says the Doctor) is necessary as a Means
to the End. N. B. God has appointed that Holiness shall be the Means, the Way
to that Eternal Life, which as in it self, and Originally, is his Gift by Jesus
Christ, so with regard to his Constitution of our Obedience, as the Means of
attaining it, is a Reward, and God in bestowing of it a Rewarder; though it be
neither the Cause, Matter, nor Condition of our Justification, yet it is the
Way appointed of God for us to walk in for the obtaining of Salvation. And
therefore he that has hope of Eternal Life, Purifies himself as he is Pure,
and none shall ever come to that End, who walks not in that Way; for without
Holiness it is impossible to see God. The bare Repitition of which words are as
plain, and full a Rebuke to all our Authors Dirty, Nasty Reflections, as a
reasonable Creature can desire. But these things we shall meet withal anon,
and therefore here they shall lie ready in Banco, till our Authors Leisure
shall call for them.

I had now eased my self and my Reader, of any further Vexation in this
Section, had I not unhappily overseen one Passage in Mr. Watson, from which our
Author thinks he has some Advantage. The words are these: Evangelical Truths,
will not down with a Natural Heart, such a one had rather hear some quaint
Point, of some Virtue or Vice stood upon, than any thing in Christ, etc. Which
he thus Canvasses: Such sanctified Souls, and Ears, loath all Dull, Insipid,
Moral Discourses, which are perpetually Inculcating their Duty on them, and
Troubling them with a great many Rules and Directions for a good Life, which he
is pleased to call the Quaint Points of Virtue and Vice. Good Sir, be not
angry, have but a little Patience and all will be well to your Hearts Content.
Mr. Watson does not Inveigh against your Poynant Invictives against the one, or
your most Elaborate Encomiums of the other. Run down sin at the highest rate of
Zeal and Fervency you can; render Profaneness as Odious, and expose her for a
Fulsome s^urvy Baggage; if you please, Invent new Names for her, with that
Reverend Divine, and tell her to her Teeth she is a Tatter-de-mallion, and a
Rapscallion; And let Virtue, Duty, and a good Life, be Urged and Pressed upon
the Conscience with the most Cogent Arguments, that Reason and Scripture will
afford you. Mr. Watson will Live, and Sleep, and Love you: They are only these
Quaint, Nice, Finical points of Vice and Virtue, which he and all Judicious
Christians (who had rather have their Hearts and Lives bettered, than their
Ears tickled) do Disgust. A Quaint point of Vice, at which your Jesuits are so
Excellent, that they have acquainted the World with more Sublimated and
Speculatives Rogueries, than perhaps else the Devil himself had ever thought
of: Such we meet with in their Books of Casuistical Divinity; where men are
Taught an Art of sinning, to be Villainous in Mood and Figure; and as some have
reached the perfection of Poisoning by Smells at a distance, so have these
Infected the World with their Theories of Monstrous Debaucheries: They have
started Game for unclean hearts to Hunt down, and set unsanctified Nature agog*
for those Pollutions of which it had else lived in a blessed Ignorance. There
are Quaint points of Virtue too, which will not down with any sanctified Souls
and Ears, who desire to hear of their Redeemer, and their Obligations to him,
upon the Account of what he has Purchased and Procured for them. When one that
supp^ies the place of the Minister, but more fit to fill up the room of the
Idiot, shall with a starched Gravity, Dress you up a Virtue A-la-mode, like a
Morice-dancer with a comely Feather in her Cap, Ribands at her Ears, and
Tuneable Bells at her Heels, and then come off with a Flourish; Oh what a
goodly thing is this Madam Virtue! Let him that speaks, speak as becomes the
Oracles of God; let him without affected Quaintness, with a serious Spirit, in
the Words which the Holy Ghost teaches, open the Excellency, demonstrate the
Necessity of any Virtue, and Mr. Watson is very well contented. Having now made
an Essay toward the Reconciling Mr. W. and our Author, I hope I may without
Offense proceed. Before our Author takes his leave of his Reader, (which he
does with much Civility) he lets him know what he has had for his Money. First,
(he tells him) He has given him an entire Scheme of a New Religion, resulting
from an acquaintance with Christ's Person. But we crave leave to Demur to that.
It Is neither a Scheme, much less an entire Scheme of any Religion New or Old,
only a Wispe, that he set up to himself to Scold at: Next he lifts up his
Masque, that we may see the full Face of his Design, for hitherto he has been
in Masquerade, and that he tells us was to Expose these Men's Principles to
Scorn: But that we saw through his Vizor, and needed not his Gazet to give us
an Advertisment, that his chiefest Talent lies in Misrepresenting men's Persons,
their Expressions and Intentions, in casting Dirt upon the the sincerest
Actions, and Invidiously traducing the greatest Truth of the Gospel. Thirdly,
He tells us* That every considering Person cannot but discover how Inconsistent
the Religion of Christ's Person and of his Gospel are. But this Distinction was
but the Superfoetation of his own Parturient Brain; we own one God, and one
Mediator between God and man, one holy Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism,
delivered to us in the Scriptures of Truth: And further than the Scriptures
have a Tongue to Speak, we have no Ear to Hear. Whereas therefore a certain
Vagrant Principle [concerning the difference betwixt the Religion of the
Person, and Gospel of Christ] has been taken Begging at our Doors, and would
have Fathered it self upon us: Now know all men whom it may Concern, that we
have Executed the Law upon it, have Stripped and Whipped it, and do hereby send it
from Constable to Constable, till it shall come at the Parish of St. George
ButtolphsLane, and the Rectory there, where the Brat was Born and Bred, and
there it is most fitting it should be Maintained.

The Reader cannot but Observe, that ( how Hotly soever our Author is Engaged
in the Pursuit of his Design, yet) he can always find leisure to have a Fling
at the Acquaintance of Christ's Person. If there were but two things in all the
World to Rail at, one of them should be Acquaintance of Christ's Person. Hence
it is that he has not got a finer Nickname, for those he would Vilify than,
the Acquaintances of Christ. Thus, page 56. As these bold acquaintance and
familiars of Christ use to speak, p. 68. As another great acquaintance of
Christ speaks, which though it be perfect Nonsense, yet serves to express his
Scolding Humor well enough: Now I confess I cannot Divine what should thus
give Fire to his Choler, and inflame his Passion against acquaintance with
Christ. It must be either the Name, or the thing it self, that I am satisfied
in. (1.) Then, Is it that Term that disliks him? Alas poor Word! What harm had
it ever done him? I could wish that to prevent Quarrels, and keep the Peace, he
may have liberty to make some other word its Substitute and Surrogate. Let it
be the Knowledge of Christ, the Understanding of Christ, or what ever other
Synonima his Sylva will furnish him with; rather than to have such a continual
Peal rung in our Ears with this Acquaintance. And yet he might have known, that
the Word is no worse than what the Learned Translators of our English Bible
saw, (or thought they saw) Reason to employ: It has now lain so long Mellowing
in that Version, that it might be presumed to have lost the Austerity of its
Nature, and to have been Sweetened to his Curious and Judicious Palate. In Job
22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace (...): And the word
signifies to Familiarize our selves to a Thing, or Person. And the same word is
used to express Gods own Knowledge of, and Acquaintance with his Creatures, and
all their ways, Psalm. 139. 3. Thou art acquainted with all my ways, (...). And
its opposed to a strange, over^y Carriage; when we live at a distance from
another, as if there was no good and clear Correspondence between us; and the
truth is, it implies a thing called Communion, and therein lies its Guilt. But,
2. I suspect that it is acquaintance with Christ's Person, that has provoked all
this Rage: Acquaintance with any Thing, or Person, else might have escaped a
Scouring; and yet under Correction. 1. The Scripture presses it as our Duty to
Study, Understand, and get a through Knowledge of the Personof Christ, 2 Pet.
3. 18. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, to him be Glory, both now and for ever, Amen. And* 2. We find holy Men
to have made it their business to get an acquaintance with Christ's Person,
which this Gentleman makes it his business to Reproach, 1 Cor. 2. 2. I
determined not to know any thing amongst you, save Jesus Christ, (...), even
him Crucified. The Person of Christ under that consideration, as Crucified; and
the Reasons are as Cogent, as the thing is clear. For, 1. In the Knowledge of
Christ (that very Christ whom the Father sent into the World) consists Eternal
Life: This is Life Eternal to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. 2. We are Commanded to love this Jesus, (another great
fault our Author finds with these Men) but how to love him and not to be
acquainted with him, may be reckoned amongst the Impossibilities, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
At the appearing of Jesus Christ, whom having not seen ye love; in whom (though
now ye see him not) yet believing ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory. The Apostle commends their love to, and faith in an unseen Savior;
whence it is easy to conclude, that it was the Person of Christ they loved;)
for the Scriptures they had seen, the Gospel, the Church they had seen, (an
Office I confess they could not very well see) and yet they are praised for
loving him that was not seen. 3. We are commanded to Worship this Jesus, to
give Divine Honor to Him, John 5. 23. That all should Honor the Son, even as
they Honor the Father: And accordingly we read that the Disciples did Worship
Him, Luke 24. 52. Nay, the Command is given to the Angelical Nature, Heb. 1. 6.
Let all the Angels of God Worship Him: But it is a strange kind of Worship that
we give Darklings. One of the smartest Rebukes Christ gave the Samaritans, was,
that they Worshipped they knew not what, but We (says Christ) know what we
Worship, (...). We must not only know who He is, but what He is whom we
worship. 4. It Is our plain duty to acquaint our selves with God, that we may be
at peace, Job 22. 21. But Christ is true God, very God; witness the Athanasian,
and Nicene Symbols. 5. We are in particular commanded to believe in Him, John
14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. And it concerns us to know, by
what authority he Imposes his Commands upon us, what is his Varacity that we
may depend upon his Promises, and what is his Power to carry us through the
difficulties that ever attend conscientious Duties, to Eternal Life: I am the
more for acquaintance with Christ's Person, because it is so great a Venture to
trust the unknown. This Prudence all men will be sure to exercise in Common
affairs, much more where Souls and Eternal Life lie at stake; and such did the
Apostle Practice, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed. 6. The whole
Design of the Scripture leads us to an acquaintance with the Father, Son, and
blessed Spirit. Hence was the Apostle so Zealous, that the Colossians might
come unto all Riches of the full assurance of Understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God, (...) Even of the Father, and of Christ,
in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: Which are those
Provoking words that have so often Ruffled our Authors thoughts into Disorder
7. The whole of the Scripture is an unaccountable Riddle, without the Knowledge
of Jesus Christ: We are told there, how God has been atoned by the Sacrifice
of Oxen, Sheep; what a sweet smelling savor he has sented in the burned Flesh
of the Holocaust; which without Consideration of the Person of Christ, and
Reference to Him, is Irrational. To speak of the Death of Christ himself, as
reconciling God and man, is also wholly Unintelligible, without due regard to
Him as Mediator, what Office he bore, what Place he filled, in whose Stead he
stood, what that Covenant was, that between the Father and his Son was agreed
upon: For according to our common apprehension of Things, God should rather
have Destroyed the World for Crucifying his Son, than have been Reconciled and
Propitiated by his Death.

Now I know well our Author will Reply, that he (good Man) is no Enemy to
acquaintance with Christ's Person, provided always we do not VViredraw New
Doctrines from it, and Extract greater and deeper Mysteries thence, than are to
be found out in the Gospel. To which we Rejoyn: That it is not Christ's Person
that teaches us the Doctrine; but the Doctrine that Acquaints us with his
Person. We study not the Person of Christ, to find out G^spel Mysteries, but to
resolve them: Not to Discover the (...) of New Truths* but to Demonstrate to us
the (...) of the Old. But if* after all that can be said, our Author will be
Clamorous, we must be Content, and Satisfy our selves with this, that it is the
Nature of the Creature; and some things we know are so untractable by their
Constitution, that though you Bray them in a Mortar amongst Wheat with a
Pestle, yet their Crabbed, Froward, Awkward Tempers will not depart from them.

CHAP. III. Sect. 3. How unsafe it is to found Religion upon a Pretended
Acquaintance with Christ's Person.
I Foresee this Section will certainly prove Unanswerable; the Comfort is, it is
the only one that appears to be such in the whole Book. The Reader will judge
with me, that he must needs have a hard Task on it, (and perhaps equal to any of
Hercu^es his Labors,) that shall maintain it safe, To found Religion upon
Hypocrisy; and yet this must be his lot, who will defend, That it is safe to
build Religion upon a pretended Acquaintance with Christ's Person. Some report,
that that Goodly Beast, which for Honors sake we will call a Porcupine, keeps
always Two Avenues to her Cell, that let the Wind sit where it will, it shall
never blow full in the Door; and let her Enemies besiege her how they can, she
has a secret Sally-port, to creep out at. With the same wisdom has our Author
provided for his own Retreat in this Section: For if any shall be so foolhardy
as to assault him with an Argument, That it is our Duty to be acquainted with
Christ's Person, and for that end to search the Scriptures, which testify of
him, direct, and lead us to him; that so upon the Person of our Redeemer we may
build our Faith, as upon that Rock against which the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail; he can readily reply upon you, True; but it is only a Pretended
Acquaintance with Christ's Person, that I so zealo^sly declaim against. I
perceive, it is no small advantage in all Disputes, to have the Privilege to
state the Question to our own good liking; and he that has once got a Faculty
for it, is out of Gunshot; unless he be so incorrigible a Coxcomb as not to be
aware of his own Interest. That the Religion of Sinners is built upon a
Mediator, (as the Religion of the Innocent was upon the Being of a God;) That
this Mediator is the Lord Jesus Christ, who has by the Sacrifice of Himself
reconciled God to Man, and Man to God; has received some Light and Confirmation
from these Papers. That our Author has opposed any thing that may stagger the
Faith of Christians, tolerably exercised in the Word of Righteousness, I do not
see: but that it is easy to erect a Castle in the Air, and when we have so
done, to draw a formal siege about it, to batter, storm, raze, and utterly
demolish it, not to leave one stone upon another; this I grant he has satisfied
me in to satiety. For, having all along laid it for the groundwork of his most
accomplished Raillery, That some men found all their Religion upon the Person of
Christ, exclusive of the Scriptures, he is now resolved to destroy that
Hypothesis, to give it no Quarter, but even to Internecion plow up the
Foundation, and sow it with Salt, that After-ages may sing goodly Ballads of
his Achievement, Iam seges est ubi Troja fuit. Thus when the Creative Power of
the Imagination has given Life to a Chim^ra, the same Power, with the same ease
can stop it*s breath, annihilate it, and calcine it to it is primitive Nothing.
There are Two parts of his present Discourse; First, a false Supposition;
Secondly, a most unmercifull Confutation of that Supposition.

(1.) That which he supposes, (and is resolved to suppose in spite of Fate,)
is, that These men you wot of, Pretend to learn their Religion from an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person, (to which he often adds, and always
understands) without Gospel Revelation. A Supposition so idle, absurd, and
palpably false, that none can possibly believe it of those Persons upon whom
it is fixed; but those (and some such there are) that have accustomed themselves
to tell a Lie so often, till at length they begin to be pretty well persuaded
that they speak Truth: Happy men, that have found an Expedient, so far to
mitigate their Guilt, that what was before a formal Lie, becomes now only a
material Untruth! That Jesus Christ is God and Man, that he dyed for our Sins,
and rose again for our Justification, that he was set forth by God to be a
Propitiation for sin, to declare Gods Righteousness for the Pardon of it; that
he is our High Priest, our Advocate with the Father, with whatever else comes
within the compass of their Creed, they do solemnly profess to have learnt from
the Gospel only; and surther than as Scripture has been Liberal herein, they
protest in so many Letters and Syllables, they know nothing less or more; these
things are owing purely to Revelation; and they are ready, when or wheresoever
cited before their competent Judges, to give it under their Hands and Seals,
attested with all the Good men and True, of the Vicinage. The plain Truth is,
Their Principles lie in it, their Writings witness to it, and at other times
they are reproached by these very same unreasonable men, that they so
tenaciously, and pertinaciously adhere to the written Word, that they make it
the Rule of their Faith, the Rubric of their Worship, the Directory of their
Prayers, the Square of their Obedience, the Treasury of their Hopes, and the
grand Cynosure whereby they steer, or desire to steer the whole Course of their
Conversation to Eternal Life.

(2.) The Confutation of this Hypothesis (which is his second Travel) must
therefore needs be very easy. And to this purpose, he brings us in two pompous
Reasons mounted like St. George himself on horseback, armed Cap-a-pe, with his
Trusty Morglay by his side, his Lance ready couch*d; but all this while,
where is the Dragon? Or like a Champion of State, who upon the Coronation of
some Great Prince, presents himself in rigid Steel, throws down his Gantlet,
defies all Men, Women and Children, in defense of the Princes Title, when he
knows well enough beforehand, that none will Take it up. Now his Reasons are
drawn, the former from the uncertainty of such a Way, and the Second (which is
as strong as the other) from the uncertainty of such a Way. Reader do not
smile; It was no less a Piece than the Great Demos^henes, who being asked, What
were the Main Qualifications of a Good Orator, answered, The first is
Pronunciation, the second Pronunciation, and the third (forsooth) was
Pronunciation: But stay awhile, and you will see our Author come off well
enough.

[1] His first Argument is taken from the uncertainty of such a procedure; This
is at best to build Religion upon uncertain Conjectures; we agr^e to it; and
whatever I could be content to be at a loose end in, it should not be my
Religion: but yet for more sureness he lines his Argument with an under-reason,
(and had he faced it with Bays, it would have worn like Steel;) Had we seen
Christ in the flesh, and been witnesses of the many Miracles he wrought, of his
Death upon the Cross, and his Resurrection from the Dead, had he not acquainted
us with the End and Design of all this, we might have ghess'd, and ghess'd till
we had been weary, but it is odds we had never ghess'd right. Nay, yet further
to overwhelm all Opponents with Reason upon Reason, he adds; Because there is
no natural and necessary connection between the Person of Christ, and what he
did and suffered, and the Salvation of Mankind; for these things are available
for those Ends to which God designed them, the virtue and efficacy of them,
depends upon God's Institution and Appointment, and therefore can be known
only by Revelation. So that his Conclusion is this: Whoever would learn the
Religion of our Savior, must learn it from his Doctrine, and not from his
Person. To say the Truth, the greatest fault I find with all this is, that he
betrays the Truth he contends for; and does not understand, that his Clyent
had better have given him a Double Fee to say Nothing, than a single one to
Destroy the Cause he pretends to plead. I shall therefore only burden his
Margin with a few asterisks, and fairly dismiss him.

1. Let the Reader carefully enquire who those We are, that if they had seen
Christ in the flesh, his Miracles, Death and Resurrection, yet without He had
acquainted them with the End and Design of all this, might have ghess'd
themselves weary, e're they had ghess'd aright? And for the clearing of that,
let him know, that he speaks not here in his own Person, but in the Person of
others, who have not the knack, or if they had, are not fortified with a
Privilege to conclude Quidlibet ex Quolibet, or to demonstrate Godwin-Sands
from TenterdonSteeple; for as to Himself, you may be pleased to understand,
that he can infallibly prove all this and more, from as little as that comes
to, and less. Admire his Abilities, page 84. When We remember that Christ died
as a Sacrifice and Propitiation for Sin, this gives Us a great Demonstration of
Gods good will to us, how ready he is to pass by all our former sins, in that
he has appointed an Atonement for us, and given no less Person than his own
Son for our Ransom. The Reader cannot but observe, that he is there giving us
Another Scheme of Religion from an Acquaintance with Christ's Person, without
Scripture; and then when he comes to take the Matter in hand, he can from the
Person of Christ, demonstrate Gods good Will, his pardoning Mercy, and what
not? when others indeed venture upon Conclusions without Scripture, they give
some uncertain conjectures, get some feeble hints, some dim appearances and
smattering I^cklings of the Matter; but to Us it speaks nothing less than
Apodictical, and great Demonstration.

2. The Reader will observe, how perfectly he Overthrows the very design he
would exalt; for undertaking to prove, How unsafe it is, to found Religion upon
a Pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person; and assigning this for a Reason,
that this is to build Religion upon uncertain Conjectures, which we acknowledge
to be Cogent; When he comes to wind up his bottomes, he tells us, Though we had
seen Christ in the flesh, we could never have ghess'd at the End and Design of
it, had not he [Christ] Acquainted us with it. So that the short and long of
this great Demonstration, is this; That it is uncertain to found our Religion
upon Christ's Person, because we could have known nothing of Religion, unless
we had been Acquainted with him: He will lift himself off this flatt, by
replying, that he means nothing but Christ's acquainting us in and from his
Gospel; and we rejoyn, that that which will bring him off, will bring off his
Neighbors; for who ever affirmed any more?

3. He has herein at unawares stabbed his main Cause to the heart; For if there
be no necessary connection between the Person of Christ, his Death and
Suffering, and the Salvation of Mankind, but that (as he assures us) the End
and Design of Christ in dying, must be known only by Revelation; then it will
unavoidably follow, that Christ dyed for some greater Ends than to give us an
Example of Patience, and Submission to the Will of God, to Confirm what he
Preached; seeing we needed no Revelation to acquaint us, that a holy man is to
be imitated in all holy things, living or dying; and that he thought (at least)
his Doctrine was true, or else he would never have exposed, and laid down his
Life to justify it. Now it is plain, however our Author does now and then
humor us with Propitiation, Ransom, Atonement, Expiation, these are all
reducible by his Engine, to Christ's confirming what he preached; Page 320. All
that I can find in Scripture, concerning the Influence that the Sacrifice of
Christ's Death has upon our Acceptance with God, is, that to this we owe the
Covenant of Grace; which is Nothing else in his sense, but God's Promise of
saving us, if we obey his Laws.

4. He is slipped into the very same guilt with which he loads (though unjustly)
his Adversaries, viz. The Dividing the Person and Gospel of Christ. He was of a
good Mind once, p. 3. if he could have kept him in it: That the Person of Christ
is not at odds with his Gospel, and that Christ and his Religion were well
agreed; but he has quitted his Post, and dogmatically asserts: That whosoever
would understand the Religion of our Savior, must learn it from his Doctrine,
and not from his Person. And why not from his Person, in or by his Doctrine?
It Is a harder matter than our Author is aware, to hear a Sermon preached
without a Preacher; and almost as difficult to believe it, without good
warranty, that the Preacher has good Authority for what he delivers: All the
Authority of the Scripture, is resolved into the Authority of Christ, and
therefore it concerns us to fetch our Religion from Christ, by his Word.

5. I must needs observe to the Reader one piece of cleanly conveyance and
Legerdemain, which our Author is forced frequently at a standing pull to serve
himself of* to draw Dun out of the Mire; and that is, to show you a fair round
Tester, and then fob you off with a Counter; to show you a Horse in the
Premises, and pass to an Ass in the Conclusion. He has pasted, and posted it
up in the Title of this Section; How unsafe it is, to found Religion upon a
Pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person; but when he addresses himself to
prove his Thesis, he falls a persecuting the old thing of Learning Religion
from an Acquaintance with Christ's Person. He who has the famous Art of Arguing
from the essential Differences of things, can he find no accidental difference
at least betwixt Principium essendi and Cognoscendi? Betwixt the Foundation of
our Religion, and the Means of conveying the Knowledge thereof unto us? A thing
may be first in Knowledge, which is last in Being; there has been some such
Distinction in former Ages. There was a time when the old World learnt it is
Religion from Angels, (as our Author thinks) from Prophets, from the Government
of the World; will he say that the Religion of those days was founded upon any
thing short of God, upon Angels, Men, Sun, Moon, Stars? Say the same in our
Case; Jesus Christ has revealed what we are to know and believe of the Father,
Son, and Spirit, ( in his Word he has revealed it) yet our Faith, Hope, Love,
Obedience is founded on, and ultimately terminated in God alone by Christ: He
that believes a Promise, obeyes a Precept, does believe the veracity of Christ
in that Promise, and obey the Authority of Christ in that Precept: That Credit
we give to Letters Patents praemunited with the Royal Seal, is resolved
ultimately into the Kings (...); That Obedience we give to a Law, is founded
upon the Authority of the Legislator: We learn our Duty from a printed Act of
Parliament, from a Proclamation, but that which is the formal Reason of our
Duty, is the Relation wherein we stand to our Prince: So childish is our Author
in his Reasonings, he begins to make a Cauldron, and tinckers up a sorry
kettle; Amphora coepit institui, currente rota cur urceus exit? He undertook to
prove the unsafeness of the Foundation of our Religion, but he is glad to come
down a button-hole lower, and prove only the danger of learning of our
Religion from a pretended acquaintance with Christ's Person* without
Scripture-Revelation.

6. He tells us, there is not a Natural and Necessary connection between the
Person of Christ, his Death, etc. and the Salvation of Mankind. Very discreetly
worded: Not a natural, and necessary connection! What Is matter if it be not
Natural, if it be Necessary? Let it be owned Necessary any way that is fair and
honest, and let him choose whether it shall be necessary by Nature, or no. If
our Author understands himself here, it is very well; I am sure some others do
not: Does he mean therefore of all Mankind? that there is no natural connection
betwixt Christ's Person, his Death, etc. and the Salvation of all Mankind? I
presume, the man's either unborn, or long ago dead, that ever asserted that
there was any Connection either Natural or Necessary, between Christ's Death and
the Salvation of every individual Person that should be upon the Earth: Does he
mean any one of all Mankind? I then do affirm, and will abide by it, that upon
supposition the Son of God was incarnate, took our Nature upon him, and in that
Nature dyed a cursed Death, there is a Necessary connection betwixt the Death of
the Son of God, and the Salvation of some, at least, of Mankind: It Is very
unconceivable, that Christ should submit to such a Dispensation, and have no
fruit of his Labor. But to put him out of fear, that he may sleep at hearts
ease, we do not fancy any natural connection of these things; that Bond that
ties them together, is the compact betwixt the Father and the Son, that upon
his Souls being made an Offering for Sin, he should see his seed, and the
pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10. The Total is
this, The Concurrence of the Sons Will, with the Fathers good Pleasure, gave
the Death of Christ a necessary Connection with the Salvation of some, at least,
of Mankind. But to talk at this loose Rambling rate is tedious.

All this while, you see but very little into our Authors Design: For as your
great Politicians have their Causae justificae, which they Hang out to view,
but the Causae suasoriae lie deep, and are not to be Exposed to, and Profaned
by common Eyes* Thus however our Author makes a Flourish, and Vapor, about the
Connection of Necessary causes and Necessary effects, as if we see Fire, we know
it burns something; and if we see Smoke, we may safely conclude there is some
Fire: Which poor Reynards Experiment would have Confuted. Notwithstanding I say
all this Ostentation of Mysterious Philosophy, there was something lay nearer
his heart, than this Bombaste, and how to bring it upon the Stage handsomely,
required good Deliberation. In plain Terms, it was nothing but to state a
Parallel betwixt the Rational, and your Systematical Divine, and to Demonstrate
the excellency of himself and those of his exalted Intellectuals, above those
low Spirited, Phlegmatic, Tigurine Doctors, who Trade all in gross Bodies, and
unweildy Systems of Divinity: For these latter, they (Dullmen) shape all
Religion, according to their Phancies and Humors, and stuff it with an
infinite Number of Orthodox Propositions, (such as the 39* Articles.) But now
for your Rational Men: They Argue the Nature of God, his Works and Providence,
from the Nature of Mankind. and those eternal Notions of Good and Evil, from
the Essential differences of Things, from plain Principles, which have an
Immutable and unchangeable Nature, and so can bear the weight and stress, of a
just Consequence: Which singular Happiness may sooner be Envyed than Mistated.
Indeed it would do any man good at Heart, to hear with what Nerves and Sinews
of Brawny Reason, they will Argue; how they Drive all before them; how they
will Trounce a poor amazed Auditor into As. and Con. and force the most
Obstinate herds of Contumacious Animals, into good Behiavour by Duress. In a
word, all their Discourses are Muscle, and Cartilage: And in one of these you
shall have the Marrow* and Pith, the Quintessence and Elixir of your Profound,
Irrefragable, Subtle, Angelical, Seraphical Doctors: But I Chide my self for
comparing them to the Schoolmen, who are Systematical Theologues. Let the
Reader content himself with a short Specimen of their Abilities. And, 1. They
argue from the Nature of God: How Facile is he to Pardon sin, all sin without
any Compensation, or Satisfaction made to his Justice: For seeing Justice is
but a secondary Attribute, a mere Instrument or Tool of Government; He may
spare or punish as he sees Reason for it without being unjust in either: For
though the Scripture has told us, Josh* 24. 19. That God is a jealous God, who
will not forgive Transgression, nor sin; and that He is of purer Eyes than to
behold Evil, and cannot look upon Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. And also that the wages
of sin is Death, which is the Religion of the Scripture, yet now one of these
familiar acquaintance of Gods Nature, can inform you better; that there was
there was no necessity of Christ's Death to declare the Righteousness of God,
that he might be Just, but that as he Pardoned the Old World for Four Thousand
Years together, who knew nothing of Christ; (...) he might have done for one
poor Sixteen Hundred Years more, and as much longer as it shall continue. That
Caution which he Hints to others, page 76. he has as much need of himself; That
we be wary in drawing conclusions from Gods Nature, since it is so seldom we
have any good Assurance, those Inferences are Genuine. Thus when he argues,
page 43, from Gods Long-suffering and Patience toward the World, and the
various Methods God uses to reclaim them, that therefore he is as ready to
Pardon sinners, as a kind Father is to receive a penitent Prodigal. I would
have him Cautious lest he should overrun the Constable, for God stands not
related to sinners, in the state of lapsed Nature, as a Father, but as an
Enemy; and our Sonship and Adoption, comes in by Jesus Christ, and this may
perhaps a little disturb the Connection of his Antecedents and Consequents: And
this for distinction-sake, may be called his New Religion of Gods Nature, from
whence we learn those greater and deeper Mysteries whereof the Scripture is so
silent. And then, 2. They argue with mavelous Success from the Works and
Providence of God. As how? page 44. Those Natural Notions the Heathens had of
God, and the Discoveries God made of Himself in the Works of Creation and
Providence, did assure them that God is very Good, and that it is not possible
to understand what Goodness is without Pardoning-Grace. For you may be sure
they cloud not see the Sun shine, but presently they must conclude that the
Light of Gods Countenance would shine upon them also; nor have a shower of
Rain, but it did Demonstrate that God would wash away their sins; nor forbear
them a day, but He would acquit them for ever. But then, 3. From the Nature of
Mankind, they Reason with incomparable Judgment: As for Instance, That because
Man was Created upright, therefore he is so still; how Vegete, Sprightly, and
active man's Nature is, that without the Subsidiary assistance of effectual
Grace, working both to will and to do, it can fulfill all Gods Commandments; and
that to talk of our own Impotency to Spiritual performances, is to suppose us
to be acted like Machines by an External force, and the irresistible Grace and
Spirit of God. And further, 4. They make admirable work from the eternal
Notions of Good and Evil: That God may punish sin if he pleases, and if he sees
good he may let it alone; sin it seems, is one of those Adiaphorous Trifles,
that it needs not the Blood of Christ to satisfy for it; for our own
repentance, without any respect to the Death of Christ, will stop that Gap:
Wherein, I confess, I as little admire his Divinity, as he does other men's
Philosophy. But, 5. They argue from the Essential differences of Things, and
what rare Feats they can do from hence is Incredible: For whereas other poor
Sneaks only deal with the Rind and Bark of Beings, as they are clothed with
Circumstances, and crusted over with Accidents; these Giants of Reason will
strip your. Nature stark naked, and show her for a Sight at Bartholomew-Fair,
in her first callous Principles. Thus our Author tells us, page 94. That Christ
came not to distract us with the Inexorableness of Gods Justice; and yet p. 95.
He assures us that God is an Irreconcilable Enemy to all sin: For he could pry
out an Essential difference between the Inexorableness of his Justice, and his
Irreconcileableness to sin. And page 82. He can show us the difference between
being astonished, and surprised with wonder; which though any other might have
stumbled on: Yet to show you just to a Hairs breadth where Wonder ends, and
Astonishment begins, this was reserved for the Acumen of a Rational Divine. It
were tedious, though useful, no doubt, to Instance with what Dexterity they
Wire* draw Discoveries out of Immutable, and Unchangeable Natures; how they
call Fire out of Smoke, but never steams out of Light: At what Killing undoing
Rates they Syllogize, how they run their Enemies all on Heaps, and perplex
their Discourses all into Snicksnarles, but every one would Live as long as he
can. This (though the better half) is but one part of that Design which he is
driving on Incognito: The other is, to Besmear a sort of pitiful Fellows he
has often, but never with respect, mentioned. For it is a very great Question
whether he be a greater admirer of his own Excellencies, than a dispiser of
other Men's Imperfections: But what is their Crime? Why they Cry down Reason for
such a Profane and Carnal thing, as must not presume to Intemeddle in Holy
Matters. I have met with some who decry Carnal Reason, but never with one that
affirmed Reason was Carnal: I know none that are very ambitious to put on
Brute, and put off Man; and for those who are so Pelted with empty clamor, I
have ever found them as much in love with, and as great Improvers of Reason as
their Neighbors, only their unhappiness is, they have not so vast a Stock to
set up with, and sometimes may be out of Sorts: However they are not ashamed to
own, or disown that Thing, which many vend for reason, as it behaves it self,
and for what I understand in this Matter, I shall freely confess where I had
it, viz. From the Ninth Article of the Church of England, of Original or
Birth-sin. This Infection of Nature does remain, yea, in them that are
Regenerated, whereby the Lust of the Flesh called in Greek, (...), which some
do Expound the Wisdom, some the Sensuality, some the Desire of the Flesh, is
not subject to the Law of God. I have met also with others, who will not
scruple to own, 1. That Reason is the sole and proper Judge within her own
Jurisdiction, and that as we must give unto Faith the things that are Faiths,
so must we yield to Reason the things that are Reasons; let her move within her
own Sphere, and they will not Iostle her, nor Enterfere with her Motions. 2.
They are earnest that the best Reason that can be got for Love or Money, be
employed in Spinning conclusions out of those Premises which are of pure
revelation, though for scanning the Truth of some propositions may be, she is
not so good at it. 3. They say, that our Service and Worship of God ought to be
(...), a reasonable Service; that in all our Worship of God, our Actions be
under the Conduct of Reason. So Idle is our Authors reproach, that they will
not allow Reason to Intermeddle in Holy Matters: Can she not meddle, but she
must be Lady Paramount? Can she not look into the Temple, but she must peep
into the Holy of Holies? 4. They say they never affirmed, Hot nor Cold, that
Reason was Carnal, but that there is some Carnal Reason: That [ Carnal] is not
Epitheton generis, as if all Reason were Carnal; but only Specie^, that there
is such a thing as Carnal Reason; and they bring the Church of England for
their Voucher. On the other side they do affirm, 1. That the Reasonings of Men
as they are found in all the Sons of Adam are Vitiated and Corrupted; they
cannot see how Reason escaped better in the common Shipwreck, than the other
powers of the Soul. 2. Hence they put a difference betwixt Reason in the
abstract, as it is in it self, and as it is found Immerst in Matter, and
Drencht in Hyle; betwixt Reason as it ran clear at first, and as it now tastes
of the Cask: And when the Apostle Paul (who passes nowadays for an Obscure
writer) could give us the Hint of this Difference, Romans 1. 21. (...): They
became vain in their own Reasonings or Argumentations, and their fool-heart was
darkened. Methinks they that Trade in the Essential differences of things,
should not have over-lookt it; but Bernardus Non vidit omnia. 3. Therefore
where the Infallible Word of God has clearly revealed any Doctrine, and
propounded it to their Belief, they look upon it as their business to Believe,
not Dispute; as owning the Reason of the Scripture, to be the Supreme and
Sovereign reason, which is nothing but the Authority of an Infallible Revealer:
When therefore they cannot Grasp how some things should be, with Consistence to
their apprehensions, they trouble not themselves much, but are satisfied that
Thus they are. 4. That there are some Doctrines in the Scripture fairly laid
down to be Faith, which yet are above the most Exalted reason to give an
account of any other way, than by Faith's Old answer to all New Objections: The
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it. 5. These men are not aminded that those great
Masters of Wit, should have their reason to be the common standard and Assize
of the Reason of all Men, unless they can bring better Evidence that they are
Clerks of the Market, to seal all measures of Truth and Error, Good and Evil;
then their new Lights hang out in Dark-Lanthorns. If it come once to this, that
God must not be God, unless he please their Humors: If Scriptures must pass
the Ordeal of their reasons before it be Canonical, we humbly desire to be
Excused, if we rather choose to Walk alone in the Ways of Truth, than for
companiessake (as well as we love them) to be Seduced into their Misprisions.

This is the grand Crime of these men, there are others not to be despised. As
that they argue from Fancies and Imaginations, from some pretty Allusions,
Similitudes, and Allegories, which have no certain shape: Yet I am well
assured, that no man was ever more firmly bounden, and indebted to an Allegory,
than our Author, unless I saw him clapped up for one upon Execution in the
King's Bench. page 6. He did but meet with the word Salem upon the Road, and he
presently spies the New Jerusalem coming down from Heaven, in it: page 161. He
had heard, that Eve was taken out of Adams side, and he sets his Allegorical
Machine awork, and hales, [the Church taken out of Christ's crucified Body] Out
on it. Though to Qualify the Matter, he says it was but with a Quasi, as it
were, or if he might so say; but by and by, he grows more flesht with Success,
and Peremptorily concludes: That the Church is taken out of the crucified Body
of Christ, which (says he) in the Mystical sense, answers to the Woman's being
taken out of the Man; and from this pretty Allusion, grounds his Interpretation
of Ephesians. 5. 30. 1 Col. 21. 22. Although the state of Innocence had no proper
instituted Types; however the passages of Gods Providence therein may be
accommodated by the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures Infallibly inspired, to
Illustrate Evangelical Verities. But let a taste of these things stay the
Readers Stomach a while, and if his Mouth waters at such Theology, he shall
have his Belly full, even to Surfeit of such Luscious Allegories in due time.
Thus much to his first Argument, taken from the uncertainty of this way of
arguing.

(2.) His second Reason follows, drawn also from the uncertainty of this way of
arguing. For thus his Argument runs: This way of reasoning will serve any man's
turn: Which is nothing but the uncertainty of it, and had not our Author (who
always argues as occasion serves from the Essential differences of things) told
us it was another reason, it might have Militated under the colors of the
former: But he puts in a Caveat against all the World but himself and his
Brethren. For though it will serve any man's turn, yet you must always Interpret
it with this restriction, who have any Quickness and Vigor of Fancy, which
clearly cuts out all the rest of Mankind, as shall appear from the Fag end of
this Section.

What remains of this Discourse, is laid out upon the Equipping of another
Scheme of Religion, from an acquaintance with Christ's Person: Where in the
Quickness and Vigor of his Fancy, do Triumph. The World shall now see (I that
they shall) what other-guise work our Author can make on it, when he comes to
the Trimming of this Matter, than those clumzy Fellows ever could, who have
attempted that way; and shall see that Scanderbags Sword and Arm together, can
work Wonders. It Is ordinary to find the Physicians Trencher laden with that
Meat, which he Prohibits his Patient upon pain of Death. If any else had
presumed to have fingered this Theme, he had got a rap oth' Knuckles, and yet
here we find our Author up to the Elbows in it. Great Spirits know how to give
Laws to others, and yet themselves to Live above them. I have openly owned it,
that this Section is unanswerable, and that my Reader may not Censure me for a
Dictator; I am Obliged to give him an Account of the Impregnableness of it. The
Scheme which he here presents us withal, is not supposed to be his own
Judgment, but merely an Imitation of other Men's way, though the Copy outdoe the
Original: If therefore any one shall Essay to Answer it, he comes over you: I
did but play the Fool, because I supposed others had done so, and I was willing
to let you see, I could do it as neatly as another. To meddle therefore with
the substrate Matter, and main Doctrine thereof, would be lost Labor; to
Examine whether it be stufft with Orthodox, or Heterodox propositions, shall be
all one to me; but one thing (I confess) I am tempted to search into (because
he Boasts so highly of his Skill in it; how easy it is to present us with many
more Schemes, with fair Colors, Exact and regular Proportions, and artificial
Connexions!) viz. Whether there be that regular proportion betwixt his
Confidence and his Performance; whether he has put such fair Colors upon
things, but that the Morphew of the skin shines through the Ceruss; whether his
Matters be Linckt together with such artificial connexions? Or whether the Sun
in the Firmament, and as the Battoon in the Chimney co^ner do not as well shake
hands; that is, whether the Windmill be not alive for all Don Quixot?

(1.) He tells us, Since we see Christ come in the Nature and Likeness of a
Man, nothing dreadful in his Countenance, having all the sweetness of
Innocence, his Miracles Great and Glorious, but not Frightful and Astonishing;
his Almighty Power displayed in Methods of Love and Kindness, healing the Sick,
dispossessing Devils, etc. From all this we may safely Conclude, He came upon
an Embassy of Peace, to assure the World of Gods good Will to them, and to
Reconcile the Differences betwixt God and Man. Now for my own part, my Eyes are
not a whit Dazzled with the fairness of his colors, nor my Thoughts much
ravished with the exactness of the Symmetry of this Piece. For, 1. It Is very
Disproportionable to his main assertion: How unsafe and dangerous it is, to
found Religion upon an acquaintance with Christ's Person: Whereas in this
Period, he assures us, We may safely conclude thence, that Christ was an
Ambassador of Peace, that he came to reconcile the Differences betwixt God and
Man. Which (I promise you) makes a shrewd Hole in Religion. 2. It bears no
better proportion to its self; for I hope the Reader has not forgotten how he
is Erecting a Scheme of Religion from an acquaintance with Christ's Person, not
taking in Gospel Revelation: Now here he supposes Christ to have been the
Eternal Son of God, leaving his Fathers Throne, coming into the World; which he
could never have concluded from his Person; had he seen him in the flesh,
unless the Mystery of it had been revealed to him from above, Math. 16. 16, 17.
Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God: Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona, for
flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.
3. He pretends to gather Christ's design in coming into the World, from his
Person, Miracles, Behavior, and sweet demeano^ toward men; yet here we want
Proportion, if we may believe himself, page 76. Had we seen Christ in the
flesh, and been witnesses of the many Miracles he wrought, of his Death upon
the Cross, and his Resurrection from the dead, had he not acquainted us with
the End and Design of all this, we might have ghess'd our selves weary, and
never have hit upon the right. But Now what a happy change is here? we may
safely Conclude now, who could not sorrily Guess before: And here is a long
stride made from one of the Poles of Impossibility, to the other of Certainty
and Necessity.

(2.) And when we consider, that this Heavenly Ambassador and Mediator is no
less than the Eternal Son of God, by whom the worlds were made, we may
reasonably conclude, that he came upon no less Design than of universal
Goodness; for he can have no temptation to partiality, as being equally
concerned in the Happiness of all men; And we cannot imagine, why he should lay
a narrower Design of Love in the Redemption, than in the Creation of Mankind,
etc. Here are proportions indeed, but whether justifiable by the Rules of
Vitruvius, or the Propositions of Euclide, is more dubious: The proportion
fancied here is, betwixt Christ's coming, his manner of coming, and universal
Redemption. Now to justify the regularity of his Superstructure upon its
Foundation, he offers us several things. As, 1. That Christ came upon a design
of Universal Goodness: Well, but it must be equal Goodness to do his Business.
2. He says, Christ can have no temptation to Partiality: True, but differing
Kindnesses where none are due, may consist very well with Impartiality: That he
showed Kindness to any, was more than he owed them, that he vouchsafed more to
some than others, was no wrong to the rest. They who have the benefit, must
ascribe all to his Grace; they who are left in the same plight their own sins
had brought them into, have no cause to complain. 3. He goes a step higher in
his Proportions: Christ was equally concerned in the Happiness of all men. And
this he gathers reasonably from the Behavior of Christ toward the World. But
I doubt he has taken false measures of Christ's concernment for men's Happiness:
The best way, I should think, would be to view how he carried it toward them
with whom he did converse; and there are some shrewd suspicions, that he was
not so equally concerned, for we read Ioh. 17. 9 that there were some he prayed
for, and others for whom he prayed not; some to whom he immediately dispatched
his saving Gospel, others to whom he at present suspended that Favor, Matthew.
10. 5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the
Samaritans enter ye not, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel: Nay in Fact it is clear, (...) not his Gospel to all places of the
habitable World equally, to some sooner, to others later: with some it
continued longer, with other Nations less while; to some it was preached in
more purity, clearness and power, to others with less: And if he sent it not at
the same minute to every individual Person, it will not argue an equal
Concernment in the Salvation of all men; for it is possible thousands might, and
certain thousands, and ten thousands dyed in Ignorance, or (as our Author
expresses it, page 30.) under Gods ineffectual Ways, before the Gospel came
unto them: and if this Gospel stayed a day longer in one Nation than another,
still here is no equal concernment for the Salvation of all; for what becomes
then of those poor Wretches, who without any fault of theirs (let me borrow an
Expression from our Author) were left out of Gospel times, because their
Fathers had eaten sour Grapes, and now the childrens teeth are set on edge. 4.
But he assigns a Reason of all this, wherein we hope to find more exact
Proportions: We cannot imagine why he should lay a Narrower design of Love in
the Redemption, than in the Creation of Mankind. That when in the first
Creation he designed all men for Happiness, in this New and Second Creation he
should design only the Happiness of some few, which is to make him less good
in Redeeming than in Creating Mankind. The sum of it is thus much: Christ
Redeemed all that he Created; but he Created all men, therefore he Redeemed all
men: And he cannot Imagine how it should be otherwise. But, 1. Leave out that
one word [Mankind,] and let the Proposition reach all rational and intellectual
Creatures, made capable of Everlasting Happiness, and then let him try how his
Proportions will fadge: We cannot Imagine how Creating Love, and Redeeming Love
should be of different Latitudes; why in the first Creation he should design
the Happiness of all his Creatures capable thereof, and yet in the Second and
New Creation, leave out some, and take others into his favor. The Creating
Love of Christ was extended to Angels, he made them glorious Spirits, and had
Christ been tempted to Partiality, was he less concerned for their Happiness,
than that of poor men? Did he lay a Narrower design of Love in Redeeming his
capable Creatures, than in their Creation? Or why in the first and Old Creation
did he design Angels for Happiness, and yet in the Second and New Creation
design the Happiness only of Mankind? One Angel might have done Christ more
Service, brought him more glory, than a thousand such wretched Worms as Man:
And yet not one Angel recovered, not one fallen Spirit raised, redeemed, and
brought back to its Original Happiness. 2. What he therefore adds, is most
Vain, that this would make him less good in Redeeming than in Creating, though
Creation cost him no more than the Exercise of his Power, but Redemption the
Expense of his Blood. For, 1. One Soul redeemed argues more Love than many
created, which is proved by that very Reason which our Author has brought to
overthrow it; because, to Redeem one Soul, cost more than to create many. But,
2. What warrant he has to measure betwixt Redeeming Love, and Creating Love, I
cannot tell; This I know, they are both beyond our reach; yet I think, that the
Blood of Christ as a Man, separated from that consideration of it as
satisfactory to Gods Justice, cannot be said to be of more worth or dignity
than the Creating Power of God. But to conclude, God made Man righteous, there
was his Creating Love; he qualified him thus made, for the Service and
Enjoyment of his Maker; If now he shall voluntarily loose his fitness, and
leave his relation to God, and thereby make himself liable to the Curse,
whenever this Creator shall please to undertake a Recovery, I suppose he may
(without impeachment of Partiality) do with his own Grace what he pleases, and
bestow it where he pleases, and not fear to be called to Account by every
Malapert Caviller: And Now he clenches the Nayl with a sure stroke. No sure,
his Goodness did not become less infinite and boundless, when he became Man.
This is indeed somewhat Amazing, for how to find out the Proportion, the exact
and regular proportion betwixt a greater and lesser Infinite, may puzzle our
brains as much as to find out the just proportion betwixt finite and infinite;
which when it shall be made out, will doubtless equal the invention of that
Prosipotion in Euclide which deserved a Hecatombe. In page 208. he tells us,
Though God be rich in Mercy, yet he never told us that he was bottomless and
boundless. And if God be not a God of bottomless and boundless Mercy, it will
not bear a regular proportion to enquire, Whether Christ's Goodness became less
Infinite and boundless than it was before.

(3.) He considers, The Holiness and Innocence of Christ's Life, that he was a
great Example of unaffected Piety toward God, etc. Hence does he reasonably
conclude, that he came to restore the Practice of Piety, etc. which had been
banished out of the world by the hypocritical pretenses of a more Refined
Sanctity, in washing of Hands and Dishes, in tything Mint and Cummin, ( as he
calls it.) Now this is to be feared, is not very regular and exa^; for some
would conclude, as if Christ came to destroy the Ius Divinum of Tithes; but we
are to understand, that the Venom and Villainy of this Hypocrisy did not lie
in Tything Eggs, or Pigs, Chickens, Ducks, or Goslings, Apples, Pears, or
Plumbs, much less those fatter Praedial Revenues of the Church; but only in
those uncanonical things, Mint, Annise, Cummine; and bate but those two or
three, and Tithes are Sacred out of all things, from the Cedar in Lebanon to
the Hyssop upon the Wall.

(4.) Our Savior by his Example as well as Laws, taught us Another Lesson,
that as we lost our Happiness at first by Sin, so the way to regain the Favor
of God, and an Immortal Life, is by the practice of a Sincere and Universal
Righteousness. I must freely confess, I would never desire any man to be more
ridiculous whilst I live, than our Author in these few words: If he has forgot
his design, or lost himself in a Wood, yet does he presume the Reader also has
his wits gone after him a Wool-gathering: He has pretended over and over* that
he would give us Another Scheme of Religion from acquaintance with Christ's
Person, more beautiful for Color, more exact for Proportion than what all
other men have been able to show, and all this without Gospel-Revelation; And
yet here contrary to all the Laws of Proportion, he takes in Christ's Laws, from
which we must learn this other Lesson; but though his Laws came in by an
Anomaly, surely his Example is Regular; and that teaches us* that The way to
regain Gods Favor, is by the practice of a sincere and universal
Righteousness. Now if Christ has taught us this by his Example; we must suppose
that He had once lost God^ Favor, but happily regained it by this Expedient of
a sincere and universal Righteousness: Whether this be a Truth or no in it
self, is out of our Charter to examine; for we are obliged only to consider
the Regularity of his Proportions, and the self-consistency of his Notions.

(5.) When We remember that Christ died as a Sacrifice, and Propitiation for
sin, this gives Us a great demonstration of Gods good will to us, how ready he
is to pardon former sins, in that he has appointed an Atonement for us, and
given no less a Person than his own Son for our Ransom. It Is very strange,
that none else may be allowed to gather all this from the Revelation of the
Gospel; and yet our Author, with his Scrues of Artificial Connexions and
Regular Proportions, can draw it, every Letter and Syllable, from an
Acquaintance with Christ's Person: But by what secret ways he became Master of
this Mystery, is to me a greater mystery: How the Person of Christ, the Death
of Christ, should teach us the proper Ends and Designs of his Death, unless he
had Acquainted us with them, I am yet to seek, and so was our Author himself
within these few leaves, page 78. The Incarnation, and Life, and Death, and
Resurrection of Christ, were available to those Ends for which God designed
them, but the Virtue and Efficacy of them does depend upon Gods Institution and
Appointment, and therefore can be known only by Revelation.

(6.) He assures us, That the Death of Christ assures him of the Desert of Sin,
and what it is. And I a^ heartily glad to hear the News, and wish it had been
attended with Proof from Scripture, which is pregnant in it, and not shuffled
off with that which is next door to none. Surely then there was somewhat in the
Death of Christ which Answered the Demerit of it, which was, Gods Anger and
Displeasure against it; or it will be impossible from Christ's Death to learn
Sins Demerit, without a Scripture-Comment upon the Text of his Cross and
Sufferings.

(7.) Christ's Death seals the irrevocable Decree of Reprobation. That Is as
terrible News as the other was comfortable; but I fear he must be beholden to
the Gospel for his Intelligence, or he will never learn it from a bare
acquaintance with Christ's Person. And now we may fairly presume there is such a
Decree, so irrevocable* so immutable, else how does the Death of Christ seal
it? It Is supposed ever, that the Decree is made, e*re it be sealed; but the
vigor and quickness of our Authors Fancy is incredible; and so at length,
those poor wretches whose hard Fortune it was (in our Authors phrase) to be
left out of the Roll of Election, without any fault of theirs, are in the same
Predicament they were in before.

Our Author has reserved one thing for the shutting up of this Section, which
being a matter of very great importance, and yet so easy and accountable, we
may not doubt but he has handled it with much Exactness: It is the True Method
of a Sinners Recovery by Christ. From hence (says he) it is easy to understand
what is the True Method of a Sinners Recovery by Christ. And there are two
parts of his Undertaking. 1. The Erecting of his own regular and exact Method.
2. The demolishing the confused Method of others.

And, ( First,) For his own Method, (for so he is pleased to Nickname it, for
diverse good and valuable Considerations him thereunto especially moving,) it is
no more but this: When we are so affected with all the powerful Arguments to a
New Life, which are contained in his [Christs] Incarnation, and Life, and
Doctrine, and Example, and Miracles, and Death, and Resurrection, and Ascension
into Heaven, and his Intercession for us, as to be sensible of the Shame and
Folly of Sin, and to be reconciled to the Love and Practice of true Piety and
Holiness; Then -- What then? O then, we partake in the Merits of His Sacrifice,
and find the benefit of his Intercession, and have A Title to all the Blessings
and Promises of the Gospel. This is the True Method of a Sinners Recovery: But
still I do not see the Regular Proportion of it to his Design; for, as has
been often observed, he pretends to give us a Scheme of Religion from the Person
of Christ, never meddling with his Doctrine; and yet now when he thinks it so
easy to give us from thence, a Method of a Sinners Recovery, he is glad to be
beholden to the Doctrine of Christ; for he says, When we are so affected with
all the Arguments to a New Life, which are contained in Christ's Incarnation,
and Life, and Doctrine, etc. It seems there are not Arguments enough in his
Person, but we must run to his Doctrine for a Recruit, and what is become then
of his specious Promise, that he would out-throw all that ever tried before
him, in making Schemes of Religion from Acquaintance with his Person: The
veriest Bungler on Earth could but have contradicted himself; but I wish that
were the worst on^t. For, 1. Some cannot see any Method at all in it. But to be
recovered is the Method of being Recovered; to be converted, is the way to be
converted; and that is a very sure way, I promise you; for, Omne quod est in
quantum est, Necesse est esse: But this one of his peculiar Excellencies: p.
18. The way to be perfect, is to live as Christ lived; or which is all one, The
way to be perfect, is to be perfect: If any one can make any better of this, he
shall have my free leave: When we are so affected with all the powerful
Arguments contained in Christ's Incarnation, etc. as to be sensible of the shame
and folly of sin, and to be reconciled to the love and practice of true Piety,
and Holiness; Then -- The English of which is this: When we are once holy, then
we are holy. And this is his New way or Method of a Sinners Recovery by Christ.
But, 2. We have been made to believe hitherto, That Method, is a convenient
sorting and marshalling of Matters which relate each to other, into such an
Order, as may tend best to the reaching the End in practical Disciplines, and
making out the Truth in Theories: But herein our Author is wretchedly out of
the way: For first he tells us, we must be so affected with all the powerful
Arguments contained in Christ's Intercession, etc. and then we partake in the
Merits of his Sacrifice, and find the Benefit of his Intercession for us. That
is, we must set the Cart before the Horses, which is an excellent Method;
Seeing we cannot partake of the Fruit of Christ's Intercession, before we
partake of the Fruits of his Sacrifice; for it is unquestionable, that the
Intercession of Christ is available by virtue of, and operates by his
Sacrifice. 3. His Method is very lame upon this Account, that he tells us we
must be affected with all the powerful Arguments contained in Christ's
Incarnation, etc. and yet never tells us, how these Arguments become effectual
to affect us, which is a main thing in this Method. A Method he supposes, and
yet never informs us, whether it be only a way that God prescribes us to
recover our selves by, using the best of our own Natural strength, or whether
it be Gods Way and Method which he proceeds in, for the effectual recovery of a
Sinner to himself. 4. Here Is a Method pretended, how a Sinner is recovered, and
yet no Consideration had, what part and share the Holy Spirit bears in it,
which must needs be marvellously ridiculous to him that considers, John 3. 5,
6. Except a man be born again, of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Our Savior had said, v. 3. Except a man be born again,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God; but not contenting himself to have showed,
how absolutely necessary Regeneration is to Salvation; v. 5. he shows the
Spirits concernment in that work, and that all other Endeavors after
Conversion without his powerful Operation, will amount to no more than flesh;
The streams will not rise higher than the Spring. V. 6. That which is born of
the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit: But yet, 5.
It Is equally absurd to speak of a Sinners Recovery, and never show from what he
is recovered: As if he should promise to Open to us the Nature of Motion, and
yet never show us from whence the Motion takes its rise, nor whither it tends:
Sinners are here talked of, to be recovered, but whether there be a state of
corrupt and sinful Nature, a state of Enmity against God, a state of blindness
and darkness of Mind, from which this Recovery must move; we are not honored
with half a word. 6. Here Is a recovery to Acts of Obedience, love, and practice
of Piety, but nothing of a New Heart, a New Nature, which the Scripture makes
the Vital Principle of all New Obedience: Here we are told a little of the
Fruit the Tree brings forth, but nothing how the Tree was made good, that it
might bring forth good Fruit. 7. He assigns a sensibleness of the Shame and
Folly of Sin, as the Means to get a Title to the Promises of the Gospel, and
yet some of those Promises contain an Engagement of God to give that New heart,
new spirit, which he makes the Condition of obtaining a Title to the Promises.
Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will take away the heart of Stone out of your flesh, and I will
give you a heart of Flesh. I am persuaded that if we should all study seven
years to be Impertinent and Ridiculous, there are not many that could reach, or
equallize our Authors Seize.

( Secondly,) The other part of his Task, wherein he is always most Admirable,
is, To pluck down those Methods which others have, or are supposed to have
Built. And it is certainly an easier province to find faults, than to amend
them. Now first, he enlightens us with this Doctrine: That the design of
Christ's coming into the World, was not to distract men's minds with the Terrors
of the Law, and the Inexorable Justice of God, not to bring us under a Legal
Despensation of Fear and Bondage: Now all the Color of this trifling Sophistry
lies in two things. 1. In putting in the word [Distract] to make his Negative
seem Tenable: For though Christ came to Humble, to Abase, to Awaken the guilty
Consciences of sinners, yet it would be hard to say, he came to fright men out
of their Wits, to prepare men for Bedlam, and the slipping in such an useful
word, will make a Negative justifiable upon any of the Designs of Christ: But
can sinners be more Mad than they are, who go on securely in a state of
Impenitency, and Rebellion against God? No sure: That which some call
distracting of sinners, is but really a step toward the helping of them to
their Wits. 2. The Design of Christ's coming into the World is either
Subordinate, which relates still to some further end and design of Christ, or
Ultimate to which all others do submit, and give deference. Now it is true, To
awaken guilty Consciences with the Terrors of Gods Justice, to bring the Soul
into a spirit of Bondage, were not that which Christ did aim at as his great
End, but that he aimed at these things also in the way to his farthest End:
That is, he used the Law to rowse the sleepy sinner to see his danger, and
provide for his safety: He wounded men that they might seek after healing; and
laid load upon their guilty minds, that they might be content to take his Yoke
upon them. And that this is so: 1. We have an Argument, which is, Instar
omnium, a Thousand Reasons by it self: That is what our Author says; That we
must be affected with all the Arguments of Christ's Incarnation, etc. so as to
be sensible of the shame and folly of our sins. Now how a man should be ashamed
of sin, till he sees its vileness and baseness; and how he should see its
vileness and filthiness, till its brought to the Test of Gods Holy Law, which
is the Rule of righteousness, the Measure of Good and Evil; is past my
Conjecture. Nay further, that shame which fills a Soul, does not merely arise
from a sense of the Souls vileness; but as compared with Gods Holiness, who is
a God so Pure, so Holy, etc. that the Soul may well be ashamed, and filled with
Confusion of face, to appear before him. Now shame upon the account of the
filthiness; and dread upon the account of the guilt of sin, are very near
Neighbors: Shame expresses the Souls sense of its own unworthiness to appear
before God, upon the score of its baseness and deformity; and Fear expresses
but the sense of Gods Authority, which he has Impressed, and Stamped upon his
Holy Law, with the Souls reflection upon it self, that it has violated that
Law, and thereby become liable to that Penalty which his own guilt has bound
him over to. And this was clear in Adams case: He was Naked, and therefore
ashamed; he was guilty, and therefore feared to appear before this Holy God,
and Just Judge. Now our Author will allow it lawful to fetch Arguments from
Christ's Incarnation, Life, Doctrine, Death, and what you please, to make us
ashamed of sin, but by no means to be afraid of the Great God: But the very
truth is, none say, that it is the duty of Men to be Distracted, and Unhinged
in mind with slavish fears, and Hellish apprehensions of Gods Justice: But that
this Dread may possibly run up some poor Creatures so high, as to a literal
distraction, when the apprehensions of the Curse due to the Transgression of a
righteous Law, of a Holy, and Jealous God, shall overset a weak Judgment, and
dark Mind, that sees its danger, but no way to escape; sees its Disease, but
not its Cure; its sin with the demerits thereof, but not a Savior with his
Merits, and at once considers that Wrath of God which it concludes to be
unavoidable, and knows to be Intolerable. 3. That our Savior did use the Law,
and it is Terrors, to awaken the Souls of men to a due apprehension of their
sin, and their danger thereupon, the whole Tenor of the New Testament prove:
It was the Method of his Precurser, John the Baptist, he laid this Ax to the
Root of the Tree, Mat. 3. 10. denouncing against them, That every Tree that
brought not forth good Fruit, should be hewn down, and cast into the fire. And
wherever the Pharisees got it, yet a warning they had got to fly from wrath
to come. The Apostle Paul both felt it, and Preached the use of the Law for
Conviction of sin, with all its Consequents, and leading the sinner to Christ:
He felt it, Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died; he
saw himself a dead and lost man, He Preached also the Use of the Law, Gal. 3.
24. to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. What use our Savior in his own
Person made of the Law, may be seen from Matthew. 5. and also chap. 23. where he
thunders upon the dead and secure Consciences of Sinners, with Arguments taken
from the Law of God, and the dreadful Curse annexed to the violation of it.
And though our Author will allow no more than an Awful regard and reverence
for God, who is a holy and righteous Judge, and an irreconcilable Enemy to all
Sin; yet when a Sinner shall be thoroughly convinced that he is so, and shall
know that the wages of Sin is Death, and that he that gave forth this Law, and
must sit in Judgment upon him, is both a Holy and a Righteous Judge, and an
Irreconcilable Enemy to all Sin, there will be more than an awful regard and
reverence for this God; unless he have the faculty to tell a Sinner how he may
stand guilty before his JudgementSeat, and not be filled with horror and
unspeakable amazement. But I see our Author can be both more severe than
Christ, where his severity is not due, and more merciful too at other times,
when his Clemency will destroy: He will dawb over the chinks of their
Consciences with untemper'd Mortar, and skin over their wounds very smoothly;
he will not have men feel the workings of the Law, nor any amazing terrors of
Gods wrath. Though it be hard to conceive how a Soul should see Sin, and not
see Gods wrath; or seeing it, not be terrified, and amazed with it: But such
was not the Way and Method, nor such the End and Design of Christ's coming; He
never preached Peace, when Destruction was nigh; he accommodated not his
Doctrine to the Lusts and Tempers of Sinners, but Acted according to his
Commission, Isa. 61. 1, 2. Preaching the Acceptable year of the Lord, and the
day of vengeance of our God. But our Author has imposed it upon himself, as his
constant Method, to discourse pro re nata, to fit the present purpose; for page
3. of this excellent Piece, he had told us, That the Gospel of Christ is as
severe a Dispensation as the Law, which dooms men to Eternal misery, that live
not very virtuous and innocent Lives: And they must be very virtuous and
innocent ones indeed, who escape that doom, for just now he assures us, That
God is a righteous Judge, and an irreconcilable Enemy to all sin.

After all this storm, there are yet a few drops behind, which we may do well
to shelter our selves from, if we can: He falls into some heat against our
having Christ offered to us to be our Savior; against the Beseechings of
Christ; against Covenanting with Christ; which is well expressed by Contract
and Espousal: And for this there is good warrant, 2 Cor. 5. 20. As though God
did beseech you by us, we pray you (in Christ's stead) be ye reconciled to God.
This was Scripture before he was born, and will be so when he is gone; and
therefore he may speak his pleasure against Christ, and his Gospel; But he has
a License, and let him make the best on it: for our parts, we hope we shall not
be Scoffed out of the Concernments of our Souls, and Salvation; and if that
must Anger him, let him repeat over the Alphabet, or which will do as well,
Turn the Knot of his Girdle behind him.

To conclude; the Persons whom our Authors lot is fallen out to reproach, Do
build their Faith, Hope, and Expectations upon God through Christ; The
Knowledge of all which, they owe alone to the Scriptures, given forth by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost: The supposition therefore that our Author has
proceedeed upon all this while, is a mere Falsehood; yet had it been True what
he charges them with, he had very weakly overthrown their Error; and none can
do greater disservice to the Truth, than by a weak and feeble defense of it,
or a weak Opposition to the contrary; it is enough to tempt some men to take up
what he opposes, and to presume there are no better Arguments one way or other,
because so confident a Designer could give no better: For all the Misadventures
in his Tedious Scheme, he will make us believe he is not bound to answer for
them; for if the Proportions be but regular, let the Doctrine be what it will,
he does but personate the Mode of others: But yet we have discovered here many
of his own dear Notions, sent abroad in Masquerade, which will appear more
barefaced in the following sheets; Imitating herein the famous Limner, who
would stand behind his Exposed Piece, to Eaves-drop the Censure of the Critical
Spectator; Just thus does our Author skulk behind his New Model of Divinity,
and if it meets with an Imprimatur, he will play a more Overt Game; but if
otherwise, he can quickly pluck in his Horns.

CHAP. III. Sect. 4. How Men Pervert the Scriptures, to make it Comply with
their own Fancies.
It Is storied of Messa la Corvinus, (once a Famous Orator) that he got such a
Crack in his Pericranium, that he quite forgot his own Name; the most unhappy
man, certainly, in all the World, to have been Employed in the Management of a
Lie; the Mystery whereof consists mainly in Tying both the Ends so handsomely
together, that it may not Ravel out into Thrums. Our Author has Managed a
severe Charge against some, that they Deduce all their Religion from an
acquaintance with Christ's Person, without consulting the Scriptures: And yet
now, The truth is (says he) if you consult their Writings, you will find them
stuffed with Scriptures. These things did not Cotton very Lovingly, and he was
as much put to his Trumps to make both ends meet; as the Gentleman, who told it
with great Confidence, That he shot a Deer with one Arrow through the right
Ear, and the left Foot behind. But he has an old Friend, that never fails his
Servants at a Pinch, and he lifted him over the Style with this: They do but
accommodate Scriptures to their own Fancies. Their Crime then in the last
Result, is this: That they are not so happy Interpreters of Scripture as
himself: They have the same Text, but they want his Headpiece to Comment on it:
They have the same Materials to work upon, but they want his Tools: Or (as one
of his Friends expres'd it) they have his Fiddle, but cannot get his
Fiddle-stick. But to reproach them upon this Account, is to reproach (by far)
the greatest part of Mankind. All were not Born under his smiling Stars, nor
had the same benign Aspects of the Planets in their Nativity: It Is not every
man's happiness, to have the Bees swarm about his Cradle, or to be entranced
upon the Top of Parnassus: However (after all the Scuffle) we have gained this
Point, that we may join Issue with him upon the Question, and modestly Debate
it, Whether he or they do best understand the Scriptures?

Two great Faults (and they are great ones indeed) he finds in their Writings:
First, That they Expound Scripture by the sound of Words: And secondly, That
they reason about the Sense of Scripture, from their own preconceived Notions.

[1.] They Expound Scripture by the sound of words. Our Author had discovered
to us, p. 80. the Danger of using a way of Reasoning that would serve any Man's
turn, that had but any Quickness and Vigor of Fancy. What a dangerous way then
must this be, that will serve any Man's turn, though he be not blessed with his
Quickness and Vigor of Fancy! For though his Antagonists Pulse toll as heavily
as Tom of Lincoln, though he never drew his Breath but in Boetia, nor ever had
his Temples crowned with the Ignis Lambens, yet he can with as much ease, and
more truth, Retort all his Rhetoric. When men's Fancies are so possessed with
Schemes and Idaea's of Religion, what ever they look upon, appears of the same
shape and color, where with their Minds are already Tinctured; like a Man sick
of the Iaundies, or that looks through painted Glass, who sees every thing of
the same color that his Eye or the Glass gives it. Some such Medium, the poor
Priest used to Prove, that the Virgin Mary was Prophesied of, from the
beginning of the World; because he had made a shift to read, Genesis 1. 10.
Congregationem aquarum vocavit Maria: And with the same learned skill did the
Rector of -- Convince his obstinate Parishioners, that it was their Duty to
Pave his Chancel for him; from Paveant illi, ego non Pavebo. And let me tell
our Author, for all his Vapouring, and that he looks so goodly on it, he has not
a more serviceable Engine than this one, in all his Arsenal. For having once
double-dyed his Fancy with a strong Conceit, that the word [Christ] signifies a
Church, an Office, a Doctrine; you cannot Quote that Text, where the Word
occurs, but his Fancy Chimes all in; just as Imagination thinks, so Scripture
clinks; and every thing he sees, turns round to that Crotchet, when all the
while the WindMill is in his own Head. If you should but venture to say, that
for an Orator, our Author is truly excellent; but for a Logician, he is but
Ordinary. I Will undertake from the sound of that one word, he shall conceit
himself at first Dash, to be a Bishop. So easy it is for a French Cook to make
Suffolkstreet Soupe, of a Stool-foot; and most Ravishing Minc't- Pies, of an
Old Boot-top, or a Leather Doublet.

As it is a Ridiculous procedure, to make the sound of words the Measure of our
Interpretation, so is it no less perverse a Method, to Expound Scripture by the
Ranverse, and go just cross to the sound of words. The Plain and Literal sense
commands our Reception; unless the Context and Coherence, Evident contradiction
to some other plain Scripture, or some gross Absurdity, and insuperable
Difficulty, compel us to Recede from it. But now according to our Authors Rule
(which he has most Religiously observed throughout his Book) the further any
Interpretation departs from the sound of words, the better it is, that is to
say, for his own purpose. As suppose you should meet with this word [Heaven,]
let not the Chiming, and Tinckling of your Fancy, betray you into a Notion of
some Glorious place, where the spirits of Just men made perfect, are Blessed in
the enjoyment of God; for that would be but to Gratify your Tinctured
Imagination, with the sound of a word that Rhimes pretty well to your own
Conceits: But rather work up your Imagination to the prospect of some dreadful
Dungeon, where nothing but Rattling of Chains, Blowing of Bellows, Hissing of
Serpents, and the Yellings of Griesly-people strike a Horror into your Mind;
and then to be sure you shall purchase our Authors good word, and never be
Taxed for Interpreting by the Sound and Clink of words. Thus if you meet with
that Expression [the Son of God,] be sure you do not understand a Person, but a
Thing; and if at the long Run, you should chance to Interpret it into No thing,
it will do best of all; For then you may lay your Life on it, you have not
Interpreted Scripture by the sound of words.

Now as much as our Author pleases himself with his Humor in this thing, the
truth is, he did but Steal, (or to make the best on it) Borrow it from one of
those he hopes to wound with it: And well might the Eagle sigh, to see her self
shot through with a Dart, which had borrowed its Feathers from her own Wing. I
will only burden him with one Passage: The Papists having hatched that
monstrous Figment of Transubstantiation, upon the discovery of any Expressions
amongst the Ancients, ( though made use of to another end) cry out, and
Triumph, as if they had found the whole Fardel of the Mass, in its perfect
Dress, and their Breaden God in the midst of it: Just so (says he) it is in the
case of Episcopacy, Men of these latter Generations, from what they saw in
being, and the usefulness of it to their Desires and Interests, searching
Antiquity, not to Instruct them in the Truth, but to Establish their Opinion,
whatever Expressions they find that fall in as to the sound of Words, with what
is now Insisted on, instantly they cry out, Vicimus Io Poean. And now either
our Authors guilty Conscience, or his Acumen, will tell him to whom he stands
Indebted, for Observing to him the Danger of Interpreting by the sound of
words: And let him take this Caution along with him, to forbear using that way
of Reasoning, which serves any man's turn as well as (and most men's better than)
his own.

It will be now time to descend to Particulars, that we may reduce his Rule
into Practice: And he has singled out these Expressions, of knowing Christ,
Christ's being made Wisdom to us. Having the Son. To give us an Experiment what
Wonders his Rule will work.

And, (1.) For the Knowing of Christ. They that Interpret Scripture by the
sound of words, Interpret the Phrase; of Knowing his Person, and all his
Personal Excellencies, and Beauties, Fullness, and Preciousness, etc. And so has
the Expression been used, John 17. 3. This is Life eternal to know thee, the
only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent. Where the Person of the
Messiah, under that Personal Excellency of being sent of God, Anointed, and
Appointed by him to Reveal, and procure Eternal Life, is made the Object of our
Knowledge, Again, John 1. 33. I knew him not, but he that sent me to Baptize
with Water, the same said unto me, upon whom thoushalt see the Spirit
descending, the same is He; and I saw, and bare Record, that [ this is the Son
of God.] Where to Know Christ, is Interpreted by knowing Him to be the Son of
God: And all the fault of this Interpretation is, that it comes a little too
near the sound of words. But that Learned Doctors practical Interpretations,
who interpreted Jesus by Judas, would have pleased our Author infinitely,
because it was more modest, and durst not come so near the sound of the word.
Well, But how does the Man himself expound the Phrase? Nay, as to that, he is
in a brown study, and says never a word; and that I assure you is a safe way to
avoid the Odium of Expounding it, by the sound of words.

But, (2.) Christ is said, 1 Cor. 1. 30. To be made Wisdom to us. And amongst
many others, I find Beza thus expounding it: Datus est nobis a Deo, ut in ipso
omnem sapientiam consequeremur ( quae quidem eo nomine vere digna sit) quum in
Uno, possumus Deum, and ejus Arcana contemplari, quae ne suspicari quidem
unquam cautissimi homines potuerunt. He is given to us of God, that in him we
might attain Wisdom (that truly deserves the Name) seeing that in Him alone, we
may behold God, and his Secrets, which the most discerning Men otherwise could
never have Ghessed at. Let this Interpretation (because it comes too near the
sound of words) only serve for a Foil, to set off the Luster of our Author:
Some duller men (says he) can understand no more by it, than the Wisdom of
those Revelations Christ has made of Gods Will to the World. But I fear it is
more their Sullenness than their Dullness, that they can see no more of Wisdom
in Christ, than a mere Ravelation of Gods Will. For had they not worn Racovian
Spectacles, they might have seen Satisfaction to Divine Justice in his Death,
as well as a Declaration of Gods Will to us, issuing from his Mouth.

But then, (3.) Here Is another great Controversy, What [having of the Son]
should signify? But before we fall upon that, we must deliver our selves from
an Ambuscado, secretly laid for our utter Ruin: When men have Learnt (says he)
from an acquaintance with Christ, to place all their hopes of Salvation in a
Personal Union with Christ, etc. He might for his Credits-sake, have produced
his Vouchers, to make good his Charge: I do indeed believe, that as the Person
of the Husband is related to the Person of the Wife, and yet there is no
personal Union made, though they are one Flesh, yet they continue two distinct
Persons, or Subsistences; so Christ and Believers are Personally related each
to other in the Covenant of Grace, and are one Mystical Body, one Spirit; and
yet they are not taken into Personal Union with Christ. Nay, our Authors
Conscience was fast asleep, when he wrote this Twang: For, page 198. He Quotes
these words from Doctor Iacomb; This Mystical Union is an Union of Persons, but
yet no Personal Union; And if our Author know not how to Distinguish these two
Expressions, he is sadly Accoutred to Manage this Controversy. And being now
freed from all Danger in the Rear, let us Advance to the Question. What this
[having of the Son] should mean? 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son has Life,
and he that has not the Son has not Life. Now the clearest way to resolve
this Doubt that I can think on at present, is to Examine, who, or what, is
meant by the Son; and when we have Settled and well Fixed the Notion of that, to
try what further Light we may get into the Phrase of Having the Son: For the
former, Who or what the Son is? I know no more Hopeful and Promising way, than
to look into the Chapter, to see if peradventure the Apostle has fixed the
Notion for us. And ver. 5. we read, Who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that believes that [Jesus is the Son of God?] And, ver. 6. This is he that
came by Water, and by Blood, even Jesus Christ. Ver. 9. This is the Witness of
God, which he has Testified of his Son. And, ver. 10. He that believes on the
Son of God, has the Witness in himself. And, ver. 11. This is the Record, that
God has given to us Eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son. And then
follows the words under Examination: He that has the Son has Life. I conclude
then, that if by [ Son,] ver. 5, 6, 9, 10. etc. he meant the very Son of God,
our Lord Jesus Christ; then by Son, in ver. 12. is meant the very self same
Person. And I am the more Confirmed in my Opinion, because our Author, p. 101.
will not allow any to separate a single Sentence from the Body of the
Discourse, to make the Scripture speak their own sense. Though I confess he
intended it as a Caution to others that they may avoid it, but a Canon to
himself, that he might observe it: What to others was set up for a Buoy, to
discover a Rock; to himself is hung out for a Lanthorn, to discover his way:
But I shall take his Caution, and charitably believe so well of the Apostles
sincerity and judiciousness in Discourse, that he would not speak of one thing
in one Verse, and another in the next, under the same words, without sufficient
intimation of his Intention. But now for [having the Son of God] that is the
remaining enquiry: Now in this our Author speaks more Truth than he is aware
of: What can [having the Son] signify (says he) but having an Interest in Him?
Being made one with Him, especially when we remember, that it is called [being
in Christ] and [abiding in him] which must signify a very near Union between
Christ's Person and ours? It must so! If [the Son] signify the very Son of God,
we must have Him, as he is capable of being had; and that is only by Interest
and Propriety, through Compact agreement, and the Constitution of God in a
Gospel Covenant. Ay, but (says our Author) Some will be so Perverse as to
understand it of believing, and Obeying his Gospel. Well, and if they will be
so Perverse without a Reason, we shall take the freedom to be as Perverse as
they can be, and believe no more than we have proof for. But let us practice
with his Gloss a little: By the Son, he understands the Gospel, and then his
Paraphrase of v. 5. will run thus smoothly: Who is he that overcomes the
World, but he that believes that Jesus is the Gospel; that is, he that
believes a Lie, he is the man that overcomes the World. Ay but we must remember
that by Jesus, he has understood the Gosple also; and then indeed you will have
a Paraphrase complete in all Points: Who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that believes that the Gospel, is the Gospel. And sure he must be a Dull thing
indeed that cannot, and a Perverse one too, that will not believe, and
Subscribe so Self-evident a Proposition. But the World is full of perverse
People, and therefore no wonder if some will so understand it. And amongst many
others, one Volkelius, lib. 3. de vera Relig, p. 37. in John 1. 4. In him was
Life. Hoc est, Ipsi commissa est vitae Eternae and viae ad eam ducentis
Anunciatio, qua Hominum animos mirifice collustravit, and Ignorantiae tenebras
(quantum in ipsa fuit) ab iis depulit, quod idem alio in loco edisserit, 1 John
5. 10. dum ait. Hoc est Testimonium, quod Deus Testatus est de filio suo, quod
vitam Eternam nobis dedit Deus, and haec in filio ejus est. That is, to him was
committed the Declaration of Eternal Life, and of the Way that leads thither,
whereby he wonderfully enlightened the Minds of Men, and scattered the Darkness
of Ignorance from them (as much as in him lay) which he Discourses also in
another place, 1 John 5. 10. etc. The Reader cannot but observe the
Parenthesis, That Christ enlightened men, [as much as in him lay] if he could
have done more, he would: But what would they expect from a Man? Now, when I
observe our Author, in this very place, Deriding the Hopes of them, who expect
to receive free Comunications of Pardon and Grace, Righteousness and Salvation,
from our Lord Jesus Christ; Methinks I see, [ Quantum in ipso fuit,] and
whether he filled his Vessel from that Cistern or no, is not so clear; but this
is certain, that all came from the same Fountain. To conclude this Head, the
Gloss of this Text according to the Proportion and Analogy of our Authors
Faith, must be this: He that believes and obeys the Gospel, believes and
obeys Life; and he that believes not, and obeys not the Gospel, believes
not, obeys not Life: But our Gloss is this, He that has an Interest in
Christ, has an Interest in Life, and he that has not in the one, has not in
the other, but the Wrath of God abides on him; there being no means discovered
whereby we can escape it, but by Jesus Christ.

It would have been small Satisfaction to our Author to pervert the Sense,
unless he might be allowed also to pour Contempt upon the Phrase of the
Scripture; which he has carried on to that height of Daring-provocation, that I
am certain he never met with his Superior, and do hope he may never find an
Equal. He is at last grown almost weary of Reproaching the Expressions of Men,
too mean a Quarry for one of his Wing to stoop at; and now the Expressions of
the Holy Ghost must find him Game, that he may appear truly Great, by great
Enmities. Erostratus was resolved to Eternize his Name, though by Firing the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus: And Nero conceived great hopes from the Burning of
Rome, and his unsampled Butcheries, to Inoculate his Name into History, that he
might upon any Terms survive his Funeral. It Is some Alleviation to them who
Groan under the burden of Obloquy, that they meet with no harder Measure than
their Lord and Master: And it might quiet the grieved Spirit of a righteous
Lot, when his words are wrested; when the holy Spirit of God is grieved with
the Affronts put upon his Expressions: The Disciple is not (ought not expect to
be) above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord: It Is enough that the
Disciple be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: If they have called the
Master of the House Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of the
Household? Mat. 10. 24. Let them therefore possess their Souls in patience, and
comfort one another with these words. And thus our Author enters upon his
Business: It Is Self-evident, that before we can be United to Christ, we must
[go to Him]: And therefore Faith, which is the Instrument of this Union, is
very Luckily called [coming to Christ,] from whence it is very evident, that to
[believe in Christ] is to [go to Him] for Salvation: Which Metaphors [of
coming, and going] are a very Intelligible Explication of Believing. But does
this Gentleman think we have not sins enough of our own to answer for, but we
must be Responsible for all the faults the Black-Jaundies of Malice can find in
Scripture? Or does he Fancy that we Penned the Scriptures, and therefore must
lie at Stake for all the Incongruous expressions that he is able to suppose in
them? Well, thanks be unto God, that the Scriptures never yet found a Match
able to Cope with them. For, 1. It Is apparently false which he says, These
Metaphors of coming, and going, are a very Intelligible explication of
Believing: Whenas indeed, Believing is that which Explicates those Metaphors of
[Coming, and Going.] With the same Forehead he might have reviled Christ, for
Interpreting the Preaching of the Word, by the Sower Sowing his Seed; whereas
the Sower sowing his Seed, is explicated by the Preaching the Word. 2. Faith
(says he) is very Luckily called coming to Christ. I shall spare him that
Ignorant Expression, that Faith is called coming to Christ: No Sir, not Faith,
but Believing; not the Peace, but the Acting of that Grace is so called. But I
shall not wave his blasphemous Flirtings of the holy Spirit: What ever
Expressions he has used to express Faith, or its Acts by, were upon advice with
his own wisdom, who will not learn of him how to guide the Heads, and Hearts,
and Tongues, and Pens of his Amanuenses, in revealing to us the Mind and Will
of God. He has better Authority to Justify Quod scripsi, scripsi, than either
Pilate who once really Crucified Christ: Or that other who has often Crucified
him in Essigie. It was advisedly so called, but unluckily reproached. 3. Those
Metaphors of coming, and going, do very aptly, and Intelligibly express the
Motion of the Soul in its turning from sin to God, by Faith in Jesus Christ:
For as in all Local Motions, there is a Term from which, and a Term unto which
we move; so in this Spiritual Motion, there is a State, or Term from which we
pass, that of Sin and Enmity against God; and another to which we pass, that of
Holiness and Peace with God. Our Savior thought meet, and we are to Acquiesce
in his Sovereign Wisdom, sometimes to employ a Metaphor in the Explicating of a
Metaphor, Mat. 13. 19. Then comes the wicked one, and catches away the word
that was sown in his heart, ver. 21. Yet has he not Root in himself, ver. 22.
-- The deceitfulness of Riches Choke the Word: and yet till of late he was
never branded for unintelligible explicating of his Notions.

If now the Reader would have an Instance, to what Height encouraged
Profaneness may rise, let him read what follows. But when the Soul is come to
Christ, is this enough? No sure: the Soul then must receive Christ, as St. John
tells us, 1 Ioh. 12. To as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the Sons of God: That faith which serves us for Legs to go to Christ,
must be a Hand to Receive him, and to apply all his Merits, and Fullness, and
Righteousness to our Souls: And now when we have Received him, we must embrace
him in our Arms too, as good old Simeon did, when he found him in the Temple,
which is a little nearer Union, as plainly appears from the Example of the
Patriarchs, who saw the Promises afar off, and embraced them* Heb. 11. 13. and
now we have Christ, we must trust and lean upon Him, as we are often commanded
to do: which signifies that Act of Faith, whereby feeling our own weakness, as
unable to support our selves, we do lean, and rest on Christ, and if leaning be
not enough, we may make a little more bold, and Roll on him, as appears from
Psalm. 37. 5. Roll thy ways on the Lord, as the Original [ Gal] signifies;
which is that Act of Faith, whereby we being weary, and heavy laden with sin,
and seeking Ease, at last discharge our load, and cast it on Christ, and this
is plain, from the phrase of Believing in Christ, and on him; for what can that
signify, but leaning and rolling on him, laying and building our selves on him
as on a Foundation. And now we have thus brought our Souls to Christ, we must
commit them to his trust, to take charge of them, and if they perish, it shall
be his fault, he must give an account of it: Thus St. Paul did, 2 Timothy 1. 12. I
know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that I
have committed unto him against that day: and Now we must hide our selves in
Christ, from the fierce wrath of God, as the Dove in the Rocks. But this is not
enough yet, for we must be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ. -- And
when we are thus united to Christ, and made one with him, then All Christ is
ours, as the Apostle tells us, All is yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. The Merit of his Death is ours, to free us from the Guilt and Punishment
of sin; and his Active Obedience to the will of God, his Righteousness is ours,
for our Justification, as is plain in that he is called, The Lord our
Righteousness, and as I. O. well observes, we are reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son, and saved by his Life, Romans 5. 10.

And now I hope there is none needs question but our Author is laid in with a
Competency of those Endowments, that may enable him to Deride the whole Bible,
from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations: If our Author does
not judge with others about the Meaning of these phrases and Expressions of
Scripture, he had the liberty (for ought I know) to discover, and (if he must
needs) to expose their Mistakes; but to droll upon the very Expressions of
Scripture, without reference to any Interpretation, and (if to any) to that
which is most evidently the True, is a Degree above the superlative of
Blasphemy. Let others admire which of his Talents they see good; for my own
part, I read more of Ignorance in it, than of all his other Characters. 1. One
gross piece of Ignorance is, that he makes the Patriarchs embracing of the
Promises, explain Simeon's embracing Christ in the Temple. 2. That in his
goodly supposed Method of the Souls coming to Christ; he fancies, first that we
have Christ, and trust and lean upon him, and yet after a while (as if it were
a new degree of Faith) he tells us, we must commit our Souls to him. 3. He
fancies, that to come to Christ, to receive him, to embrace him, are several
Acts of Faith, distinguished by some Intervals of time: But let us hear the
guilt of these Scriptures, and his little Glosses: Why they offend against his
great standing Rule, Interpreting things by the sound of words. For (says he)
what better proof can you desire for all this, than Express words? Really, the
Laws upon which we must be permitted to discourse with our Author, are very
severe; for, p. 78. he laid it down as a Law of the Medes and Persians, that
none must dare to Draw one Conclusion from the Person of Christ, which his
Gospel has not expressly taught: Well, we accepted the Terms, and have
brought him express, and expressly express words, and do speak as Volkelius
commands us, dilectis luculentissimisque verbis, and yet we are never the
nearer; for now we offend in trusting to the sound of words. Just thus did
Procrustes entertain his Guests, wracking out them that were too short, and
lopping off their feet that were too long for his Bed: All men I perceive are
awake to their Concerns in this Rule, as well as our Vigilant Author: When it
is urged, that Christ is called expressly God, the True God, He that was in
the beginning, by whom were all things made; who upholds all things by the Word
of his Power; the Socinians have now a compendious Answer. Ay, this is to
interpret Scripture by the sound of words: And the Atheist has an inckling of
it too; he can subscribe all the Scriptures as True, but when you urge him that
God created all things out of Nothing; that he is the Owner, Governor, Judge
of the whole World; they are provided with a short Answer: Yes, this is
interpreting Scripture by the sound of words: And whether every Drunkard,
Swearer, Adulterer, all the Rakehells and Rakeshames upon Earth, may not in
time make their advantage of it, I cannot tell; That Ministers do but fright
them with a sound of words: Thus have some dealt with the Sacerdotal Office of
Christ; He is a Priest (they confess,) he offered a Sacrifice, was a
Propitiation, made an Atonement, did expiate sin; but have a care you do not
interpret these things as the words sound: he did indeed something like a
Priest, offered something like a Sacrifice, but truly and properly he was
nothing, did nothing of All this. It had been therefore more plain-heartedly
and ingenuously done, had our Author written a Confutation of the Scripture,
proving that the Spirit did not speak intelligibly; but All in good time, he
has Materials ready for the work. P. 100. The wildest, and most extravagant
Opinions that were ever yet vented under the Name of Religion, have pretended
the Authority of Scripture for their Patronage: And yet he knew, how first to
break its head, and then make it a Plaster.

This famous Rule of our Authors, may be applied to all things under the Sun;
but there are two Principles only that he will examine by it at present.

(1.) The spiritual Impotency of all men without grace to perform that which is
Acceptable to God: This (says he) they prove wonderfully from our being dead in
trespasses and sins; and therefore, as a Dead man can contribute nothing to his
own Resurrection, no more can we toward our Conversion. I wonder when the
Scripture will be able to speak so plain, that deaf men will understand it? One
would have thought, the Spirit of God should never have chosen that Expression
of being Dead in trespasses and sins, to signify, what mighty power and
abilities the Creature has to Obey: But we are instructed better from this
useful Caveat; not to interpret Him, by the sound of his words; for now we
must understand by [Being dead] [Being Alive,] and proportionably by [Sins and
Trespasses,] we must understand [Duty, and Obedience,] and then to keep close
to our Instructions, and far enough from the sound of words, To be Dead in Sins
and Trespasses, is to be Alive to all Duty and Obedience. And thus that other
vexing place, Romans 5. When we were without strength, in due time, Christ dyed
for the ungodly; must be Paraphrased, When we were strong and Active, and had
no need of Christ, he dyed for the godly. And this I think (if that be good for
ought,) is very remote from grating our Ears with the unpleasant sound of
words. Ay, but (says our Author) This is true of Natural Death, but will be
hard to prove of a Moral Death. Hard to prove! Methinks we want his wonted
out-facing Confidence: But why so hard to prove? Has not the Spirit of God
selected those words borrowed from the Condition of one Naturally dead, to
instruct us in the true Condition of one Morally dead? It Is true of a Natural,
and therefore not of a Moral Death. Nay, it is therefore true of a Moral Death,
because it is so of a Natural Death. What wild Similitudes would he impose upon
the Holy Scriptures? Even as one that is Naturally dead can contribute Nothing
to his Resurrection, just so, one that is Morally dead can contribute something
to his Conversion. This is the great Illustrator of dark Metaphors. But wherein
does this Moral Death consist? Oh (says he) In the prevalency of vicious
habits contracted by long Custom, (which was the Case of the Heathens whom the
Apostle there speaks of) which do so enslave the Will, that it is very
difficult, though not impossible, for such Persons to return to the love and
practice of Virtue. But who can tell, whether by [enslaving the Will] which is
a Luscious Metaphor, our Author would not have us understand, [enfranchising
the Will,] lest we should border too near upon a sound of words? But I am not
illuminated with our Authors Reasonings: For, (1) Moral Death does not consist
in the prevalency of vicious Habits, it is the general Condition of all men
born into the world; who are privatively Dead in respect of that Life we all
once had in the first Adam; and Negatively Dead, in respect of that Life which
is attainable by the second Adam. And in those days, when men studied not
Aequivocations to subscribe every thing, and believe Nothing, it was not
questioned in the Church of England: Art. 10. The Condition of Man since the
Fall is such, that he cannot Turn and prepare himself, by his Own Natural
Strength, and good Works, to Faith, and calling upon God; wherefore we have no
power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without his Grace
preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and working with us when we have
that Will. But, (2) Supposing that this Moral Death did consist in the
Prevalency of vicious Habits, contracted by long Custom, yet such may be the
prevalency of them, into such a slavery may the Will be brought, that it may be
not only di^ficult but impossible (without the effectual assistance of the
Spirit,) for the Sinner to return to God. Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are
accustomed to do evil: Whence the Prophet shows, that such is the prevalency
of a vicious Habit, contracted by long Custom, that it is as possible for the
Black-Moore to wash himself white, (which is the Emblem of Labor in Vain) or
the Leopard to rub out his Dapples, as for such a one, so enslaved, to do
good. And if difficulty only be designed in the Comparison, there is great
danger of seduction, to have the Case of habituated sinners thus described. (3)
Our Author is much mistaken, to say, That the Apostle speaks of the Case of the
Heathens: The place is, Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he quickened, who were Dead, in
Trespasses, and Sins, etc. And these things are exceeding clear: 1. That to be
dead in Trespasses and Sins, (let it signify what it will) is a Condition
common to Jew and Gentile. v. 3. Amongst whom also we all had our Conversation
in times past, in the lusts of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the Mind,
and of the Flesh, and were by Nature the Children of wrath, even as others. v.
5. When we were dead in sins. 2. That the same Power and Grace was required to
Quickening of the one, as the other. v. 4. God who is rich in Mercy, for his
great Love wherewith he loved us, quickened us, (...). (4) It Is very ridiculous
to express some strength by None: As if you should say, A dead man will hardly
walk above five miles a day, and then he must rest himself too at every miles
end. It Is true, a Natural Death does not deny a Resurrection by Divine Power,
nor a Moral Death exclude the efficacious Power of him that raised up Jesus
from the dead, yet both exclude all Ability in the subject, or we must despair
of ever understanding one Syllable of Scripture to the Worlds end.

(2.) There is Another Doctrine he will examine by this Rule, viz. the Manner
of Gods Working in Regeneration. Concerning which, the Apostle Ephesians. 2. 10.
(when he had before showed all to be dead in Trespasses and Sins,) thus
expresses himself: For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good
works; and 2 Cor. 5. 17. He that is in Christ is [a New Creature.] Wherein the
Apostle does instruct us in three very material points. 1. Here is the Product
of Gods Grace. A real Effect, (...). Something brought forth; (...) a New
Creature, a New Creation; Another, a better, though a lesser World. 2. The End
of this Work, or Product of Gods powerful Grace; (...)* it was to good works,
which God ordained they should walk in. The End of the New Heart, New Creature,
and New Nature, is New Obedience. 3. The Manner of Gods producing this work;
(...)* ye were Created to that End; so that as God at the first by his Creating
Power exerted, brought forth the Creature, and gave it power to bring forth
fruit after its Kind: So in this New Creation, there is something that Answers
both the created Effect, the Creating Power, and the End of this Creation. This
would have done pretty well, had it not chimed too near the words; and
therefore our Author shall expound it himself, and then (if ever) he will be in
the good Humor. This were true (says he) if our being created to good works
did signify the Manner and Method of our Conversion, and not the Nature of the
New Creature. But what if it signifies both? Here Is a Workmanship; and here is
the Manner of working: We are his Workmanship created. The work, called a New
Creature, shows the Thing; and its being said to be done by Creation, shows the
Manner. All the Apostles Metaphor will else be very lame; The Manner of Gods
producing the Old Creation expressed, but Nothing to answer it in the New
Creation; and yet this was the Main of his design: v. 5. Even when we were dead
in sins and trespasses, he has quickened us; v. 8. By Grace ye are saved, not
of your selves, it is the Gift of God. But let us hear his Paraphrase: That as
in the first Creation we were created after the Image of God; so we are renewed
after his Image in the second, which is therefore expressly called Renewing,
and Renovation: An excellent Similitude; just as God wrought All in the first
Creation, so (for all the world) he does Nothing in the second: That is, in
plain Terms, The New Creation is no Creation; and the Apostle could not more
unluckily have expressed the Doctrine of our own Ability to good Works, than by
saying, we were created by God in Christ Jesus, to the Performance of them: To
conclude, That the Image of God restored, should answer the Image in which God
created Man at first, I can be content; only, to fill up the Parallel, What is
that act of God in the New, which answers to Gods creating Act in the first
Creation? And that the New Creation should be called a Renovation, I can very
well digest; but then we must take in Gods Renewing Power, as well as the
Renewed Effect; but that this is called so, expressly in other places, I do
not very well approve, (nor will our Author, when he thinks better upon it,) for
that will discredit the whole Paraphrase, because it chimes too harmoniously to
the sound of words.

Hitherto we have heard a very learned Declamation against interpreting
Scripture by the sound of words; and now we shall have another Oration against
Metaphors, Similitudes, Allegories, Types, Figures, and all this under the same
Head. If they say, Christ is our Righteousness, our Wisdom, etc. then they
interpret all by the sound of words; and if they say, the Pearl, the Manna, the
Rock, etc. signified Christ, which seems to be very remote from, yet that is
interpreting Scripture by, the sound of words also; so that we are in a Fork,
Snick or Snee; and both ways equally undone: Mr. Watson thinks that The Pearl
in the Parable, Math. 13. 46. may be accommodated to Christ; for, as the Pearl
is there said to be (...) so Christ is called (...) 1 Pet. 2. 7. That he was
praefigured by the Manna, upon the only Credit of Christ's own Interpretation:
Joh. 6. 48. I am the Bread of Life; your Fathers did eat Manna in the
Wilderness, and are dead: This is the bread that comes down from Heaven, that
a man may eat thereof, and not dye. That the Rock also did typifie Christ; from
the Apostles warrant, 1 Cor. 10. 3. They drank of the Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ: That Christ was also Resembled by the Brazen Serpent,
upon Christ's own Authority, Ioh. 3. 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up: and that Christ is
compared to a Vine, Joh. 15. 1. I am the True Vine: He proves also, (or thinks
he proves) That Christ has very lovely and excellent Titles given him in the
Scriptures. He is the Desire of all Nations, Hag. 2. 7. The Prince of Peace,
Isa. 9. 6. The Holy One of Israel, Isa. 41. 14. Elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2.
6. That he was also typified by most excellent and glorious Persons and Things:
By Moses, David, Solomon; by the Pillar of Cloud, by the Rose of Sharon. In the
pursuit of which Metaphors and Types, perhaps he has a little overshot himself;
and alas, how easy a matter is that? It Is very hard to stop at a point, when
we are upon the full speed. St. George himself straining for a blow at the
Dragon, had like to have come over: These are Human Errors, and I wish our
Authors were of no worse Consequence. But, 1. Our Author forgets himself to
say, that Mr. W. uses these Metaphors to prove, when all the Service they do
him, is to illustrate his Doctrine, sufficiently otherwise confirmed from
innumerable Scriptures: If our Author will not allow the Pearl to signify
Christ's Preciousness, yet it is very clear that Christ is precious. If he
boggle, that the circular Figure of Manna should denote Christ's Perfection, yet
that he is Perfect, is undeniable. 2. Whatever was a Type of Christ,
represented some of his Personal Excellencies, Actions, or Sufferings, etc. If
then we single out the most eminent of their Natural Excellencies, and then
consider which of Christ's spiritual Excellencies syncretize with them, all the
hurt that's in it is, that those Types are more beholden to Christ, than he to
them. And, 3. We ought to consider, that there is a greater latitude of
Expression allowed in Open handed Discourses ad Populum, than in your
Double-fisted Disputations in the Schools: Our blessed Savior does accommodate
his Discourses to his Disciples, and preach as they were able to hear him; and
Mr. Watson does not always preach or write, to such long-ear'd People as our
Author is. And thus after all, Mr. Watson may be very Innocent; but whosoever
is in the the Right, our Author will be sure to be in the Wrong; for when all
that Discourse had spent it self to persuade us, that Christ is excellent, that
he deserves our Love, our Service and Obedience; our Author could make no
better use on it, than to throw a Flout upon the very Person of our Redeemer:
Who (says he) can forbear being smitten with so lovely a Person? Really he may
do well to consider, whether his License will justify him to Scoff at Christ's
Person, toties quoties he meets with any that shall dare to give him a good
word: I have known some so prodigal of their Friends, that they would sell the
best they had for a sorry frothy Jest: but should our Author forfeit the Favor
of Christ, when he shall most need it, for a poor half-witted Conceit, it would
be more than he would ever get by it. But hence we learn, how difficult it is,
for any to have a little more Wit than his Neighbors, and not to discover it;
though it had been more comely to have been facetious any where, than against A
Savior; and may he in time come to himself, least he be smitten with Christ in
a fence not to his good liking.

[2] The Second Way whereby these men Pervert the Scripture is, that they argue
from their own preconceived Notions and Opinions, about the sense of Scripture.
And (to have saved charges) both these might have been mustered for one, but
then it would not have born such a Port, nor carried so much state and Majesty
in its looks: The first way was, When they find any words in Scripture which
chime to the Tune of their private Conceits, they interpret them by the sound
of words: And this* second way is the first way, in other words; when they
Argue from their own pre-conceived Notions: But perhaps there may be some
subtle Essential difference, between [their own Conceits,] and their [own
preconceived Notions,] which though he can, every one cannot discover: Now of
this first, or second, or same, or New, or no Way, (call it which he pleases)
he will give us some few Instances.

(1.) There are (says he) a great many places, which expressly tell us, we are
justified by Faith, have Remission of sins by Faith, etc. Now the difficulty
will be, how we shall Reconcile these Scriptures to their Notion of being
justified by Christ's Righteousness. For (as he acutely observes) Faith
certainly is not the Righteousness of Christ in their Notion of it: (No nor in
his neither, if he rightly understands himself.) Now those other men have a way
to Reconcile our being Justified by the Righteousness of Christ only, and our
being justified by Faith only; and it is this: When Faith is said to justify,
they understand not this Absolutely, as if Faith did justify, either as it is
a Work wrought iin us, or an Act performed by us; but relatively, as t makes us
one with Christ, by whom we are justified: And they assign this Reason for it:
Because, had Justification been promised to any thing wrought in us, or done by
us, it had been by Works: And this Conciliation of the true Interest of Faith,
and Christ, in the business of Justification, is justified by the Doctrine of
the Church of England: Art. 11. We are accounted Righteous before God, only
for the Merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our
own Works or Deservings; wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, is a
most wholesome Doctrine. Now our Author might with great Applause have placed out
his Reconciling skill upon this Article: How we can be Justified [for the Merit
of Christ only,] and yet [by Faith onely]? And again: How we can be Justified
[by Faith only,] or indeed at all, and yet [not for our own Works?] we find in
Scripture, that the same Effects are attributed to Faith, which are attributed
to Christ: Justified by Christ, Isa. 53. 11. and justified by Faith, Romans 3.
28. We live by Christ, Joh. 6. 57. and we live by Faith, Gal. 2. 20. Are
pardoned by Christ, Act. 13. 38. are pardoned also by Faith, Act. 26. 18. Have
peace with God by Christ, Col. 1. 20. have peace with him also by Faith, Romans
5. 2. Have Access to God by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 18. have Access also by Faith, Ephesians.
3. 12. Are sanctified by Christ, Heb. 10. 14. and sanctified by Faith, Act. 15.
9. Overcome the World by Christ, Joh. 16. 33. and so also by Faith, 1 John 5.
4, 5. The Sons of God by Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5. and so by Faith, Gal. 3. 26.

These things being thus, it seems to be a worthy Enquiry, what Part and Share
Christ may Challenge, and what Faith may claim in the Justification of a Soul
before God; that so we may give unto Christ the things that are Christ's, and
unto Faith the things that are Faiths. And, 1 It Is very evident, that their
Concerns are really Distinct; Christ Justifies in one respect, Faith ^in
another: It Is possible that some ( ver. 9. Infants) may be Justified without
Fa^ith in Christ, but impossible that any should be Justified without Gods
respect to Christ; for herein the Scripture is Peremptory, and God is at a
point with all the World, Acts 4. 12. There Is no other Name under Heaven given
by which we must be saved, neither is there Salvation in any other. 2. It Is
evident from those very Places where the Concerns of Christ, and of Faith, are
jointly mentioned, not only that they have really distinct Interests, but that
Christ carries the Supremacy, and that Faith has only a subservient Concernment
therein, Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Whence it is plain, that whatever Faith
contributes to our peace with God, yet even that Operates through Jesus Christ,
(...). So Gal. 3. 16. Ye are all the Children of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ:
It Is the Redeemer as made a Curse for us, ver. 13. that gives Faith all it is
Virtue and Efficacy. And, Gal. 2. 20. The life which I now live in the Flesh, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave Himself for me:
Where such a Concernment is ascribed to Christ, in the Souls life, that Faith
is not at all Capable of; He loved me, and gave himself for me. 3. It Is no loss
evident, that Christ by his Death and Sufferings, has removed those insuperable
Impediments, which lay in the way of a sinners Justification, Reconciliation
with God, Expiation of sin, which Faith could not possibly Undertake, and
Atchieve. 4. That what ever Parts Christ and Faith have in this Glorious work,
yet no more must be Ascribed to either, than can consist with a Free, and
Gratuitous Justification, Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by his Grace,
(...). And, 5. It Is evident that the Sacrifice, Sufferings, etc. of Christ, and
that Reconciliation and Atonement procured by them, do not in the least
Enterfere with Justification by Free Grace; for Christ himself is Free-gift,
and that God would admit a Mediator, to Interpose on our behalf, that he would
accept a Propitiation for us, is all due to Free Grace; and therefore
Free Grace and Jesus Christ are joined together, Romans 3. 24. Being justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. 6. It is
also as evident, that to ascribe Justification to Faith as it is our Work, or
Act, will take off just so much from the freedom of Grace, as is ascribed to
it, as a work in us, or done by us; and therefore Faith must needs Justify us
by virtue of that respect that it carries toward a Redeemer; and to assign it
any other Interest, is to Entrench upon that free Justification, which the
Gospel does so abundantly Preach: Now what Title to give to Faith as it
Justifies, whether that of an Instrument, or a Condition, I dispute not; let
the proper Concerns of Faith and Christ be secured, and their distinct Actings
kept Inviolable, and Sacred, and if any can find more apposite, and significant
Terms, than Protestants have used, I shall be very well content: But now our
Author will favor us with a Reason, why Justification by Faith as it is our
own Act, may consist with Justification by FreeGrace. Modest men (says he) who
dream not of Meriting by every thing they do, would have thought, that
Free Grace and Faith, might have been easily reconciled, though (...) had
justified as our own Act, since the Reward and Recompense, does so infinitely
exceed the Work that there can be no suspicion of Merit; and where there is no
Merit, the reward is of Grace, and not of Debt, what ever the Condition of the
Promise be. But, 1. Gods Free Grace will not be beholden to, nor stand to the
Courtesy of Man's Modesty; and besides, all men are not so Modest as our Author
is; and if they were, it would be hard Trusting them: Man is indeed, a very
Proud and Haughty Creature, till Free Grace tames him, loath to stoop to those
Methods of Gods Wisdom for the abasing the Creature, that Grace may be
magnified in his Mercies. And I see plainly, that God has Contrived the way of
showing favor to a lost Sinner, in such Wisdom that every Mouth shall be
stopped, that Boasting shall be excluded, and that no Flesh shall glory in his
presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. 2. It Is not what men will do out of their sweet
Natures, that comes here into Consideration; but what they may do, God has
taken a Course they shall not, cannot have cause to Glory; but if the sinner be
justified by his own Act, as it is his, he has whereof to boast, Romans 4. 2. If
Abraham were justified by Works, he has whereof to boast; though it may be
some Virtuoso's would be so Modest and Civil, as not to lay it in the Dish of
FreeGrace. 3. It Is precariously supposed, that Grace in the justification of a
sinner, is only opposed to Merit: The Scripture has opposed it to Works, and
set them as Inconsistent in the dealings out of Mercy from God to men, whether
there be such a proportion between the Work and the Reward, or no, Romans 11. 6.
And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace.
4. They may be very Immodest men, and yet want the Confidence to dream of Merit
by every thing they do; and yet there are those that dream to this day of
Meriting Heaven by that, for which they a thousand times better merit a Halter.

Protestant Divines in the explicating the Concerns of Faith in our
Justification, that they might Accommodate their Discourses to the Capacity of
them with whom they deal, have found out certain Similitudes, which do well
express their own Intentions, when they say: Faith justifies us not as our own
Act, but by virtue of its Relation to Christ, who is our Righteousness. Thus we
say, the Ring stanches Blood, and yet we intend no more than that the
Haematites set in it, has that Virtue: That our Hand relieves us, and yet
perhaps it contributes no more toward it, than that it receives the Charity of
another: That a Bucket quenches our Thirst, yet all it does, is to bring us the
Water from the Fountain, which quenches it. And many others they have Invented,
the best they could find, none so mean but is above Contempt, yet none so
excellent to be above Malice. The use they make of them is (as I said) to
cloth their Conceptions, and give some Light into the Thing, but by no means
to prove the Truth, when it is drawn into Controversy. But from hence, our
Author is taking another Ramble, and going to run his old Wild-Goose Chase of
Profaneness, and Scurrility; the easiest way of Confutation certainly, that
ever was Invented: But let his own Folly chastise him, or if not, delight him;
and in the mean time excuse me from bearing him Company.

(2.) Another Instance, and but another, he will give us: How Men argue from
their preconceived Notions, and that is about the Necessity of Good Works. For
(says he) when they are pressed with those Scriptures that urge the Necessity
of Good Works. -- What do they then? Nay, that he could not tell, but carries
on a suspended Sense, for almost two whole Pages, and in the end leaves it
unintelligible Nonsense. But however, let us hear those Texts that are so
pressing for Good works, and a holy Life. Why? Without Holiness, no Man shall
see God: The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all Unrighteousness
and Ungodliness of Men. Truly, these Scriptures do press upon our Consciences,
and Practices, but not upon our Principles: Well, then there are others that
assert, Our Acceptance with God, depends upon a Holy and Virtuous life. I
promise you that presses indeed! But it does not press me: Our Acceptance with
God, depends upon a Holy life, as the Qualification, but it depends upon Christ
for Procurement: But the places are, Acts 10. 35. God is no Respecter of
Persons, but in every Nation he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him. Well, let us examine whom this Text does press most? The
Apostle Peter in that excellent Discourse, ver. 43. tells us: To him [Christ]
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in
Him, should receive Remission of sins. Whatsoever of acceptance with God then,
they that fear God, and work Righteousness do obtain, still it is through the
Name of Christ. The Text then presses not us, he must call for more weight, if
he designs to Press us to Death: But as I remember, page 44. our Author with
much Confidence would bear us down, that the Jews who knew nothing at all of
Christ, yet unde^stood God to be a Sin-pardoning God. And yet the Apostle
assures us, 1. That all the Prophets gave witness to Christ. 2. That their
Testimony was this, That they were to expect Remission of sins, through the
Name of Christ. 3. That the Means of acquiring the Remission of sins through
Christ, was by believing in Him. And now let him ask his own Shoulders, whether
this Text does not press him; But there is another Scripture that will break
their bones, Mat. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. And what was their Righteousness? Why he tells us: They were a company
of Immoral Hypocrites, who placed all their Righteousness in observing the
Ceremonies of the Law, without the purity of their Hearts and Lives. Well, and
we think a Man may Travel a great many Leagues beyond such Debauches, and never
come near the Kingdom of Heaven. Let them then Groan under the weight of it,
who place their Religion in Ceremony, and profane Drollery; it presses not
them, who professing Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and Repentance from Dead
works, subject themselves to his Gospel. Well, but there is one more that will
Grind them to Powder, ver. 19. He that breaks the least of these Commandments,
and teaches men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven. And this
will certainly press them, who Renouncing their part in the Satisfaction given
to God by Christ, trust to their own Imperfect repentance, wherein there are so
many Flaws, as will amount to the breach of some Commandment, and then our
Author has quite shut them out of the Kingdom of Heaven.

To conclude this Section, our Author has one round Fling at Doctor Owen, and
it is ex Officio, no doubt: I suppose he may hold some fair Estate by this
Tenure, That he Persecute the Doctor with Fire and Faggot, as far as a pair of
Shoes of a great price will carry him. The Question is, What necessity there
is of Obedience? The Doctor had said, That Universal Obedience and good Works,
are Indispensibly necessary to Salvation; by the sovereign appointment and Will
of God. To this our Author answers: This is not one syllable to the purpose!
Why then, It Is the end of the Fathers electing Love. That Is not one syllable to
the purpose! It Is the end of the Sons redeeming Love. That Is not one syllable
to the purpose! It Is the end of the Spirits sanctifying Love. That Is not one
syllable to the purpose! Well, but it is necessary to the Glory of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. That Is not one syllable to the purpose neither. If neither
the Sovereignty of God over us, the Love of God to us, nor the Glorifying of
God by Us, be to the purpose of Obedience; let our Author speak to the purpose.
So he will: God has commanded Obedience, but where is the Sanction of the Law?
Will he Damn all that will not Obey for their Disobedience? Where Is the
Sanction of the Law? I am sure that Question is very little to the purpose.
It Is the Command it self that makes a Duty, that creates a necessity: The
Authority of the Lawgiver, lays the Obligation upon the Subject. It Is our
Interest to Obey, upon the account of the Sanction; but it is our duty to Obey
upon the Command it self: But not to hold him in suspense, God will Damn all
those that will not Obey, for their Disobedience.

Our Author has now quite run himself a Ground, and is Pumpt dry of his
Drollery, and therefore turns Catechist, and Persecutes us with Impertinent
Queries. I have heard some say, that an Idiot may tie more Knots in an Hour,
than a Wiseman can untye in a day. But however, though we might plead it is
Coram non Iudice, yet for once, let him suppose himself in his Desk, and his
poor Catechumens humbly waiting upon his Footstool.

Quest. Will God Damn those who do not Obey for their disobedience? Answ. Yes,
and it please you Sir. Qu. But will he save, and reward those who do Obey for
their Obedience? An. He will reward their Obedience, but not save them for
their Obedience. Qu. But will the Father Elect none but those that are Holy?
An. Yes, and it like your good Learning, he Elects them that they may be Holy,
but not because they are Holy, Ephesians. 1. 4. Ephesians. 2. 10. Qu. But will the Son
Redeem none but those that are holy? An. Yes, indeed Sir, a great many; for a
Redeemer supposes them to be sinners, and Captives under sin. Qu. But will he
reject and Reprobate all that are not Holy? An. God has not Reprobated all that
were, or are not holy; for then he had Reprobated all the World, but he will
reject all that continue unholy to the Death. Qu. But tell me, Does this
Election, and Redemption, suppose Holiness in us, or is it without any regard
to it? An. Neither the one nor the other: It Is Fallacia plurium
Interrogationum: They neither presuppose Holiness in us, nor are they without
all regard to Holiness; it is a necessary Effect but not a Cause of Election
and Redemption. Qu. Do thou stand chopping Logic with thy Betters? If we be
Elected and Redeemed without regard to our being Holy, our Election and
Redemption is secure, whether we be Holy or no. An. Good Sir excuse me, we are
Elected to Grace, as well as to Glory, and he that appoints to the end,
appoints to the necessary means leading to the end. Qu. But is holiness
necessary on our parts? An. Yes, indeed Sir, that we be so, but it is necessary
also that Grace make us so, unless we can make our selves so. Qu. But how can
Obedience be for the Glory of the Father, Son, and Spirit, when the necessity
of Holiness is so destructive to free Grace? An. Obedience in its proper place,
and for its proper end, is not destructive to free Grace: But when Hypocrites
will assign it a room which God has not appointed, as to justify us before a
righteous Judge, and give us a proper right to Heaven, then it crosses the
design of free Grace. Qu. But how can Holiness be for our honor, in making us
like God, when the perfect Righteousness of Christ would be more for our
honor? An. Good, Sir, be not angry, and I Will tell you: Inherent Righteousness
is much for our honor, being complete in its kind; but Imputed righteousness
is more for our honor, being absolutely complete. Qu. But you say, Holiness is
for our Peace; Must we then at last fetch our peace from our Duties and Graces,
is not this to renounce Christ? An. Pray, Sir, be not so hasty, we have our
Reconciliation with God, and Security from his Wrath, by the Blood of Christ;
but we have our inward peace in the Conscience, from the evidence of our
Sanctification. Qu. But does not Doctor O. say, That we must not set about
correcting our Lives; for by the deeds of the Law, no man is Justified, and
that if God should mark what is done amiss, there is no standing before him? An.
Yes indeed does he, That we must not set about correcting our Lives, in order
to Justification before the Righteous Judge of all the Earth. Qu. But how can
Holiness serve for the Conviction of Enemies, when it is not Essentially
necessary to his Friends? An. Indeed, Sir, if you will believe me, it is
Essentially necessary to all his Friends; and I pray it may prove more
serviceable to the Conviction of his Enemies. Qu. Will thou dare to Contradict
me? I tell thee, I am resolved, they shall hold, that Holiness is not necessary
to Salvation. An. Nay, pray Sir, do not force them to that: And if you can make
any shift, Rail at them upon some other account. Qu. But how can Holiness be
necessary to the Conversion of others, when men may be Converted without it?
An. Ay, indeed, if your Worship can Inform us how to conceive of Conversion
without Holiness, you shall be owned for the Wisest man in all the Parish. Qu.
But why cannot the Righteousness of Christ keep the Judgments of God from
others, more effectually than the Holiness of men? An. Because visible Holiness
honors God most before men and therefore he will honor it most with visible
Mercies. Qu. But how can Obedience be necessary to the state of justified
Persons, when they are clothed with the Robes of Christ's righteousness, which
is the only Foundation of our Communion with God? An. Very well, Sir, for
though Christ's righteousness be the Foundation of our Communion, yet Holiness
and Obedience, give us a meetness and fitness for the exercise of that
Communion. Qu. But how can Holiness be ne^essary to Sanctification? An. Holy
Obedience is necessary to Sanctification, because the new Creature is Nourisht
by suitable Acts of Obedience; even as all other things are fed by those things
of which they are made. Qu. But is not this Idem per Idem? An. No, I assure you
Sir, for the Vital Principle of Obedience, and the Living Fruits of it are
really two distinct things. Qu. But yet I cannot see any necessary Obligation
to Holiness, from those men's Principles, what should be the Reason? An. I can
soon tell you that, Sir, do younot remember, you almost Pored out your Eyes, in
the second Section. Qu. I have one question more, answer me that, and take all:
Is Holiness necessary to Salvation, as a means to an End? Now speak to the
purpose. An. Really, Sir, it is absolutely and indispensibly necessary. Qu.
This is indeed, Home, Pertinent, and somewhat to the purpose; but yet I have a
question or two more, I am sure will Choke you: Come on your ways, young Man:
What say you? What, Holiness necessary to Eternal Life, and yet neither the
Cause, Matter, nor Condition? An. Sir, I perceive you have a frail Memory, for
you quoted the Doctor just before, saying, It was neither Matter, Cause, nor
Condition, of our Justification: And now you put the question about its being
the Cause, Matter, or Condition, of Eternal Salvation. Qu. Did you spy that?
An. Do you think your Readers have all pored their Eyes out, as well as your
self? Quest. Well, hold your peace, I will now Irrefragably prove, Holiness to
be a Cause, at least Causa sine qua non, of Eternal Life: What say you to that?
An. Pray spare your pains, lest you spoil the Cause; for if you can prove it no
better a Cause, you had as good let it alone, for Causa sine qua non, non est
Causa; we allow it to be both the Condition and the Matter also of Eternal
Life: It Is the Condition, for the Doctor has owned expressly, That none shall
come to the end, who walks not in the way: And it is the Matter too, for Grace
is Glory begun, and Happiness is Holiness perfected. Qu. Well, I will not
Dispute about words, I am content it should only be a necessary way to Eternal
Life: But what becomes of Christ then, who is the only way? An. Take you no
care for that, Christ is the only way of Merit, Purchase, and Procurement; but
Holiness is a way of Means, preparatory Meetness, and Fitness for Eternal Life.
I suppose you sometimes read the 11th. A^t. of the Church of England, which
acquaints you, that we are Justified only for Christ's Merits, and yet justified
by Faith only. There may be several Only's in the same Effect, and yet each the
Only one, in suo genere. Qu. But is not the Righteousness of Christ able to
save us, without an additional righteousness of our own? An. No, Sir, for the
Righteousness of Christ being made ours, by the appointment, constitution, and
free Gift of God, we must enjoy the benefits of it, in that Method it pleases
the Donour to Ordain. It Is reason the Giver should dispose of his own Gift: And
yet it is true, the Righteousness of Christ is able to save us without any of
our own, employed for that special end for which the righteousness of Christ is
used. Qu. But do the Active and Passive Righteousness of Christ both free us
from Guilt and Punishment, and give us an actual Right and Title to Glory, and
yet can we not be saved without walking in the ways of God? An. Concerning
Active and Passive righteousness, I shall say little; but, never flatter your
self, without walking in the Ways of God you can never be saved. For it is
plain, That no Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall Inherit the Kingdom of God. Qu. But what then becomes of
Free Grace? An. It Is quite shut out of some men's Principles; but as to us, we
own it the great Spring of all our present enjoyments, and future Expectations.
Qu. But is not this to Eke out the righteousness of Christ with our own? An. I
have told you, our Holiness is no Patch to Christ's Righteousness, but has its
Distinct concerns, Peculiar uses, and Proper employment, in the Salvation of
Believers. Qu. Say you so? I protest thou art the most Pertinacious,
Refractory, and Obstinate Creature that ever I Catechized in my life: But I let
thee know, I am resolved, that they shall hold, in spite of their teeth, that
Holiness and Obedience, are not necessary to Salvation.

Now the short of all this long Discourse, our Author gives us in these words:
That to know Christ, is not to be thus acquainted with his Person, but to
understand his Gospel in its full Latitude and Extent: It Is not the Person of
Christ, but the Gospel of Christ, which is the Way, the Truth, and the Life. To
which I only say, 1. It Is a strange Definition of the Knowledge of Christ, that
it is, not to know Him: To know, is to be Ignorant; to see, is to be Blind. 2.
It Is impossible to understand the Gospel in its Latitude, but we must thus know
Christ's Person; he has Learnt little that has not Learnt the reconciliation
made in the Blood of Christ's Cross. 3. Though the Scriptures be the way and
Means, yet the Person of Christ is the way of Mediation, whereby we come to the
Father: And though we have Direction, Instruction, Encouragements from the
Scripture, to walk in the way of Holiness, yet we have Grace and Ability from
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is a Head of Influence, as well as Authority, to all
that are in Covenant with him, to walk in that Way.

At length, the Gentleman having Discharged the Office of a Catechist, will let
us know how terrible he is for an Exorcist: He falls a Raving, and Conjuring at
the acquaintance with Christ, that the Candles seem to burn blew, the Ground to
tremble; and in this Sulphurous Vehicle, we shall see him Raise his Spirit.
Acquaintance with Christ's Person is only a work of Fancy, teaches the Arts of
Hypocrisy, undermines the Fundamental Design of the Gospel, makes Men
incurably Ignorant, endless Talkers, insolent Censurers, and every Boy learns
to Despise the Ignorance of his Teachers. Our Author is Whistling over to
himself his wild Notes, just like a Blackbird in the latter end of February,
that he may not be to seek in March: So here he gives us a Synopsis of
Scolding; the brief Heads of things upon any of which he can Write a Book as
long as this: But what is the Matter? Why, Boys despise the Ignorance of their
Teachers. I had rather they should despise their Ignorance than their
Knowledge: Ay, but they despise them for not knowing Christ, and the Mystery of
the Gospel: Alas! you do not pretend to know him, but have described the
Knowledge of Christ by Ignorance of him: Oh! but the Laws of Christ will not
down with them. At this rate (I believe) they never will: All Reverence to his
Laws must cease, when his Person is exposed to Contempt: He that Teaches men to
Mock at the Personal Excellencies, Beauty, Loveliness, Fullness of the
Lawgiver, does more surely, though more slowly undermine the Foundation of
Gospel-Obedience, than he that brings his Mattocks to the Commandment itself.
The Reader perhaps is not aware what design our Author has upon him: Why, He
hopes that good People will hereafter have better thoughts of him, and his
Fellows, that they are not such Strangers to Christ, as they may Imagine; for
he has a greater Reverence for him, than to be so Rude and Unmannerly, than to
make bold with his Person, and with his Laws. I could heartily wish, indeed,
our Author were no stranger to Christ, (but it is better so than worse) to be
Ignorant of Him, may perhaps prove his best Plea for Enmity against Him: For
his Boldness, I cannot tell how more unmannerly he could well be; he has
divided his chiefest and most glorious Titles, whereby the Spirit of God has
Recommended him to our best Affections, the Gospel Portraitures of Christ's
Loveliness, etc. he calls Romantic Descriptions; he has Overthrown and
Confounded, all his Offices, Canceled the main Ends of Christ's coming into the
World, turned all that is Sacred into Drollery, and yet he thinks he has not
made bold enough with Christ.

From hence he takes occasion to fall into some admiration of the Church
Catechism, and the Wisdom of the Church in feeding her Children there with
wholesome and substantial Food. It will be long enough before he commends the
Wisdom of the Church in her Articles, put forth to be the Standard of the Faith
of all that are to instruct the Churches Children: I shall entreat our Author,
seeing he is so passionately in love with the Catechism, to practice it more;
to keep his Hands from Picking and Stealing; (for Volkelius, Shlictingius, etc.
complain heavily of him;) and his Tongue from evil speaking, lying, and
slandering; (and herein another sort of men make lamentable Complaints.)

There is but one thing more, whereof he will take Notice; and I am heartily
glad on it, for I feared when his hand was in, there would have been no End of
this railing Humor: But why he should call it one thing more, I cannot
imagine, when it is but the same strain of Profane Scoffing at the Concerns of
Religion. But let us hear that one Thing: When the Scripture speaks of the
Knowledge of Christ, it includes not only the speculative part of Knowledge,
which consists in true Notions; but the Virtue and Efficacy of it in the
Government of our Lives. Surely, this is not the one thing he would speak to:
No, no; These men talk of an Experimental Knowledge of Christ: Now he comes to
it: The meaning of which is, that this Acquaintance with Christ's Person, warms
and heats their Fancies, moves their Passions; sometimes they find great
breakings of heart, they melt and dissolve into tears for their sins, when they
remember their Lord suffered for them; They see him hang upon the Cross, etc.
It requires no great Wit to be Profane; common Abilities will serve to
represent the Truth to disadvantage; he that presumes his Tongue is his own,
may let it run riot without Truth or Honesty.

1. This Acquaintance with Christ's Person (says he) heats their Fancies. Thus
he has told us before, p. 95. That the workings of the Law, the Offers of
Christ, and our entering into Covenant with him, is but the working of heated
Fancy, and Religious Distraction; that to speak of Christ's beauty, loveliness,
fullness and preciousness, are but Romantic Descriptions of him: That is, All
is Fancy, that comports not with his own extravagant Whims^y. The Knowledge of
Christ, informs our Judgments, affects our Hearts, reforms our Lives; and it
will argue little love to our Redeemer, if we entertain meaner thoughts of him,
by loud Clamor, and impotent Reflections upon him.

2. It moves their Passions; and if we be a little passionately affected with
the love of our Redeemer, it is a pardonable Error: When our Author would curry
favor with his Reader, and persuade him, that for all his scandalous
Expressions, he was no Enemy to Christ, he could say as much as that came to,
p. 184, 185. This is a Sacrament wherein we celebrate the Love of our dying
Lord, and express our most passionate Love to him: Here is Love, passionate,
and most passionate Love; and yet others Passions must not be moved, for fear
they set the Town on fire.

3. They find great breakings of heart. I would we experienced them more, upon
Condition we were ten times more reviled for them: but I cannot well conceive,
how the Heart should be broken from sin, that is not broken for sin; and though
this is grown so despicable a Matter in his eyes, yet we have this Relief, that
a broken and contrite heart God will not despise.

4. But they melt, and dissolve into Tears, when they remember what their Lord
suffered for them: They are content he should be called their Lord; if others
renounce him, they are willing to own him; It Is better to be reproached in this
World, that they have a Savior, than condemned in the next World, because they
have none: and let it be their, and all our Cares, that Men may not hate us for
professing Christ; and God too, because we do but profess him. But is it so
heinous a Crime, to weep at the remembrance of what Christ suffered for us? We
pray that God would fulfill upon us that Promise, Zech. 12. 10. That he would
pour out his Spirit upon us, that we may look upon him whom we have pierced,
and mourn over him, and for him, as one mourns for an only Son; and we say
with Holy Herbert,

If thou have no Sighs nor Tears,
Would thou had no Sins nor Fears;
Who has These, Those ill forbears.
But, 5. They see him hang upon the Cross, and have all his Agonies, and dying
groans in their ears. Well, if Faith represents to us a crucified Christ, the
Galatians were not called foolish upon that Account: When we read that Christ
was amazed, and sore troubled, that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even to
death, that it expressed from his Body clods of Blood; all the Question is,
whether we ought to Read these things between sleeping and waking; or get the
most lively and powerful Impressions of them upon our Souls? The Primitive
Church used to pray, (...) libera nos Domine: And the Present Church of
England; By thine Agony and bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion, good Lord
deliver us.

6. They Curse their Sins that nailed him there. The truth is, they do not
bless their Sins for crucifying Christ; though he was a Person above our
Authors scorn, that used that Hyperbole, Foelix Peccatum quod peperit Christum:
But sin has proved so dishonorable to our God, so wounding to Christ, so
grievous to the Spirit, so bitter to the Conscience, that we would say the
worst by it we can, on this side Cursing. And this we have good Authority for,
page 185. The Memory of what Christ has done and suffered, excites in us a just
Hatred of our sins. So that, were we but Masters of his Regular Proportions,
could we but find the just Measure of the Hatred of sin, and Nick it exactly;
betwixt too much, and too little hatred of sin, we might escape the severity of
his Censure: Hitherto we have been taught, That the just Measure of loving
Christ, is to love him without Measure; and the just Measure of the Hatred of
sin, is to hate it without Measure; but our Author (good Man) is very
solicitous least we should over-love Christ, or over-hate our iniquities.

7. They tremble at the Thoughts of the Naturalness of Gods vindictive Justice
to him. And if they do consider God, as one of purer eyes than to behold
Iniquity; if they do view his Holiness, and in the sense of their own vileness,
cry out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean lips: As
good as they, or he, have trembled at (...) sight of this Glorious, Holy, and
Righteous Judge.

8. But they feel all the Horrors and Agonies of damned Spirits: I knew we
should have a Rapper before we had done. Is this the Fruit of Acquaintance with
Christ? I question not but a Cain, a Judas, a Spira, may have felt in this
Life, something of the horrors of the Damned: The Apostle denounces some such
dreadful vengeance against Renegadoes from the Christian Faith; Heb. 10. That
there remains no more Sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation, to devour the Adversaries, v. 26, 27. But
these despairing horrors proceed not from an experimental Knowledge of Christ
(as our Author either ignorantly dreams, or maliciously calumniates,) but from
an Ignorance of him, the true design of his Death, in Reconciling God and Man:
This is one of their Extremes; for at other times they are ravished with his
Love, charmed and captivated with his Beauty, refresht and ravished with his
Comforts, etc. It is easy to observe, that our Author always writes pro re
nata, just as the present occasion invites him; for he will tell you, p. 396.
That the Soul many times feels such great and Ravishing delights in all the
Acts of Religion, as infinitely excel all the pleasures of Sense; they relish
great Pleasure and Satisfaction in the sense of Gods Goodness. P. 397. They
must needs feel sometimes such divine Touches, and Impressions, as are the
Effects ( if I may so speak) of a mutual Love and Sympathy. And had these men
but the Happiness to have expressed themselves in his very words, and
Syllables, they might have said either the worst or best of Religion, they had
pleased, without Rebuke.

But all this (he tells us) may be no more than the working of a warm and
Enthusiastic Fancy; but then if it should prove the work of the Holy and
Blessed Spirit, which he ascribes to Fancy and Conceit, how near it may come to
the sin of those who ascribed that to Beelzebub, which was effected by the
Finger of God, I must leave to his serious Consideration. Enthusiasm is much
reproached, and little understood. (...). Enthusiasme is, when the Mind is
wholly enlightened by God: In which sense I pray God make us all Enthusiasts.
And let the End of all that Joy and Satisfaction that we have in Christ, be
improved for Obedience; That his Love to us may so powerfully constrain our
hearts, that we may wholly live to him that dyed for us, and rose again, who is
also at the right hand of God, making Intercession for us. To him be Glory.
Amen.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. Of our Union to Christ, and Communion with him.
OUR Author will not in Courtesy, or cannot for Shame deny, that the Scripture
does mention such a Relation between Christ and Christians, as may be expressed
by an Union; and that these Phrases of [Being in Christ,] and [Abiding in
Christ,] can signify no less. Now this Union to Christ being a very suspicious
Phrase, he is deeply concerned, to mollify it with some such Healing
Explication, that it may not prejudice, or however not utterly destroy his main
design. To interpret it according to the sound of words, is to blow up himsels,
with his whole Cause; and therefore it is judged a safer way, to accommodate
the Expression, if it will be tractable, or to force it, if it proves
obstinate, to a Compliance with his own espoused Notions, and preconceived
Opinions: And now we see, that the True Reason why he so zealously declaimed
against that way of Interpreting Scripture in the last Section, was that he
might without suspicion serve himself of it in this. Some do not like his
Tottering and Staggering way of wording his Matters: It may be expressed by an
Union, and it can signify no less than an Union: A form of speech invented
doubtless to let us know, how unable he is to deny, and yet how loath he is to
confess the plainest Truth. I have not forgot that he told us, p. 108. That the
Scripture describes the Profession of Christianity, a sincere Belief and
Obedience to the Gospel, by [Having Christ, and Being in Christ;] but now he is
graciously pleased to Mount them a little higher, and is gently content, that
they should signify no less than an Union with Christ.

Four Notable Observations he makes to us in this one Section.

[1] That those Metaphors which describe the Relation between Christ and
Christians, do primarily refer to the Christian Church, and not to every
Individual Christian. I am sorry that it must still be my great unhappiness to
dissent from him, but seeing all Accommodation is desperate, we must bear the
shock of his Reasonings as well as we can: Christ (says he) is called a Head,
but he is the Head of his Church, which is his Body, as the Husband is the Head
of his Wife; No particular Christian is the Body of Christ, but only a Member
in this Body. This indeed would do pretty well, but that it wants two small
Circumstances, Truth and Pertinency; which being so inconsiderable, we may well
spare in any of His Writings. And,

1. Methinks I want that sorry circumstance of Truth in his Argument. Christ is
the Head of his Church, as the Husband is Head of his Wife; but the Headship of
the Husband over the Wife, will not exactly measure the Headship of Christ over
Believers; we must call in assistance from another Similitude, that of the Head
in the Natural Body over the Members: Christ is a Head of Influence, as well as
Authority; he communicates Grace to Obey, as well as commands Obedience. And
this is that the Apostle would teach us, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. -- The head, even
Christ, from whom all the Body fitly joined together and compact, by that which
every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working, in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the Body, to the edifying of it sel^ in love.
Here Is an effectual Operation in every part, the Growth and Increase of every
individual Member, by virtue of that Influence which the Head communicates to
it: And now to make the Husbands headship over the Wife, to represent the whole
of Christ's Headship, is craftily to seduce us from the Consideration of that
Grace which from Christ we receive, to help us in time of need. The Holy Ghost
has singled out the most per, and perspicuous Metaphors, that outward things
would afford, to instruct us in the Nature of that Union, and Relation that
Believers have to Christ, the Privileges and Advantages which they receive
thereby, and those Duties which indispensably arise from thence; and yet such
is the incorrigible and untractable Nature of all outward things, such is their
shortness, poverty, and narrowness, that they do not yield a Similitude that
will adaequately, and commensurately express the total of Christ's Grace, Mercy
and Authority, or of our mutual Obligations and Duty. Much of the Poverty and
Beggarliness of the Mosaical Types, lay in this, (those (...), Gal. 4. 9.) that
they could not represent Jesus Christ to the life, whom yet it was their design
in some measure to shadow out. And when I have named a shadow, I have given a
sufficient Reason of my Assertion; for though a shadow may describe the general
Lineaments of its Body, yet it will not paraphrase upon the Complexion: To
supply this defect, it has pleased the Wisdom of God to institute that numerous
train of Types, that so what could not be expressed by any one, might yet in
parcels be described by Another. Hence is it, that one Type represents the
Death of Christ as a Sacrifice for Sin; as the Goat of the Sin-offering, Lev.
16. 15. Another, the Intercession of Christ at the right hand of the Father; as
Aarons appearing in the Most Holy place upon the Feast of Expiation: The same
Wisdom has it pleased the Spirit of God to exe^cise, in describing to us the
Union and Relation betwixt Christ and Believers; for, seeing that no one single
Metaphor, however borrowed from the nearest, and most intimous Relation upon
Earth, could possibly convey to our understandings all that Mercy, Grace and
Love, which from Christ issues to all that are in Covenant with him; nor all
that Reverence, Love and Duty, which from Believers is due to a Redeemer;
therefore has he chosen out many, that so by putting together the Mercy and
Duty which is comprehended in each, we might spell out the Meaning of what is
wrapped up in that Relation wherein we stand to him. But,

2. It wants Pertinency as well as Truth: For, what if no particular Christian
be the Body of Christ. yet is he a Member of that Body; and Christ, as Head of
that Body, is related in particular to him, without the Intervention of the
Body. A Body is nothing else but the result of all the Integral parts put
together in their due Site, and proper Order: and the Church is nothing else
but the aggregate of many Christians united under their proper Pastor: And as
the Head in the Natural Body is immediately related to all the parts, so is
Christ immediately related to every true Christian. If then he will argue thus,
No particular Christian is the Body, therefore Christ is primarily related to
the Body; any one with as much honesty may infer, Every particular Christian
is a Member of Christ, therefore, Christ is primarily related to every
particular Christian: And thus the Conclusion will be as far to seek as ever;
Whether this Metaphor of a Head does primarily refer to the whole Body, or
particular Members. But let us go on: Christ is called a Husband, (says he) but
then the whole Church, not every particular Christian, is his Spouse, as St.
Paul tells the Church of Corinth, 2 Cor. 11. 2. I have espoused you to one
Husband, that I may present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. To which renowned
Argument, I have many things to oppose. 1. If the Church of Corinth was the
Spouse of Christ, then the Church of Ephesus, that of Coloss, that at Philippi,
and to be sure the Church of Rome, will put in their claims with equal right to
that Title; and then what becomes of what he asserts, p. 14^. Christ is a great
Enemy to Poligamy, and has but one Spouse. Is it not great pity a Conceit so
ingenious, should have its Neck broken at the first Encounter? And, 2. If
Christ has but one Spouse, and yet every particular Church be his Spouse; it*s
but crumbling the Metaphor into more minute particles, and then he may be a
Husband to every individual Believer. 3. The Text proves not that Christ has
but one Spouse, but that the Church has but one Husband; I have espoused you
to one Husband. 4. Though the Metaphor may perhaps more fitly express Christ's
Relation to particular Churches, than particular Believers; yet this hinders
not, but that Christ may be primarily related to particular Believers: For the
Metaphor does not express the Order of Christ's Relation, but the Relation it
self. The word Church is only a Term of Art, which expresses the same Persons
collectively, who distributively taken, are each immediately related to Christ.
Again, Christ (says he) is a Shepherd, and the Christian Church is his Flock,
for the Relation between Shepherd and Sheep, does primarily concern the whole
Flock. This is but one Doctors opinion at most, and will hardly mount it up to
the Credit of Probability. For, 1. A Shepherd may be related to one single
Sheep; and that one is enough to keep alive, and maintain the Relation; one
Sheep will denominate him a Shepherd, though there must be more than one to
constitute a Flock. As there was a first Man, related to God, as a Creature to
his Creator, before there was A Church; so there was a first Disciple, a first
Believer, or Convert, and that one under the Pastoral Charge and care of Christ
the great Shepherd, ipso facto, as a sincere Convert, and sound Believer, and
yet that Individual would not make a Society under Bishops or Pastors. 2. A
Flock is made up of many Sheep; now that which constitutes, is at least in
order of Nature before the thing constituted: The whole is made up of parts;
and I have been taught to presume, that the parts are in order of Nature before
the whole: A Shepherd does not muster a company of howling Wolves, and roaring
Lions, and then by that Collection make them a Flock of Sheep; but he gathers
particular Sheep together, unites them into one Fold, and thereby they become a
Flock. The way of Christ is not, to amass a Medley of debauched Varlets and
Scoundrels, and by making them a Church, make them Christians; but he seeks out
for his own Service, particular Christians, and out of these Materials he forms
his Church. Again: Christ (says he) is the Rock upon which his Church is built,
and the Christian Church is a Holy Temple. Let him take it ^or granted, if it
will do him any service; but is this Rock, this Foundation, this Cornerstone,
related primarily to the Building, or to the particular Stones? The Apostle
Peter, who was a wise Master Builder in Church-work, understood the Method much
better: 1 Pet. 2. 5. To whom coming as to a Living Stone; ye also as lively
Stones, are built up a spiritual House: Hence ordinary understandings would
conclude, that the building did not make the materials, but the materials made
the building; the Spiritual House did not make the Lively Stones, but the
Lively Stones made the Spiritual House: Such Language the Apostle durst use;
these lively Stones were first united to the living Cornerstone, and the
product of all was, a beautiful Fabric: And thus was Solomon's Temple built;
the materials were exactly fitted, and squared for their respective uses and
places, and there was nothing to do but to join them together, and out of
those (after seven years Labor) there grew up a Holy Temple: Had He built of
Bricks, the Edifice would never have converted them into hewn Stones; and had
he used only Sycamores, they had never been turned into Cedars by being
Sleepers in the wall. I must therefore abate him an Ace or two of his general
Conclusion: All these Metaphors in their first, and most proper use, refer to
the whole Society of Christians. In Isa. 9. 6. Christ is called the Everlasting
Father, which Metaphor (if it be a Metaphor) does primarily express the
Relation of Christ to every adopted child, and not the Relation of Christ to
Children in gross, and in the Lump: A Father is as really so to one child, as
to Twenty; he may be a Father to more, but not more a Father. It will sound
harshly in the Ears of any that have not lost them under the Cataracts of
Nilus: to say, That Father does not primarily describe the Relation of Philip (
v. g.) to Alexander, John, etc. but to children, in the first place, and then
at second hand, and through a remove or two, to Alexander and John. Thus is the
Everlasting Father primarily related to every child, by virtue of his
Adoption, and Regeneration; and secondarily to them all as brethren, related to
one another, living under the same Discipline, and Laws of the Family.

[2] He observes further to us for our Learning: That the Union of particular
Christians to Christ, is by Means of their Union to the Christian Church: Which
he as Learnedly proves from 1 Cor. 12. 27. Ye are the Body of Christ, and
Members in Particular. Where the strength of this Argument lies, I confess, I
see not: That the Church of Corinth was the Body of Christ, That I plainly see:
That every particular Member of that Church, was a Member of Christ; I think I
see that too: But that it was therefore a Member of Christ, because it was
United to that Body of the Church of Corinth; I own my Dullness, that I cannot
see: And I have some scruples that makes me Halt, and not so Nimbly go on both
Feet into our Authors Opinion. For, 1. If particular Christians by being United
to the Body, become the Members of Christ, then what Medium of Union have these
particular Churches to Unite them to Christ? We poor Folks of the Laity have an
Expedient found out to Unite us to Christ, namely, by Uniting us to the Church
under the Bishops, and Pastors: But what shall become of the Bishops and
Pastors themselves? What Provision is made for them? Which way shall they be
United to Christ? Some (indeed) talk of Uniting them by their Metropolitans,
and them again by their Patriarchs, and then these by the Pope: But who shall
Unite him, poor man? I see here is a Design laid to prove the Pope to be
Antichrist. 2. When a Church is first Collected, I am perplexing my self how
the first Convert, the first Believer comes to be United to Christ, when there
is never a Church existing by which he should be United: And it troubles me to
think, what a long while that unhappy Creature may be Holy, and very Religious,
and yet cannot be united to Christ, because others will not consent to become a
Church; and thus he must necessarily perish, though he be thus Holy, and
Devout, because others will not go to Heaven with him. But, 3. We must
suppose, that Baptism Unites us to the Visible Church: Now, either this single
Person was United to Christ before his Baptism, or not: If he was, then the
Cause is lost; for then Union with the Visible Church, is not the only Means of
our Union to Christ. If not, then, 1. What a sad Generation of Wretches must be
the Ingredients of a Church? And some will define it, as others have made it; A
Cage of unclean Birds, and a Hold of every filthy and unclean Spirit. And then,
2. It will be the unquestionable Duty of the Pastors of the Church, to admit
into the Society, the most Profligate Rascals, that offer themselves: For what
would you have them do? Shall they be so Barbarous and Inhumane, such bloody
Murderers of Souls, to deny them the only Means of their Union to Christ? And
what would you have the poor wicked wretches do? Repent, and believe, and turn
from their sins? Alas! all is to no purpose, they can never be United to Christ,
without the only Means of Union; were they as Meek as Moses, as Patient as Job,
as Believing as Abraham, they are never the nearer Christ; and therefore as
good come Laden with all their Villainies, and Triumphing in their Rogueries,
and be but united to the Church, and all in good time, they may come to be
United to Christ: But surely the Church of England has Instructed her Children
otherwise. I shall not press our Author with the Articles, because he is no
great admirer of them; but because he so adores the Catechism, I shall remit
him thither for Satisfaction. Qu. What is required of Persons to be Baptized?
Ans. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the Promises of God made to them in that Sacrament. If now such a
Faith, such a Repentance, as are here described, must qualify a Person for
Baptism, that he may be United thereby to the Church, and so to Christ; I would
gladly learn, whether such a faith, and such a repentance, will not serve to
Unite him to Christ, antecedent to his Baptism? And if not, whether the Church
can contribute any more to his Union with him? Another Reason of our Authors,
proceeds thus: The Church is Christ's Flock, and every Christian who is of this
Fold, is one of Christ's Sheep. In good time! but is he therefore, and only
therefore, one of Christ's Sheep because he is one of this Fold? Or rather taken
into the Fold, because he was first one of Christ's Sheep? But if indeed this be
the real way to Create sheep, by taking any thing that has four Legs into the
Fold, it will be a Noble piece of Charity to revive the Tribute of Wolves; and
if the Breed should be worn out in England, we know from whence to recruite the
Sheepfold; but still he proceeds, and I perceive he has a mind to prove
something if he knew what. The Church is Christ's Spouse, every Christian is a
Member of that Society, which Christ owns for his Spouse, but every Christian
is not Christ's Spouse. No? Why not? Now comes the Knocking-argument: He is a
great enemy to Poligamy, and has but one Spouse. Wonderful! So is Christ a
great Enemy to Monsters, and Prodigies, and has but one Body: And yet for all
this, our Author could allow the Church of Corinth, to be his Spouse, to be his
Body, and then I will allow the Church of Smyrna, to have been his Body, and
his Spouse, and others (as their affections lead them) will no doubt allow
other particular Churches to be his Body, his Spouse; and then Christ shall
have as many particular Bodies, and Spouses, as there are particular Churches
upon the Face of the Earth; and so this Doughty argument Vanishes into Smoke,
and nothing: and in lieu of it, I will offer him another. It Is impossible to be
United to Christ, without the only Means of Union, but it is possible to be
United to Christ, without being United to a particular Church, therefore to be
United to a particular Church, is not the only Means of Uniting us to Christ.
The former Proposition we will for once humbly beg at his hands, and do not
doubt but he will charitably grant it; the second is Evidenced from hence: When
particular Churches are broken in pieces by Persecution, or otherwise, yet the
true believing Members are not thereby separated from Christ; they cease not to
be Christ's Friends, because the World is their Enemy: Yea indeed (says our
Author, page 165.) If there be no Visible Society (as it may happen in time of
Persecution) it must of necessity alter the Case. That is in plain English; his
Discourse had been Strong, if it had not been Weak; and our Union to the Church
had been the only Means of our Union to Christ, but for one ill favored
Business, that there is another Means of our union to him, and we may be united
to him without it. I grant (indeed) with much readiness, that it is our
unquestionable Duty, and when all Circumstances concur, our Indispensible Duty
for every Christian to join himself to some particular Church; the Command of
Christ has made it so: The Edifying our own Souls in Faith, Love, Comfort, adds
to that necessity; the Glorifying of our God, and our Redeemer, in a visible
Profession of, and Subjection to all his Ordinances, heightens that Necessity;
the enjoyment of many Gospel Ordinances which presuppose a Church State, add
more weight to the Necessity, and that our Union with Christ has more Bonds
laid upon it, by this means, I freely own; but that our Union with the Church,
is the only means to Unite us to Christ, I must see better Arguments to prove
it, before I know how to believe it: Our Union with Christ, is by Invisible and
Internal Ligaments, and if there were no other, than what a Visible Church can
afford, I do not see, but all Christians are Obliged to be Hypocrites. The
great Promises of the Gospel, those of Justification, Adoption, and
Sanctification, are made to Individuals, and how to apply them to whole
Churches, otherwise than by the Individuals, is unconceivable: They are single
Persons, that are Justified, Sanctified, Adopted, Pardoned, and Saved, and not
a Complex Notion, which is only an Operation of the Mind conceiving of singular
things, as they relate one to another.

There is yet one Text of Scripture, which our Author has reserved as the
Triarij to the main Battle; and though his Jelites be Cut off, and his Body
shaken, yet so long as his Reserves are entire, and unbroken, he cannot be
totally Routed. The place is, John 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. I am the true Vine, and
my Father is the Husbandman. -- Abide in me, and I in you. As the Branch cannot
bear Fruit except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me.
Now because he lays such a Stress upon, and places all his Hopes and Confidence
in this place, I shall particularly Examine, 1. His Interpretation. 2. His
Reasons for that Interpretation. 3. The Use he makes of this Interpretation.

(1.) For his Interpretation, it has more Faces than Ianus; and more Colors
than the Rainbow. I am the true Vine: Where [I] signifies Christ together with
his Church: There Is one Face. But page 146. He repents that ever he took the
Person of Christ into the Paraphrase, for fear some ill disposed persons should
make an ill use on*t, and therefore he Glosses it thus: I am the true Vine,
that is the Church: So [ I] is grown a Church. But yet that neither will not
answer all his Occasions, nor stop all Gaps, and therefore it must put on
another shape: page 147. When Christ speaks in the first Person [ I] he cannot
mean this of his own Person, but of his Church, Doctrine, and Religion: And yet
for all this it will not do the Feat, but it must pass through one
Metamorphosis more, and it signifies, a sincere and hearty Belief of the
Gospel. So here we have got the Act and the Object Married together in this one
word [ I:] A man would conclude he had found at last Aristotle's Materia Prima,
it is Omnium formarum capax: Nothing in Act, but every thing in Power, a piece
of soft Wax, that is pliable to any Impression, a mere blanck Paper, you may
Write down your own Conditions: But what is meant by the Vine? Why that is the
Church too, page 146. That is, the Church, which is founded on the belief of my
Gospel, is the only true Church: Or, I am the Vine, that is, the Church is the
Church; but let us proceed. He that abides in me: [In me] that is, the
Christian Church: [I in him,] that is, the Christian Doctrine; For without me,
you can do uothing: That is, without a sincere belief of my Gospel. And now he
presumes he has laid his Matters so Closely, Evenly, and Regularly together,
that he may defy the Cunning of the most expert Caviller to disturb them. And
yet to deal openly with him, he has not lead me Captive by his fair Colors and
regular Proportions. For, 1. I find his way of Interpretation merely Arbitrary,
such as has no other Foundation but the Sovereign will of the Commentator; he
deals with Scripture as if it were his perfect Vassal, and he the absolute
Monarch of the Word of God; and that his Paraphrase knew no other Language than
his Car tell est nostre plaisir: For such is our Will and Pleasure* Let the
Reader take but a taste: He that abides in me, and I in him. Where [ Me] must
signify the Christian Church, and [ I] the Christian Doctrine. For we must
know for our Learning, that [ Me] in the Ablative case, must always signify a
Church; but [ I] in the Nominative case, that is the Christian Doctrine. And if
any peevish Fellow shall Object that it is a huge Wonder that such a slight
Variation of the Case, should alter the Signification. Every puisny Shool-Boy
will inform him, that the varying the Case, does wonderfully alter the Case.
Now had it been Referred to a Hundred Systematical, Heavy-headed Divines, they
would have concluded, One and All; that if [ I] signify a Doctrine, [ Me] will
signify the same: And if [ Me[ signify a Church, [ I] will signify neither
better nor worse, but a Church too; but when a Zaphnath Paaneah, a Revealer of
Secrets, shall take the Matter in hand, he will show you the difference. 2.
Another Exception I have against this Interpretation, is, That Christ has often
spoke in the first Person, He has compared himself to many other things, and
yet never intended any thing by [ I] but his own Self, John 10. 11. I am the
good Shepherd. And besides that, we have had our Authors Suffrage to it, the
thing it self makes it evident that Christ speaks there neither of Church, nor
Doctrine. The Fold, must signify the Church: The Pasture, will answer the
Doctrine, and Christians they are the Sheep, but Christ himself is the
Shepherd. And yet one signification more for this poor [ I] will do the
business, let it signify the Pastors and Bishops, and that will heal all. And
I do not doubt when he has need of them, he can fi^d a Dozen more
significations of that one word, that one Letter [ I.] Again, John 10. 7.
Christ says, I am the Door. Now the Church is evidently the House, or Temple,
and so [ I] will not do very well for Church, in that place: And the Doctrine,
is the Orders, and Rules for Government of the House; and therefore we had not
best make [ I] signify Doctrine neither, in this place: Oh! but then (and it
was well thought on) Baptism is a Sacrament of Admission into the Church, and
then it will run as Glib upon the Tongue as may be, I am the Door; that is,
Baptism is the Door. But what shall we say to John 6. 48. I am the Bread of
Life. Oh! that is wondrous easy, and the Interpretation natural, and without
straining; that is, My Doctrine is the Bread of Life, which answers the Manna.
But then Christ tells us, ver. 51. That the Bread which he will give is his
Flesh, which he will give for the Life of the World. What shall become of us
now? Why our Author must take advice with his Pillow about this Difficulty, and
let it signify any thing in the World; Black or Blew, provided it do not
signify the Person of Christ, and the Interpretation is authentic, and by to
Morrow-morning, shall shine with it is own Light. 3. This Interpretation avows
false Doctrine. He had told us: That by He that abides in me, is meant, he
that abides in the Christian Church. And our Savior assures us, ver. 5. That
without [ Me] ye can do nothing. Now in just proportion to his Interpretation,
the sense must run thus: Without you be in the Christian Church, it is
impossible ye should do any thing that is good. And how notoriously false this
is of a particular Church, is evident, how many particular Churches have been
dissolved; The Shepherd smitten, and the Sheep scattered, and yet the
Indivi^uals have brought forth Fruit in patience. Our Author should have
considered this a little better: Why so he has. Without me ye can do nothing;
that is, Without such a sincere and hearty belief of my Gospel. Well, but we
were told, that by [ Me] was meant the Church: And we took it for granted, that
if we met with it in the Ablative case, it ought to signify the Church; And
must it now signify the Doctrine? How often has the Wind turned in half an
hour? Oh! but you are to understand, that, then it was in the 4th. ver. Abide
in me: But this is in the 5th. verse, Without me. And so the Rule will be this;
That whenever you find it in the Ablative case, in the 4th. verse of any
Chapter, then it signifies the Church; but if it fall out to be the Ablative
case, and the 5th. verse, then believe it, you shall do well to Interpret it by
Gospel or Doctrine: But still here is an odd Scruple behind; For what will
become of ver. 4? Abide in Me, and and I in you: As the Branch cannot bear
Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide
in Me. Now our Authors Gloss is this, [ abide in Me,] continue in the Church;
and [ I in you,] let my Doctrine continue in you. And then the following words
must be thus Paraphrased: As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it
abide in the Vine, no more can ye except ye [abide in the Church:] Which spoken
of a particular Church, is utterly false; and there is no help left, but only
this standing Rule: That [ Me] in the beginning of a verse, signifies a Church;
but in the latter end of a verse, it always signifies a Doctrine. And then the
5th. verse too, will be as plain as a Pike-staff: He that abides in me, that
is, in the Church; and I in him, that is, the Doctrine in him; the same
brings forth much Fruit: for without me; that is, without a sincere and
hearty belief of my Doctrine (or to disguise it a little, say Gospel) it is
impossible you should do any thing that is good: And surely, never was a small
piece of Armor better placed, nor to better purpose, by the Wit of Man. I have
done with his Interpretation, but that I cannot forbear to give the Reader the
Sum of what he has said: That Church which owns my Doctrine, is the true
Vine: and all you who make a public profession of Fait^o in me, (i. e. of a
belief of my Gospel) and live in Communion with one another, are the Branches
of this Vine; and whoever of you continue steadfast in this Profession, and
Communion, and do not only make a visible profession of Faith in me, but suffer
my Doctrine and Precepts to dwell and abide in you too, to Govern your Wills
and Affections, and direct your Conversations in the World, all such of you
will be very Fruitful in good Works. And it is very likely to be true, for it
would be a great wonder if they whose Wills, and Affections, and Conversations,
are Governed by the Word of Christ, should do nothing that is good; because most
things in the World, are what they are, excepting only Christ's Person, which
shall signify, Many, Diverse, Contrary Things, and in short, any Thing besides
Himself.

(2.) His Interpretation being so Arbitrary, Precarious, Self-Inconsistent, and
Ridiculously false, I need not much trouble my self with his Reasons; nor
should I, but that they also discover its ^ness. Reason 1. The Jewish Church is
frequently in the Old Testament called a Vine, Isa. 5. 1. I will sing to my
Beloved a Song concerning his Vineyard. My Beloved had a Vineyard: Judge
between me and my Vineyard. And now he must be very blind, that does not see
the Church is compared to a Vine; though some will be so Peevish, as to fancy
some small difference between a Vine, and a Vineyard. But yet it is called a
Vine, Jer. 2. 21. Very true: Ergo, What? Why therefore Christ is not compared
to a Vine, in the New Testament. And therefore it must signify Doctrine,
Gospel, Religion, and Twenty things more. But, 1. Tell me seriously: Did God,
or any of the Prophets, ever say, I am the Vine; and then teach the Jews to
discant thus upon it? That is, The Church which is founded on the belief of
Moses his Doctrine, is the only true Church. When the Prophet will describe the
Church by a Vine, he tells you expressly what he intends; and there is an end of
all Controversy: And so would our Savior if ever he intended to be
understood, till a happy Head should, after Sixteen Hundred Years, light upon
the Mystery. Ay, but the Christian Church is expressly called an Olive Tree, and
the Members of it called Branches, Romans 11. 17, 18. Expressly? And must we then
split against that Rock, and Interpret the place, by the express the sound of
words? Two things let him consider at his Leisure, 1. Whether it be the
Christian Church that is there compared to the Olive Tree. 2. Whether it be
said, that Christ is the Olive Tree: Which expression if he can produce, and
then make it out, that [I] am the Olive Tree, signifies the Church is so; we
will then freely confess he has bidden fair toward a probability for the truth
of his Interpretation. 2. Because God is called the Husbandman, who takes care
to Dress this Vine, which cannot be understood of Christ, but of the Church.
This Reason seems to carry some civility toward Jesus Christ, and therefore
deserves a fairer Treatment than the strength of it can challenge. Let this
suffice: The Father is called (...), the Husbandmand, in respect of the
Branches of the Vine, ver. 2. Every branch that bears Fruit he purges, that
it may bring forth more Fruit; and every branch that bears not Fruit, he
takes away. 3. Christ speaks of such branches in him as bear no fruit: Now
there can be no such branches in the Person of Christ, for our very Union to
Him will make us Fruitful. Ans. Many things are said to be, which only seem to
be. There Is nothing more ordinary than for appearances, to wear the Livery of
Realityes: Hypocrites are said to be in Christ (...), who are not so (...),
Acts 8. 15, 16. Simon Magus is said to believe, who yet was in the Gall of
Bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity: Rotten, Dead Branches may have a
visible station in the Vine, and yet derive no nourishment from the Vine; and
visible Professors may be said to be in Christ, in a judgment of Charity, which
thinks no evil where none appears; and hops all things, where there is ground
of hope. Our Savior prescribes a Rule how we must judge, who have no direct
Cognizance of the heart; when he himself takes other Measures of Men, and
needs not that any should testify of Man, for he knows what is in Man. 4. To
confirm all this, and prevent Objections, It Is evident (says he) from the
Chapter, that Christ when he speaks in the First Person [I,] and [in Me,]
cannot mean this of his own Person, but of his Church, Doctrine, and Religion.
But where lies the Evidence of this great Demonstration? Why Christ says, I am
the true Vine, and ye are the Branches; He that abides in me, and I in him,
brings forth much Fruit, for without me you can do nothing. Well, what of all
this? Why, our Author would willingly Learn what sense can be made of all this,
if we understand it of the Person of Christ: And I will as willingly Teach him,
if he be not too proud to Learn, I Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New
Covenant, am very fitly compared to a Vine; and ye my Disciples are as fitly
compared to the Branches of a Vine. Now he that really abides in me by a true
lively faith, and I in him by the Quickening Operations of my Spirit, the same
brings forth much Fruit of holy Obedience; for without derivation of Grace
from Me your Root, you can do nothing that is truly good, and acceptable to
God. Oh! but he has two or three formidable Objections against this
Interpretation. 1. It Is not very Intelligible, How we can be, or abide in
Christ's Person? No more it is: If we bring Capernaitical understandings along
with us, who Puzzled their Heads with a gross Notion of Carnal eating the Flesh,
and drinking the Blood of Christ. If by [being in Christ] were understood, a
Local, Physical, or Natural being in Him, it were somewhat Unintelligible, but
when no more is meant by it, but that every true Believer is by Constitution of
the Covenant of Grace, one Person morally with Christ; so considered and dealt
with by God, there is no more insuperable Difficulty, than what unbelief will
create in the clearest Truths of the Gospel. But, 2. It Is more unintelligible
still; How we can be in the Person of Christ, and the Person of Christ at the
same time be in us; Which is a new piece of Philosophy, called Penetration of
Dimensions. But there is no great danger in that: Christ may dwell in us by his
Spirit, and we in him by Faith, and yet Faith and the Spirit, never disturb
each other in their Motions; but what the Dimensions of the Soul, in its
actings of Faith, or of the Spirit in it is working of Grace are, this I
confess, is to me unintelligible: And that a Christian should be in the Church,
and the Church at the same time be in a Christian, had been equally
Unintelligible, and as much danger of the Penetration of Dimensions: But that
our Author stumbled upon a happy Expedient; that [ I] should signify a
Doctrine, and [ Me] a Church, to heal the Contradiction. 3. That our
Fruitfulness should depend on our Union to Christ, is as hard to my
understanding. Truly, I cannot help that, I have no Medicine to cure Crazed
Intellectuals: He that cannot understand that Believers do receive Actual
assistance from Christ by his Spirit, to help them in the way of their Duty,
and to encourage them against the Difficulties they meet withal in their
Duties, cannot (I presume) understand very many Lines in the Gospel.

(3.) Our last Task is, to Examine what improvement he has made of this
Interpretation, and in short it is this: That the Union of particular
Christians to Christ, consists in their Union to the Christian Church. And now
I am abundantly satisfied, that our Author is a very Philomel, Vox and
praeterea nihil; One, whose Volubility of Tongue, and Pen, supplies the place
of Argument, and Demonstration: I hope our Author will not meet with many
Readers, who have so far parted with their Memories, as not to remember what
that was he Propounded to himself to Evince, viz. That the Union of particular
Christians to Christ, is by means of their Union with the Christian Church: And
yet now when he comes to cast up his Accounts, we have gotten another
Conclusion; That the Union of particular Christians to Christ, consists in
their Union to the Christian Church. Surely, the Purblind will epsy some small
difference: Eating is a means to Living, yet none but a Swine of Epicurus his
Stye, will say, that Living consists in Eating. The High-road is a means to
bring the Traveller Home; yet it will be hard to persuade us, that being at
Home, consists in Traveling: Trading is a mean to Riches, yet Riches do not
formally consist in Trading: The end may possibly be separated from the Means,
but nothing can be separated from that thing wherein it consists. But let that
pass: If he has proved either the one, or the other, I am content he be reputed
an Artist. The thing he has a good will to prove, is: That the Union of
particular Christians to Christ, is either by means of their Union to the
Christian Church; or else that it consists in it. Now for the Proof of this: He
has told us, That the Church is the Body of Christ: The Church is the Temple of
Christ: The Church is the Spouse of Christ: The Church is the Flock of Christ.
And had it been referred to a thousand Persons, not one but would have thought,
that, that Christ who is the Head of that Body, is a Person: He that is the
Husband of that Spouse, is a Person: He that is the Shepherd of the Flock, is
a Person: and He that Dwells in that Temple, is a Person: But things are not so
far gone, but our Author shall have his Opinion, and choose what he will abide
by; for my part I am much unconcerned, let him please himself, he shall not
displease me at all. Say then: Shall it be Christ's Doctrinal, or Christ's
Ecclesiastical, that is the Head of this Body? The Husband of this Spouse? The
Shepherd of this Flock? I can rest satisfied. But then the Sense runs thus: A
Doctrine, or a Church, is the Head of the Church: A Doctrine, or a Church, is
the Husband of the Church: A Doctrine, or a Church, is the Shepherd of the
Church. If this does not please him, let him try the other way, and allow it to
be a Person that is all these. A Person, that is the Head, Husband, and
Shepherd of the Church: And now I must plainly acquaint him, That he has
Entangled his Affairs in such confusion, that he will never be able to
Extricate them. For, 1. If the Person of Christ be here intended, then it seems
at last, whatever the means be of that Union, yet there is an Union to the
Person of Christ; and whereinsoever that Union consists, yet such an Uunion
there is: How absurd would it be, to enquire whether our Union to Christ's
Person, consists in our Union with a particular Church? If, Union to Christ's
Person be a Nonentity? Or, Whether our Union with a particular Church, be the
means to our Union with Christ? If there be no such thing? And then, 2. He is
as much concerned, as his poor Neighbors, to salve the Difficulties of being
in Christ's Person; and yet at the same time, Christ's Person being in us; of the
depending of our Fruitfulness upon that Union, with whatever other
Incongruities a strong Fancy may impute to it. And then 3. If the Person of
Christ be intended in the Question, then his last and tedious Argument from
John 15. 1. which he has managed with so much Industry, upon which he has
bestowed so much Cost, and in which he places so much Confidence, concludes
something very near to Nothing: For the Abstract of his Medium is this, that
Christians are in the Church; which will never conclude, that therefore our
Union to a particular Church is the Means of our Union to Christ, much less,
that our Union to Christ consists in it.

From the Scriptures we are posted over to the Ancient Fathers; who (if we may
believe him) Interpret all those Metaphors which decypher the Union between
Christ and Christians to signify, the Love and Unity of Christians among
themselves. He that will reproach his own Mother, will not much Reverence the
Fathers: They do indeed argue from the Unity between Christ and Christians, to
an absolute Necessity of Unity between Christians themselves, they are members
of one body, under one common Head, and therefore it presses sore upon them,
that there be no intestine Broyls among themselves: they are Sheep of the same
Fold, under one Shepherd, and it were unnatural for Sheep to devour one
another, which is the Province of Wolves; they are subjects in the same
spiritual Kingdom, under Christ the Sovereign Monarch of the Church, and
therefore all heats and animosities, all seuds and broyls, are alien from that
place and Relation they fill up toward Christ, and each other: So the Fathers,
so the Scriptures argue: Mal. 2. 10. Have we not all one Father? has not one
God created us? why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother? The
Process of the Argument is very clear, if we be Children of one Father, we
ought to love our Brethren; but to conclude from thence, that A Child's Relation
to his Father consists in the Love and Unity of the Children among themselves,
is somewhat more than ridiculous. Thus from the Union between Christ and
Christians, there is an unanswerable Argument drawn for the Unity of Christians
amongst themselves; but that the Union of Christians with Christ, does formally
consist in their mutual Agreement and Concord each with other, is a piece of
Logic for which we are indebted to our Author; but thus Chrysostom expounds
Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21. where the Apostle speaks of that spiritual building which
is erected on the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ
[himself (...).] being the chief Cornerstone, to signify the Unity of the
Church in all Ages, that both the Jewish, and the Christian Church are united
in Christ, as the several parts of the building are kept together by the
Cornerstone. Now though Chrysostom be little beholden to our Author for
traducing his honest meaning, yet we are all beholden to Chrysostom. For then,
1. There have not been so many sorts of Churches in the World, as he would
persuade us, but both Jews and Christians constitute one universal catholic
Church, though differing in the Economy, and some variety of Administration;
both the Jewish and Christian Church are the several parts of one and the same
Building. And then, 2. The Jews, we may presume knew something at least of
Christ, what he was to be to them, what he was to do for them, if they and we,
Jews and Gentiles in all Ages are United in him. To the same purpose St.
Ambrose: (Yes I believe it; as little to our Authors purpose as St.
Chrysostom:) Duos Populos in se suscepit Christus Salvator, and fecit unum in
Domino, sicut Lapis Angularis duas parietes continet in Unitate Domus firmatas:
which our Author Englishes thus: Christ united two People, in himself, and made
them one in the Lord, as the Cornerstone unites two Walls in a building, and
makes it but one house. Now if we cannot agree about the Construing a piece of
familiar Latin, we shall strangely differ in the Interpretation of its design
and tendency: And here Ambrose is less beholden to our Author than Chrysostom;
for, that he may not cross our Authors sense, he is made to speak Nonsense.
Christ united two people, and made them one: That is, he made them one, and
made them one; or he united them, and united them; for, what uniting should be,
but making one, I cannot divine. But Ambrose his Latin runs thus: Duos populos
in se suscepit, and fecit unum in Domino. He took two people upon himself, and
(so) made them one in the Lord: He bore their Iniquities, carried their sins in
his body upon the Cross, and thereby reconciled them to God, and then their
reconciliation to one Another would be easy: but our Author, (who is never
wanting to his Concerns) was not at leisure to take notice of that: However
(says he) this is the plain design of the place, to prove, that Christ has
taken away the enmity which was between Jew and Gentile, and has reconciled
them both to God. Well, I can be content it should be the Plain design, but not
the Main design, not the whole design of the place: Some men think themselves
wondrous witty in the Contrivance, that they have found out some Reconciling
work for Christ's Death: But then it must not be, to reconcile God and Sinners,
but to remove an old grudge between Jew and Gentile; (which is an Invention of
the latter days, utterly unknown to the Ancient Fathers, and the whole
Catholic Church,) that they might not seem to say, there is no Reconciliation
by the Blood of Christ: I would turn over our Author for satisfaction in this
point to the Reason, not the Authority of Dr. E. Stillingfl. against Crellius,
p. 558. A Difference being supposed between God and Man, on the account of sin,
no reconciliation can be imagined but what is mutual: For, did Man only fall
out with God, and had not God just reason to be displeased with Men, for their
Apostasy from him? If not, what made him so severely punish the Old World, for
their Impieties, by a Deluge? what made him leave such Monuments of his Anger
against the Sins of the World, in succeeding Ages, etc? Well then, supposing
God to be averse from men by reason of their sins; shall this displeasure
always continue, or not? If it always continues, men must certainly suffer
the desert of their sin: If it does not always continue, then God may be said
to be reconciled, in the same sense that an offended party is capable of being
reconciled to him who has provoked him. Now there are two ways, whereby a
party justly offended, may be said to be reconciled to him that has offended
him: First, when he is not only willing to admit of Terms of Agreement, but
does declare his Acceptance of the Mediation of a third Person, and that he is
so well satisfied with what he has done in order to it, that he appoints it to
be published to all the world, to assure the Offender, that if the Breach
continues, the fault lies wholly upon himself: The Second is, when the Offender
does accept the Terms of the Agreement offered: And these two we assert, must
necessarily be distinguished in the Reconciliation between God and us: For,
upon the Death and Sufferings of Christ, God declares to the World, that he is
so well satisfied with what Christ has done and suffered, in order to the
Reconciliation between himself and us, that now be publishes Remission of sins
to the World, upon those Terms which the Mediator has declared by his own
Doctrine; but because Remission of sins does not immediately follow upon the
Death of Christ, without supposition of any act on our part, therefore the
state of Favor does commence from the performance of those Conditions that are
required of us, etc. And now let the Authority of the Church of England
interpose: Art. 31. [Of the one Oblation of Christ, finished upon the Cross:]
The Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption, Propitiation and
Satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, both Original and Actual, and
there is none other Satisfaction for sin but that alone. But we shall be
soundly pelted with the Fathers, and therefore he cites a great many more from
Chrysostom, and from all concludes: That according to the sense of this Holy
man, particular Christians are united to Christ by Means of their Union to the
Christian Church; otherwise I cannot understand how our Union to Christ, can be
an Argument to Union and Concord among our selves. But if that be the worst
on it, that he cannot understand it, Charity commands me to relieve his
laboring understanding: It Is a good Argument, that Children should entirely
love one another, because they are Children of the same Father; and yet for all
that, they become not Children to their Father, by means of their Union one to
another as Brethren; but they are therefore Brethren, because they are Children
of the same Father. It Is an Argument, that Subjects should study and follow the
things that make for Peace among themselves, because they are all Subjects to
the same Prince, and his honor, the strength, and security of his Kingdom,
lies much in it; and yet their Union among themselves is not the Means whereby
they become related to their Prince; but because they are all Subjects to him,
they become fellow subjects each with other. And now methinks, a very ordinary
pair of Brains might have understood, how our Union to Christ is an Argument to
Christians to unite amongst themselves, though by their union amongst
themselves they had not been united to Christ: And thus he might as well have
quoted the Ancient Father Mercurius Gallo-Belgicus, as either Ambrose or
Chrysostom; but that we are all mightily concerned to know, that he reads the
Fathers, to very little purpose.

But from hence he will give us a very seasonable word of Exhortation: That
they would seriously consider it, who boast of their Union to Christ, and yet
rend his Church into a thousand little Factions: I am glad however that they
are not great Factions: And I would have them seriously consider it also, who
broach such Doctrines, so contrary to the main design of the Gospel, that if
owned by any Church, must necessitate an absolute and total separation, if we
will be true to Christ. There have been many sad Controversies amongst us, but
they have been about Mint, Anise, and Cummin, in comparison of the great and
weighty things of the Gospel; but the Question now must be, Whether Christ be a
true and proper High Priest, whether (...) death upon the Cross be a proper
Sacrifice offered unto God, to reconcile him to sinners? The Question is now,
Whether we must hold Communion with God in Prayer or no? Whether Faith and
Repentance will unite us to Christ? Nay, whether there be any such thing as an
Union with Christ's Person or no? Nay, upon the Matter, whether there be a
Person of Christ or no? or that all must not be interpreted into Doctrine,
Church, Office, and I cannot tell what? Some I perceive are hugely afraid,
least differences should be accommodated; they dread The tomb of Controversies
almost as much as their Own; they are more solicitous how Quarrels may live,
than about their own Deaths; and therefore fearing those smaller Bones of
Contention would not set the World together by the ears long, they have thrown
more considerable ones before us; to entail Contentions upon Posterity, and
propagate Divisions to Eternity. It Is the Interest of some men, to make loud
clamours against Divisions, variety of Opinions, difference in Judgments, and
yet to take special care that there shall never want matter for them; to
complain of the Fire, and yet pour in Oil to quench it; and if they may but
warm their own hands, can sing over the flames which they have kindled, and do
still foment. It has been the Policy of Rome, to build partition-walls of
Separation, and then to rail at all that cannot leap over them; to thresh the
Wheat out of the Floor, and then rage at it for Dividing from the Chafe; to
beat their Servants out of doors, and then send Huy-and-cry after them, with
all the Marks and Descriptions of Run-awayes. Thus far our Author has led us
out of the way, and it will be high time to return.

The Fathers may now go to bed, and sleep, our Author will give them no further
trouble: Authority is but an inartificial Argument, and now have at us with
downright Demonstration, and Club-law. Those Sacraments our Savior has
instituted, are a plain demonstration, that our Union with Christ consists in
our union with the Christian Church.

1. For Baptism. Baptism is the Sacrament of our Admission into the Visible
Church; but in Baptism we make a public Profession of our Faith in Christ;
Therefore the Union of particular Christians to Christ, is by Means of their
Union with the Church. This is that plain Demonstration we are threatened with;
and in a while, if our Author does but eat a dish of Beans and Bacon, it will
be a plain Demonstration: In Baptism we make a visible Profession of our Faith
in Christ; and if this Profession be true, such a one as the Church of England
requires as prerequisite to Baptism, we are thereby United to Christ
antecedently to our Baptism. If Baptism finds us not in Christ, it puts us not
into Christ: If it finds us not qualified for a Church state, it makes us not
so; it is a Symbol, but it supposes the thing signified, and conferrs it not:
It is a Seal, but presupposes a Covenant: But that we are admitted into the
visible Church by it, he will prove; and indeed he is excellent at proving what
none deny; and very untoward at proving the thing in Question; but hear his
proof; 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body. In which
(says he) the Apostle seems to allude to Baptism; which conferres the same Holy
Spirit on us All, and thereby makes us all Members of that one Body, which is
his Church. I think he is resolved never to produce a pertinent Scripture, to
prove the plainest Truth: For, 1. here is but an Allusion at most; and has he
scolded all this while against Allusions, Allegories, and must he lay the main
stress of his Argument upon an Allusion? 2. It but seems to Allude neither, and
that weakens the Credit of it exceedingly: An Allusion, a seeming Allusion; A
shadow, the dream of a shadow: Any thing or Nothing will serve his turn for
plain demonstration; when a Man's Name is up for a demonstrative Man, he may lie
in bed till noon. 3. This Baptism (says he) conferres the same Holy Spirit
upon us all: But the Apostle says no such matter, but the contrary; by the
Spirit we are baptized; and not by Baptism receive the Spirit: Thus the Spirit
Unites us to Christ; then comes Baptism, which looks backward as a Seal of what
we have received, and forward to our visible state in the Church; and hence it
appears, that our Union to Christ, is the Reason of our Union to the Church;
and not our Union to the Church, the Means to unite us to Christ. 4. Baptism
admitts not into a particular Church, but the visible Church at large, and then
it will be harder still for our Author to prove from thence, that the Union of
particular Christians to Christ, is by Means of their union with a particular
Church under the Bishops and Pastors: But if Allusions will not pass current;
Then (says he) more expressly in Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. There is one Body, and one
Spirit, as you are called in one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism: That is, the Christian Baptism is but one; and is A Sacrament of
Union; making us all the Members of that one Body of Christ; this is called
being Baptized into Christ: i. e. Admitted into the Christian Church by a
visible Profession of our Faith in Christ: Now for a small matter I could grant
him all this, and yet despair of seeing his Conclusion: Baptism is but one; be
it so: It Is a Sacrament of Union; take it for granted: It makes us all Members
of that one Body of Christ, which is his visible Church; let it be supposed:
But still I wait for proof of this, That by Baptism we are all really united to
Christ. But here are some things very pretty: 1. Baptism is but one, and is a
Sacrament of Union: Very good; and so is the Spirit but one, and therefore he
is the Means of Union. 2. By Baptism we are made Members of the one Body of
Christ; that is, of the Visible Church: but is there no means to make us
Members of the Invisible Church? 3. This is called, being Baptized into Christ.
But is there no other way of uniting us to Christ, but by Baptism. 4. We are
admitted into the Christian Church by a public Profession of our Faith in
Christ: Very true; we are solemnly admitted into a Visible Station in the
Visible Church, thereby always supposing Repentance, whereby we forsake sin;
and Faith, whereby we steadfastly believe the Promises of God made to us in
that Sacrament, which has already united us to Christ.

2. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament of Union, and signifies that near
Conjunction between Christ and Christians: Signifies it? It presupposes an
Union both with Christ, and a particular Church: All are supposed, in one sense
or other, to be in the Church, to be in Christ, that are admitted to it: Read
over the Exhortation in the Liturgy at your best leisure. My duty is, to exhort
you to consider the Dignity of this Mystery. -- And so to search and examine
your Consciences, that you should come holy and clean, to a most Holy Feast:
for otherwise, receiving of the Holy Communion does nothing else but increase
your Damnation. Again, in the other Exhortation: For as the benefit is great,
if with a true penitent heart, and lively Faith, we receive that holy
Sacrament, (for Then we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his
blood, Then we dwell in Christ, and he in us,) so the danger is great, etc. and
therefore, if any of you be a Blasphemer of God, N. B. an hinderer, or a
slanderer of his Word, N. B. an Adulterer, or be in Malice, N. B. or Envy, or
any other grievous crime, bewail your sins, and come not to this holy Table,
least the Devil enter into you, as he did into Judas. But what can be more
evident? our Author supposes we are united to the Church, united to Christ by
Baptism; and therefore surely this other Sacrament confirms our Union, and does
not first Create it.

I have long waited for an Argument to enforce his Conclusion, and now we shall
have it: The Intention of our Lord and Savior in what he did and suffered for
us, was not to reform and save some single Persons, but to erect a Church, and
to combine all his Disciples into a public Society. A fairer Truth never dropped
from his Pen, which some will like the better, because it is so handsome and
proper a Confutation of the whole Section: For, if this be Christ's design to
combine all his Disciples into a public Society, then sure they were his
Disciples, related to him as their Lord and Master before such combination: Now
to be a true Disciple of Christ, is no such slighty and trivial matter, that we
may be such a one, and yet not united really to Christ: It implies Self-denial,
taking up the Cross, and following Christ; and that will go a great way to an
Union with Christ; and yet of such as these it is granted, the Christian Society
must be composed: But he copes up all this with a little Reason: And therefore
our Savior does not own any Relation to particular men, as such, but as they
are Members of his Body. As such? Now for an Explication of the Qua: He owns no
Relation to particular men as such; that is, as particular men: No, I am very
well satisfied of that; for then he should own a Relation to all particular
men; for, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia: But does he own a Relation to
particular Believers, as Believers? will he own a Relation to a Disciple, as a
Disciple? I am sure he has promised to own those, that own them as Disciples;
and I am as sure, that if a particular Church be a combination of Disciples, he
will own his Disciples wherever he finds them; so that I was just a concluding
the clear contrary, if our Author had not given me timely Notice, That because
Christ does combine all his Disciples into public Societies, that therefore he
does own, and is so related to, united with, and will have a special care of,
his Disciples, as they are such: and he has evidenced his owning of them, and
care for them; that he unites them into such Societies, wherein they may
mutually discharge all Christian Offices to each other; edify one another in
Love, and be meet helps to one another Salvation. That Christ therefore owns a
Relation to particular men, though not as men, but as holy men, is evident,
Heb. 2. 11. Both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of
one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them Brethren: Nor was he
ashamed to own Paul to be a chosen Vessel to himself, upon his particular
Conversion, nor to bestow the Holy Ghost upon him, and yet all this before
Baptism, before his public profession of the Christian Religion, and admission
into the Visible Church.

At length we are assaulted with a kind of Argument from 1 John 1. 1, 2, 3.
That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also may have
fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ. Here are so many sad misadventures in this one Argument, that
I know not where to begin; and having begun, it will be as difficult to know
where to make an end of pointing at them.

1. His Gloss is very Notable: That which we have seen and heard: That is,
(says he) The whole Doctrine, and History of the Gospel. And thus we have
gained one signification more of Christ, that we never heard of before: Christ
is now not only a Doctrine, a Church, an Office, but a History too, and ere
long he will cut him short by an Aphaeresis, and and make him a Story.

2. That his Gloss might pass without suspicion, he has concealed the Apostles
words, v. 1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, and seen
with our eyes, which we have looken upon, and our hands have handled of the
Word of Life: This was certainly the same Person, of whom the same Apostle,
Ioh. 1. 1. affirms, That he was in the beginning with God; whom being made
flesh, he saw, and looked upon with his eyes; whom he touched with his hands:
the same Person who lay in the Bosom of the Father, and manifested that Eternal
Life that was in the Father: And yet as he has handled the Matter, it shall be
the handling of a History, the handling of a Doctrine. Really the Socinians are
well-bred Gentlemen to our Author: for though they contend hotly about the
Beginning, in which Christ is said to be, yet they confess it was the Person of
Christ who was in the beginning. But,

3. Our Author has quite lost his Question; however it gave him the slip, I
cannot tell, but gone it is to Iamaica: For the Question was about the Means of
our Union to Christ? and the Answer is, about the Means of our Fellowship with
Christ: The Enquiry was, Which way we are related to Christ? and he answers
very gravely, to the Way of our enjoying the Privileges that flow from that
Relation: Alas, if he had but once asked it, we would, for a word of his Mouth,
have granted his Petition; That our Union with a particular Church, is a Means
to let us into Communion and Fellowship with Jesus Christ; to admit us into
many glorious Privileges, and happy advantages, which cannot possibly
otherwise be obtained; only we would say, there must be a previous Union, an
antecedent Relation to Christ, as the Foundation of our Enfranchisement in that
Church, whereby we are enstated, and installed in all those Privileges.

4. The Communion we enjoy with the Church, will not prove that we are united
to Christ thereby, any more than it will prove, that a Servant becomes related
to his Master by Means of his Relation to his Fellow Servants, because they
eat, and drink, and work together; which is no tremendous Demonstration.

5. Those words, That ye may have Fellowship with us, are very ill glossed:
That is, become members of the Church of Christ; for the Apostle writes unto
them as Members of the Christian Church actually; otherwise the whole Epistle
is unintelligible: chap. 2. 12. I write unto you little Children, because your
sins are forgiven you for his Names sake: I write unto you Fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning: I write unto you young men, because
ye have overcome the wicked one.

6. Those words, That ye may have fellowship with us, do not denote, that the
Fellowship of particular Believers must of necessity be with the Church
immediately, and then with the Father and Christ, at the second hand; but that
the Fellowship of the Apostle and all Believers, is jointly and equally with
the Father, and with Christ: His desire was, that others might enjoy the same
Communion with both, that he enjoyed. And now the Reader will easily see the
dreadful Mischief of not stating the Question, and distinguishing its Terms at
the first: It was obvious to every Man, (and I was aware of it) into what
Confusions he would lead us, by the Ambiguity of Church, Union, Means,
Communion; but I resolved he should run his Trundle, and when he had tired
himself in a Labyrinth of Error, it would be a more seasonable time to talk
with him.

His last Argument (which is therefore the best, because it is last) is taken
from Excommunication.

Now, This (says he) is a plain Demonstration: That our Union to Christ, is not
an Union to his Person, but consists in the Spiritual communion with the
Christian Church: Otherwise this External communion with the Church, could be
no visible signification of our Union to Christ; nor could our Excision from
the visible Church, signify our Separation from him. This is another plain
Demonstration, if you will take his word for it. Two things call for our
Consideration: 1. What he would prove. 2. How he proves it.

(1) What he would prove: And I assure you, that is grown a great Secret of
late: One while he would prove, That our Union with a particular Church, was
the means of our Union to Christ; and within an hour after, he would prove:
That our Union with Christ, consists in our union with the Christian Church:
And now he will prove (or it shall cost him a fall) that our Union to Christ,
is not an Union to his Person. And thus here is another Hare risen up before us,
which whilst we pursue, it is ten to one we shall lose them all. If I might
counsel our Author, before I would be Tormented with a Fugitive, Vagabond,
Protean Question, that is never two Hours in one mind, nor ever tarries two
Hours in one place, I would clap it in Irons, and Chain it to a Post. For if
the Reader will give me Credit in so small a Matter, I verily thought for some
while, that he had been Hammering out a Proof; That our Union to Christ, is by
means of our union to the Church. At last, I perceived another Conclusion just
Peep out of the shell; That our Union to Christ, consists in our union with the
Church: And all along, I Dreamed, that, that Christ about whom the Question
was; He that was the Shepherd, to whom the Sheep are United; the Husband, to
whom the Spause is United; the King of the Church, to whom all Christians are
United; had been a real, and very Person, and that it had been supposed that
Christians are some way or other, United to him; Only all the Question was,
Whether they were so United by Means of the Church, or no? For if we are not
united to Christ at all, it s a needless Enquiry, How, or by what means we are
United to him? Or, wherein that Union consists? For this takes away the Subject
of the Question: What is it then, wherein this Union with Christ consists? Why,
It consists in a sincere and Spiritual communion with the Christian Church.
And now the Question must be Trimed over again: Whether our Union with the
Church, consists in a sincere communion with the Church? That is, this Face of
the Question will do best in this place; for I always observe, our Author
Writes just from Hand to Mouth; and if he can but make a Rubbing shift for the
present Page, let the next take care for it self.

(2) And now let us hear his plain Demonstration. Otherwise (says he) this
External communion with the Church, could be no visible signification of our
Union to Christ. A notable Argument (no doubt) if any Living-body understood
it. In the words foregoing, he tells us: He means by Union with Christ, a
sincere and Spiritual communion with the Church: And then the old question
would have stood thus: Whether our union with a particular Church, be the means
of our sincere and spiritual communion with the Church: And if he had thus
spoke out, I am assured he had met with no Opposition: But he intended another
thing then, and entertained new Councels upon new Successes, and greater hopes
from achieved Victories. But still the Reader is Importunate for the
Demonstration: Then take it, and make your best on it: External communion with
the Church, is a visible signification of our Union to the Church; (that he
means by Christ) and therefore our Union to Christ, consists in a sincere and
Spiritual communion with the Christian Church. And if he had told us plainly,
that there is no such thing as Union with Christ; but that the Phrase of Union
with Christ is an empty Name, and has no more in it, than union with a Church;
it had been easy to have understood the strength of his Will, and the weakness
of his Reason, without half this Circumlocntion.

[3.] His next Observation is; That the Union between Christ, and the Christian
Church, is not a Natural, but a Political Union: That is (says he) such an
union as is between a Prince and his Subjects. It was but just now, that he
told us, That our Union with Christ, is not an union with his Person; and yet
now he will explain the Nature of this Union, between Christ and the Church.
And indeed, he has so Bewildred himself, that it needs a great deal of
Explication, and I doubt, all will be too little to deliver it from Nonsense:
For his Explication must be this: The Union between the Church and the
Christian Church, is not a Natural, but a Political Union; such an union as is
between a Prince and his Subjects. Now this has two Faults in it: First, That
if it were true, it would Over-turn his whole Design; which I can be very well
content withal. And, Secondly, (which is the Misery on it) its False, and
therefore will neither Overthrow, nor Support his Design: And therefore his
Interest will lie in this one thing, (if he could but see it) to Prove his
Assertion to be False, that there may be some hopes left of his conclusion.

(1.) As it stands, it apparently Overthrows his whole Design. For if this
Politic Union be such a one as is between a Prince, and his Subjects: Then, 1.
There is such a thing alive again in the World, as Union with, and Relation to
Christ's Person: For surely, Subjects are Related to, and united with the Person
of their Prince. 2. Then this Union to Christ, denotes Primarily a Relation to,
and Union with the Person of Christ; and only Secondarily, an Union with, and
Relation to his Laws and Commands, and the rest of our fellow Subjects. For I
think, the Reason why Subjects give Obedience to any Laws, is, because they are
the Laws of him who is the Legislator: The Reason why the Sheep are subject to
Pastoral Orders, is, because they are the Orders, and Instituted by him who is
their Shepherd, and has a right to Enjoin them: And the Reason why the Wife
subjects her self to the Commands of her Husband, is, because she is united to
him, upon those Terms in the Marriage-covenant. All Duty is founded in
Relation; It Is impossible to conceive Conjugal Duty, without a Preconception of
Conjugal Relation: If therefore such be our Relation to Christ; such our union
to Him; as of Sheep to Shepherd, Wife to Husband, Subjects to a Prince; then
are we first Related to his Person, and as far as such Relation will Unite,
united to his Person; and then his Negative is blown up: That our Union to
Christ is not an union to his Person, but consists in our communion with his
Church. Which is, as if he should say, Our Relation to our Prince, is no
Relation to his Person; but consists in our Union to the Commonwealth; which
is a neat Engine to hook in Democracy.

But (2) It s False, which is the worst on it; our uuion to Christ is not fully
explained by a Political union. It Is true, It is not a Natural union; but yet
it is well Explained by, and bears a full Analogy with a Natural union: The
Relation is not Natural, but Spiritual; and yet it has pleased the Holy Ghost
to express the Spiritual Relation, by the Natural. The Relation between a
Prince and his Subjects, expresses something of that Relation that is between
Christ and Believers, but not the whole: All the Similitudes used in Scripture,
to Illustrate the Relation between Christ and Christians, have something in
common with each other. All imply absolute Sovereignty, and Authority,
contempered with tenderness of Affection on Christ's part; and all imply an
absolute Subjection to be given to Him, with delight and complacency on our
parts; yet some of them express a nearer union, and more endeared Affections
than others: That of a Master, Lord, and King, express Authority, and Power,
yet not that Intimacy, and union, which is expressed by that of Husband, and
Wife: That of a King, implies Christ to be a Head of Government; but that of
the Head in the Natural Body, implies the Communications of Grace, of Strength,
Counsel, and Power to Obey; and withal, that there is such an Intimate union
between Christ and true Believers, that the Members in the Natural are not more
(though in another way) united to the Head, and one to another, than Christ and
Christians are in this, which may be called a Mystical union; for Christ and
Believers are hereupon called, One Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. As the Body is one,
and has many Members, even so is Christ: That is, so is the Lord Christ and
his Church. When therefore (he says) That Christ is called a Head, and the
Church his Body; a Husband, and the Church his Spouse; which two Metaphors
signify the same thing, and are both of them Names of Power and Authority: It
is something of the Truth, but not the whole Truth, nor nothing else but the
Truth. Something of truth there is in it: Christ's Headship, denotes Authority:
But then it is not the entire Truth: Christ's Headship denotes more than bare
Authority: And then there is something more than the Truth: Those two Metaphors
do not denote the same thing: That of the Husband over the Wife, denotes Power
mixed, and sweetly tempered with Love, and Pity: But that of the Head over the
Members, denotes a continual Influx of all saving Grace into his Members. I
wish therefore, he would leave Trifling with his Hackney Fallacy; That because
Christ is a Head of Authority, He is not an Head of Influence: For he that can
assert, that the Union and Relation between Christ and Christians, has no
Spiritual correspondency with a Natural Union; (which yet is Explicated by it)
may when he sees his own time, deny, That the Union between Christ and
Christians, has any Analogi^with a Political union, though he has ( Pro hac
vice) Explicated the Union by it.

There is one thing more, wherein our Author shows himself a great Divine, and
a mighty Statesman; for the very sound of Political Union, is enough to Inspire
a Man that is prepared for such Impulses. Our Union to Christ ( says he)
consists in our Belief of his Revelations, Obedience to his Laws, and
Subjection to his Authority: As Obedience to our Prince, is the strongest Bond
of a Political Union, which is Dissolved and Broken by Rebellion and
Disobedience. But this is neither truly Asserted, nor wisely Explained. 1. Not
truly asserted: For our Union to Christ, does not consist in that Obedience,
which we give him as our Lord, our Shepherd, our Husband; but in that Act of
Obedience whereby at first we take him for our Lord, Shepherd, and Husband;
and give up our selves sincerely to him again, to be his Sheep, Subjects,
Spouse. 2. Nor wisely Explicated: For if Relation to a Prince, does formally
consist in Obedience, and that Union be dissolved by Rebellion; then whenever a
Rebel shakes hands with Actual subjection, he absolves himself from the duty to
Obey, which would save the horrible Charges of the Popes Bull. Our Author has
acquainted the World with a very fine way, how to live a Traitor Twenty years,
and yet never commit but one single sin at first, but all the after acts will
be Regular: For if Rebellion dissolve, and break in pieces the Union between
Prince and Subject, then he ceases any longer to be a Subject; and by
consequence whatever sins he commits, must be called by other Names, for it can
be no Rebellion: When the Relation ceases, Duty ceases; Obedience is a
conserving cause of Union, but the Union lies not in it: He that does not
perform his Duty, yet is under an Obligation to perform his Duty; the Union
continues, though many acts unsuitable to the Union are committed. But should
we be so charitable as to grant him all this, he will be weary on it in a while;
as little Children, that make a heavy and piteous moan for a Gewgaw, and when
they have it, throw it away.

Thus after all his Rodomontade, That this Union is a Political union, such as
is between Prince, and Subjects; as if his Book could never have been Licensed,
if he had talked of any thing below Crowns and Diadems, and the Roman Empire:
Yet page 162. he tells us, That God has laid aside, in a great Measure, that
severe Name of a King, and calls himself our Father, to signify that Liberty
we enjoy under the Gospel, in Opposition to the Bondage, and Servitude of the
Law of Moses. Well, whatever opinion he has of Monarchy, the severity of it is
Name, the Bondage and Servitude that it brings Men under; I know many, who if
they might choose, had rather come under that severe Name of King, as to their
Religious concerns, than feel the more smooth, and Debonair Treatment, of some
Spiritual Fathers.

It Is very Tiresome to Travel out of the way, for the further we go on, the
further we have to come back; and yet thus has our Author seduced his Reader,
but now we shall come to a vein of Matter; for having reduced all the benefit
Believers have from Christ as their Head, to Political Government, there is but
one thing more, which if he can cleverly compass, the day is his own; and this
is to strip Christ of that little Power and Authority he had left him: To this
end we must observe further: That though Christ be our Lord and Governor, he
does not Govern us immediately by Himself, for he is Ascended into Heaven,
where he powerfully Intercedes for his Church, and by a Vigilent Providence,
superintends the affairs of it; but he has left the Visible and External
conduct and Government of it, to Bishops and Pastors, who preside in his Name,
and by his Authority. To which I answer:

1. That Christ's committing the External conduct of his Churches to his own
Officers, may very well consist with his own Internal and Invisible conduct of
his Peoples Souls, and their Spiritual concerns.

2. Whatever Authority Christ has vested his Officers with, he has Divested
himself of none, he continues sole Head of the Church still; All Power is
committed to him in Heaven, and in Earth: And though there are some that would
ease him of the Trouble, yet I have not heard that he has laid down his
Commission, nor taken any into joint Commission with himself.

3. Christ has given an Authority in the Churches to all his own Officers, but
he has not given to any of them his Authority: And indeed, unless he could
Communicate to them his Power, as well as his Authority, it would signify
little. But, I hope, they know their places better than so; they are Servants
of Jesus Christ, tied up to their Instructions, as all Ambassadors are, though
they come in the Name of their Prince; and their Commission runs, to teach us
to Observe whatsoever Christ has Commanded in the Scripture.

4. As to the External Conduct of the Church, Christ has left it as much to
Princes, as to Bishops, and more; for several Reasons that I know of, but one
is this: That every Supreme Magistrate is next and immediately under Christ,
Supreme Head and Governor of the Church, within his own Dominions. Well, but
what Reason does he favor us with? Why Christ does not immediately Govern us
Himself.

1. He is ascended into Heaven: Well: Yet he knows how to be present with all
and every one of his, to the end of the World: And, Where two or three meet
together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them: He has sent Vicariam vim
Spiritus sancti, who does Manage for him a Spiritual Government in the Souls of
all the Elect: And since I have named two such dangerous words, as
Sanctification, and Election, I had best bethink my self of good Security; and
that I have from the Church Catechism. Quest. What do thou learn chiefly in
these Articles of thy Belief? Answ. -- I learn to believe in God the Holy
Ghost, who Sanctifies me, and all the Elect People of God.

2. He powerfully Intercedes for his Church. Why sure Intercession with the
Father, is not Inconsistent with immediate Rule and Government over his Saints.
But,

3. By his vigilant Providence, he Superintends all the Affairs of it: Why then
he Governs it: Nay, Soft awhile: He will allow Christ a Transmarine
Superintendency, but no proper Episcopal Jurisdiction: That is, he may be a
Spectator, or a By-stander, and look on to see how Squares go, but must not
meddle with the Immediate Government of us; for he has put that out of his
Hands, and left it to the Bishops and Pastors: Which I confess, is the worst
News that I have heard this Seven years. But now for the Conclusion: This is
(says he) a plain Demonstration, That the Union of particular Christians to
Christ, is by union with the Christian Church. Shortly, If our Author does but
give a grave Nod, it will amount to a Demonstration; but if he should please to
give a Lusty Hum, it will be a plain Demonstration: Though others are so
perverse, they will not own it for a probable Conjecture; for the Spiritual
subjection of the Soul and Conscience, is immediately to Christ: As the
Emperor once said, Non tibi sed Petro; so may every Christian, Non tibi sed
Christo. Whatever Command the Officers of Christ bring us in his Name, their
Commission is Patent, and we must search the Scriptures to see whether it be so
or no; if it carrys the Signature of Christ's Authority, we Obey him in hearing
them; and if they have, or pretend to have any private Instructions, or Cabala,
we may fairly demur to them, or bring a Quo Warranto against them.

And now at last, he will leave his Imperious Dictates, and come to
Disputation: If our Union to Christ, consist in our Subjection to him as our
Lord and Master, Head and Husband, it follows that we cannot be United to
Christ, ( that is, cannot own his Authority) till we Unite our selves to the
public Societies of Christians. But the former is true. Ergo, etc. To the
Consequence of the former Proposition, all I say, is, It Is Feeble and very
Sick. Our union to Christ may consist in our subjection to him as King, Lord,
and Husband, and yet we may be united to him thus, before our Actual union to a
particular Society. Well, he will prove it thus: This Authority of Christ is
not Exercised immediately by Himself, but by the Bishops, and Pastors of the
Church. To which I return:

1. If he means that only Christ exercises not a Visible Authority by himself,
but by the Guides and Pastors of the Church, it may be true; but then it will
prove no more than this. That we are visible Professors of Christ's Name, by our
Uniting to a particular Church, under the Guides and Officers thereof, which is
not the thing in Question.

2. If he means that Christ exercises not any inward Authority over the Soul,
immediately by Himself; I must return to my former Answer, which is a
peremptory denial.

3. Whether this Authority be exercised immediately by Christ, or not? Our
Union with Christ may be immediate: For our acceptance of Christ as Lord,
King, and Husband, is the Bond of our Union, and the Exercise of all Authority
of a Superior in those Relations, must still of necessity presuppose the
Union, and Relation. But as to our Antecedent: That our Union to Christ,
consists in our Subjection to him as our Lord, Head, and Husband: Which is very
true, of that Act of Subjection whereby at first we accept of him to be all
these to us, and give up our selves to be all the other to him; but very false
of those subsequent Acts of Obedience which flow from, but do not Constitute
the Relation: And therefore it was prudently done, to Explain Union to Christ,
by owning his Authority. For however it be false, yet every one will not spy
that, who Rides on a Trotting Horse; and it will serve to make a Semblance of
saying something. It Is true, we cannot own Christ's Authority, if we Derogate
from his Commands; but yet our union with Christ, and our relation to him* must
precede our owning his Authority over us. And for this, our Author has fitted
us with a Similitude, which may befriend Us as well as it is owner. As no man
can be said to submit himself to his Prince, who denies Subjection to
Subordinate Magistrates, who Act by his Commission: For the union of Bodies
Politic, consists in Order and Government, when all the Members keep their
proper places, and are knit together by a faithful Discharge of their Duties. I
could not hope for more Weakness in an Adversary, than I shall be sure to find
in this Similitude.

First, None can be said to submit to his Prince, who denies Subjection to
Subordinate Magistrates: And thus none can be said to submit himself to Christ,
who denies Obedience to his Officers, who act in his Name.

Secondly, As Submission to Subordinate Magistrates, is not that wherein our
Relation to our Prince con^ists, but an effect of it; so a due subjection to
our spiritual Guides, is not that wherein our Union to Christ consists, but a
Consequent of it: We first owe a subjection to Christ, and from thence to them
who Command us in his Name. Thus the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 5. They first gave
themselves to the Lord, and to us, by the Will of God.

Thirdly, No man can be said to Submit, who Rebels. (A weighty truth:) But he
may be said to owe submission, though he rebels: His Prince has not lost his
right to Command, though he (like a Villain) want^ Grace to Obey.

Fourthly, It Is very Childish, and spoken like a Green headed Statesman, That
the union of Bodies Politic, consists in Order and Government. For, Order and
Government, are for the preservation of the Union, and not the first union of
these Bodies Politic. The union of Prince and People, consists in their first
relation to one another as such; and the exercise of Government, is to secure
that union, and the advantages of it: If union consists in Order and
Government, then Disorder and ill Government would dissolve the union, and
relation, and by consequence discharge all Subjects from a Conscience of their
Duty; which is very dangerous Doctrine, and a wide Gap to all Rebellion: What a
pitiful plight were Princes in, if the Foundations of Government, the Essential
reasons of the Peoples subjection, were to be Discanted upon by every
Churchman. The Child's relation to his Father, does not consist in his filial
Obedience, but is the reason of it: The Subjects relation to his Prince, does
not consist in Subjection, but is the true Ground of it: The Wife, her relation
to her Husband, does not consist in her submission to her Husband, but is the
Spring of it: A disobedient Child is a Child still, he cannot shake off the
relation; a rebellious person, though he deserves not the honorable Title of a
Subject, yet he is a Subject, and cannot put off that relation: An untoward
Wife, is a Wife still; and every act, nay, many acts of Disobedience cannot
dissolve the Copula: For otherwise, the way to be rid of a relation, would be
to Violate the Duties of it; and then all future Disobedience would be no sin:
Because, when the union is once Null, and the relation dissolved, there is no
Foundation upon which the Superior can build a claim to Duty; and this would
be a short Cut, and save abundance of time and Charges, in sueing out a
Divorce: For, let but the Wife disobey, and the union which consists in
Obedience, Vanishes.

A little Divertisment will now be seasonable, both for our Author and his
Readers; and therefore he will give us a plain Account of the only cause that
can justify Separation. In the mean time it seems, there is a Cause, though
but one only Cause that will justify it; and separation will not always argue
S^hism: And now all you that would know the one, the only one Cause in all the
World, that can justify a Separation from a true Church, draw near and give
your attention.

1. When any Church prevaricates in the Laws of Christ. Prevaricates? How many
thousands of Schismatics will shroud themselves under the Covert of that one
Word? He has opened a Gate, at which three Coachful of Separatists, may Drive
all-a-Brest. If then a Church shall pretend to give us the Laws of Christ in
Scriptis, (such was the Knavery of a Cardinal in the Consistory, before the
Conventicle of Trent) and yet by Preaching and Practice, destroy those very
Laws, or the Ends of them; if the Church of Rome shall talk Big words of Holy
Mother Church, and yet embrace in her arms as her Children, the vilest Varlets,
and shut out none but the Good, unless now and then an old Fornicator, or some
such like Vermin, that want Money to Buy off, or Commute for Penance; this is
an unworthy Prevarication, and if it shall certainly appear, will justify a
separation.

2. When it corrupts Religion: And this will go a great way (I promise you) in
some particular Churches. Corruption may be by Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication, or Division: The end of the Keys may be perverted, those shut
out whom Christ would receive: and they admitted whom Christ would exclude: It
may strike with the back of the spiritual Sword when it should use the edge,
and wound with the edge when it should sleep in the Scabbard; Christ's Religion
may be corrupted by mingling our own inventions, with this pure and plain
institutions: and then we have a cause, or a piece of a cause that paves our
way for separation, as broad as that by which Israel departed out of Egypt,
(...) five in a rank.

3. When it undermines the fundamental design of Religion which is to make men
good, and virtuous. So that though they do not openly assault it by battery,
and escalado, yet if they shall secretly undermine Godliness, by denying the
office of the holy spirit in Creating men to good, and virtuous works, and
teach men to trust to their own natural strength, and shall craftily oppose the
Doctrine of the Scriptures and the Church of England: That the condition of man
after the fall is such, that he cannot turn by his own natural strength,
without the Grace of God preventing him, that he may have a good will: or if
they shall disown the satisfaction of Christ's death upon the cross to Gods
holiness, and his justice founded thereon, which is the bottom of our return to
God and of our holy walking with him, why then farewell! as far as the shoes
of the Gospel will carry you.

4. When we cannot obey our spiritual rulers without disobeying the Laws of
Christ: when Christ's commands, and they forbid; when he forbids, and they
command; then we have our pasport to be gone, and travel to the utmost ends of
the Earth: These are those four things, all in one that will justify a
separation from a particular society, and if our Author would preach this
Doctrine to his Parishoners, he might leave it to them to make the Application.

But now on the otherside, if the Church we live in acknowledges the Authority,
and submits to the Laws of Christ, we are bound to live in Communion with it.
Very true, but not true for our Authors Reason, because this Unites us to
Christ, which is (...), but go on! when nothing is made the condition of our
Communion, which is expressly forbidden by the Laws of the supreme Lord, we
acknowledge his Authority in our subjection to our spiritual guides. Now here
are many things might be opposed.

1. Let it be considered whether an implicit prohibition from the supreme Lord
be not sufficient to make a condition of Communion unlawful? and I cannot but
wonder that our Author in this case is all for an express prohibition, when
perhaps that may signify a Command if he follows but his own rule, not to
interpret phrases by the sound of words. But,

2. In submitting to such conditions of Communion as are not expressly
forbidden, the Question is, whether herein we submit to Christ's authority? and
this I confess I stick at: And the Reason of my doubtful hesitation is this.
Because it supposes an acknowledgment of Christ's Authority, where he has not
interposed his Authority: supposes him to speak, where he is silent, and to
Command obedience where he commands nothing; nay where he has forbidden, though
not expressly forbidden that condition: Now as I am not bound to obey an
inferior Magistrate, unless his particular command be warranted by his
Commission, though it be not forbidden in his Commission* so it seems I am not
bound to Obey a particular Church, in a particular imposed condition, if not
authorized by Christ's instructions, though it be not forbidden there, at least
no such refusal of obedience can be interpreted to be a disowning of Christ's
Authority, because he is supposed to have determined neither Pro nor Con. If we
turn back to p. 164. Our Author has these words: No man can be said to submit
himself to his prince, who denies subjection to those subordinate Magistrates
who act by his Commission: so no man can be said to resist his Prince who gives
subjection to all inferior officers in all things wherein they act by his
Commission; for he may pass for a very tolerable good Subject who does all
things that are commanded him, so in this case; no man can be said to Obey
Christ who denies subjection to the Pastors of the Church who act according to
their instructions from the supreme Lord of the Church: nor any be said to
resist Christ's authority, though they refuse compliance in those things to the
Officers of the Church, wherein they act besides their Commission. But let us a
while wholly set aside the consideration of the lawfulness or unlawfullness of
these new conditions of Communion: yet still me thinks there is a great deal of
disingenuity in the Pastors of a Church, to make new Terms of Communion with
them, for if it be so necessary as is pretended, to our Union with Christ, that
we be United to the Church: and then again so necessary to our Salvation to be
United to Christ: and then further so necessary to our Union with the Church,
to submit to those conditions that the Pastors shall appoint, every new
condition is a Bar to, and a Clog upon our Salvation. We must come up to the
condition e're we can be United to the Church, and we must be United to the
Church, e're we can be United to Christ, and we must be United to Christ, e're
we can be saved: That condition therefore how small soever it be in it self,
how indifferent soever in its own Nature is thereby made necessary to
Salvation, because indispensably required to that which is so: Now I will not
clamor, and make a noise at this as an evil thing, but yet methinks it does
not look as if it had over much good Nature in it, for a Church to deal thus
with the people. The Church received a Religion from Christ at first, that had
no encumbrance upon it, and that the Church should leave it deeplyer engaged
than she found it, I think is not very handsome: if the Church found the door
wide open; why does she set it on half-charrs: when she could march in with a
full body, why should others be forced to crowd in and wedge themselves through
a narrow wicket sidelings? why should the Pastors bind heavy burdens on others
fhoulders, when Christ laid none upon theirs? or why should they raise the
Markets so high in the latter age, when they had it so cheap in the primitive
times? It was a good plain saying of King James to the pragmatical Spalatensis,
when he would be new modelling affairs at Winsor. Extraneus es! Relinque res
sicut eas invenisti. Come Reader, there is no false Latin in it, had former Ages
heard and taken the advice, we could have been content with the Primitive
light, though we had wanted sumptuous Candlesticks; the power of Religion, had
made amends for its plainness; and golden Officers, recompensed wooden
chalices: Thus far at our Authors invitation we have step't out of the way, and
are now ready to return with him into it.

The next thing considerable wherein he ingages, is a description of the New
nature, whereof the Holy Ghost makes frequent mention, as that from which all
new Obedience must proceed.

This New Nature, (says he) the Scripture represents under several Notions.

1. By the subjection of our minds and Spirits to Christ. 2. By a participation
of the same Nature, which is the necessary effect of the subjection of our
minds to him.
If a man would study to be cross all his days, and resolve to trade in no
figure but Hysteron Proteron, he might hardly hope to equalize our Author in
this discourse. For,

1. What subjection of mind, and Spirit, can be given to Christ, without a new
Nature, from whence that Act of subjection should proceed? the most inward Acts
of Obedience are yet but Acts: the most spiritual and refined workings of the
soul are still but works, and have always for their root and principal, a good
and an honest; a new, and a renewed heart and Nature. Thus we see it is in
Nature: there must be a principle of motion, before there can be natural
motion, all the rest is violent, and against the hair. And this order our
Savior has described in the most plain, and familiar way to gratify our
understandings that they could desire. Math. 12. 33. Either make the tree good
and the fruit good; or the evil and the fruit evil, and Math. 7. 17. 18. Do men
gather Grapes of thorns, or Figs of Thistles. Even so every good Tree brings
forth good Fruit, and a corrupt Tree brings forth evil fruit: But our Author
has found out a way called Transmutation of species: to make a Thorn become a
Vine, and to Transubstantiate a Thistle into a Figtree: I know the Reader has a
grudging of the old curiosity to see the experiment: The operation therefore is
this, teach a Thistle to produce Figs for one seven years, and you shall see it
become as very a Fig Tree as any is in the world, thus let the natural and
unregenerate man perform multiplied Acts of the best obedience he can, and
without any efficacious working of the Holy Ghost he shall acquire a new heart,
which I shall believe at the same time, when I see a thousand Ciphers give
themselves the significancy of one figure. Our Blessed Savior has long ago
determined this to our hand. John 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh. Let the Egyptian Pollinctors practice upon it, let them sweeten perfume,
and season it with the spicery of India, and all the balm of Gilead, it will be
but flesh still, all its operations carnal.

2. It will be of good use in this matter to enquire, wherein lay the Image of
God in Adam, what relation it had to his obedience, and thence perhaps we may
get some light what order the Image of God in us observes: That it mainly
consists in righteousness and true holiness, no man can doubt that reads the
Apostles description, Ephesians. 4. 24. but now it is evident that Adam did not
procure this Image of God, by repeated Acts of obedience, it was not the result
of many particular duties, it was no acquired habit, but it was concreated with
him, as a condition due and meet for a Creature made to such sublime, and
glorious ends as the enjoyment of his God, and from this Nature, this Image of
God, proceeded all that Obedience which he paid, all that which God required,
and accepted. And if this be so, it is evident that all who are renewed, who are
born again, who are Created unto good works go through the same method. So the
Apostle Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge
after the Image of him, that Created him: The order of Gods working is
conformable to his promise, we may be sure he will do both what, and how he has
promised, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will
I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your Flesh, and
give you an heart of Flesh; and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them: where the
order and method of God in this great work is laid down, with such a convincing
evidence that he must have no eyes or shut those he has who does not see it.
And,

1. God promises that he will remove the great principle of resistance, that
which makes head, and opposition to the Commands of God: the stony, hard,
inflexible-Heart.

2, That he will bestow another, a better, a new heart, a soft Spirit, a heart
of Flesh: that may comply and close in with Gods Commands.

3. That from this new heart, all new obedience, all service acceptable to God
must proceed as from its spring or root. I will put my Spirit into you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,

4. That all obedience, inward and outward obedience: keeping the Commandments
of God with the heart, and doing them in the practice of our lives, yet all
must proceed from this new heart, this new Spirit, which God promised, to put
within them.

But he comes to close Argument, we are exhorted that the same mind be in us
that was in Christ, Phil. 2. 5. And to be his disciples is to learn of him, who
was meek, and lowly in spirit, Math. 11. 29. We question not that, its our duty
to imitate Christ; to copy out all his imitable excellencies, and if he can
prove that we can do this, viz. imitate Christ in Acts of self denial, taking
up the Cross, bearing reproach, forgiving enemies, without a better heart, and
Nature, than we brought into the world with us, he will then begin to speak to
the purpose: But (says our Author) Christ transcribed his own nature into his
Laws, and therefore a sincere obedience to his Laws is a conformity to his
Nature, To which I answer,

1. He that transcribed his Nature into his own Laws, must yet transcribe it
once more, even into the heart of a son of Adam, e're he can give to him that
new Obedience which is acceptable to him: It was not enough that God wrote his
Laws in Stone, unless they be written upon the Tables of the heart with the
finger of God.

2. Obedience to the Laws of Christ does increase our conformity to the Nature
of Christ, but still there must be a renewed heart and Nature, upon which all
progressive conformity to Christ in obedience must proceed.

3. Transcribing of Christ's Nature into his Laws is a Metaphorical expression,
which our Author may explain how he pleases, but I observe always, when he
can cloth an Argument with Metaphors, he is then secure: yet still he presses
upon* us from, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none
of his. That is (says he) Unless he have the same Temper, and disposition of
mind that Christ had: Now let the Reader look well about him, and he shall see
rare sights: we do all remember that to be United to Christ, or to be one of
Christ's, signify to be United to a particular Church: And now we are told:
That by having the Spirit of Christ, is meant being of the same temper and
disposition: and now from hence we have these consectaries.

1. That if any man be not of the same Temper with Christ, that is be not holy,
as he is holy: he cannot be United to a particular Church: And our Savior has
vouched for it, John 3. 5. Except a man be regenerate and born again he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. We must be like minded with Christ, and thereby
become one of his: and what is now become of the great Proposition that has
filled so many pages. That the only means of Uniting as to Christ is by our
Union with a particular Church.

2. He tells us that Union to Christ is described by having the Spirit: and
then having the Spirit is interpreted by being of the same Temper with Christ:
so now we have got another Doctrine: That our Union to Christ consists in being
of the same Temper, and disposition with him. But,

3. We have here an excellent expedient to discharge the World both of the
Person of Christ, and of the Spirit too: For as he can interpret Christ's Person
into Doctrine, office Church, Religion, Bishops, Baptism; so he has interpreted
the Spirit into Temper, disposition; and when an exigency calls for it, he may
explicate it by a strong wind, or a vapor, and then his work is done. But,

3. For the explicating of the new Nature, he tells us there is a closer Union
which results from this, which consists in a mutual, and reciprocal love, which
I am glad of, amongst other Reasons for this; that now it will be lawful to
Love Christ, without persecution, provided always we do not over love him, nor
be passionately in love with him: but yet there are a few inconveniences which
attend this explication. For,

1. If we be United, and closely United to Christ by Love, then a Political
Union, is not the only one betwixt Christ and Christians. And,

2. Then it seems (for all the sorrow) a Christian may be United to Christ
without being United to a particular Church: for we therefore love Christians
because we love Christ, and are taken with the imperfect holiness which is
copied out into their Natures, and lives, because we are surprised first with a
delightful admiration of Him who is the grand exemplar of all perfect
Holiness, 1 John 5. 1. He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is
begotten of him. 3. Why may not this Union with Christ signify an Union with
the Church as well as the other? and then to love Christ signifies no more than
to love his Church, and so we are but where we were.

4. Its very strange, that our Love should result from our obedience, and
subjection, whereas its hard to conceive how the soul should give subjection
without Love, and if it should give any, a forced subjection without its
principle of Love, would find as cold a well-come in Christ's heart, as that
cold heart it came from: our Savior had described obedience as the result of
love. John 14. 15. If ye Love me keep my Commandments. No (says our Author)
keep my Commandments, and then you will fall in Love with me: but let him give
light to his own Notions: when we are transformed into the Image of Christ, he
loves Us as being like him; and we love him too, as partaking of his Nature. He
loves us, as the price of his blood, as his own workmanship created to good
works, and we love him, as our Savior, and Redeemer, now love is the great
Cement of Union which unites interest, and thereby does more firmly unite
hearts. It is not then quite so bad as was pretended, to Love the Lord Jesus
Christ, provided we have but our Authors license to love him: but now the
Question will be this: whether our Union to Christ consists in a mutual and
reciprocal love? And if our Author* had been judge a little while since, he
would have resolved it in the Negative, That our Union to Christ consists in
our Union to a particular Church: and that it is a political union, such a one
as is between Prince, and Subject, and consists in a belief of his revelations,
obedience to his Laws, and subjection to his Authority. I shall only note a few
things, and dismiss it.

1. That there is a love of Benevolence and good Will, a designing, purposing
love in Christ toward us, before we bear his Image and Superscription: this
love he bears toward those that are unlike him, Romans 5* 8. God Commends his
love to us, that when we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us: verse 10. When we
were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son.

2. There must of necessity be the intervention of an Union, a likeness, a
Conformity of Natures, before there can be supposed a love of mutual
complacency, and reciprocal delight in each other, for this love, this delight,
must have something to work upon. As there must be a Conjugal Relation, before
the Husband can take delight in his Wife, as his Wife; and the Wife in her
Husband as her Husband.

3. That this love of good will in Christ, is the Original Reason of our
transformation into the Image of Christ; whereby we become meet objects for
that other love of Complacency.

4. Its true that we love him, as partaking of his Nature; but then its also as
true that those Acts of love to, and delight in Christ, proceed from that New
Nature which we derive from him.

5. The Love wherewith Christ Loves us, as the price of his blood, is a
differing love from that wherewith he loves us as his workmanship created in
Christ Jesus to good works.

6. I rejoice however that we are owned to be Christ's workmanship Created to
good works: which it were not so, we had more reason to love our selves, to
admire and deifie our own natural Abilities, which effected that glorious
workmanship: And I see of late our Author, takes to the Church Catechism;
which had he attended to in time, had saved him half the Labor of his Book:-
My good Child! know that thou art not able to do these things of thy self (to
love God, to believe in him, to fear him, with all thy heart with all thy mind,
withal thy strength, to worship him to give him thanks to put thy whole Trust
in him, etc.) nor to walk in the Commandments of God and serve him without his
special Grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer.

7. The more we exercise our selves in the Love of Christ, the more like him we
grow; and the stronger bonds are laid upon our Souls, to maintain the Union
inviolable; but still there must precede an Union, which is the true Foundation
of the Exercise of this Love of Delight and mutual Complacency. Ay but (says
he) Love is the great Cement of Union, which unites Interests, and thereby more
firmly unites hearts. Let him call it the Cement, or the Soder, or the Glue,
it is all one to me; I conceive that Interest is the Cement of Love, and not
Love the Cement of Interest: Men love because it is their Interest so to do;
but whether that Love that flutters up and down the world, a thing so unstable
and desultory that we cannot tell where to have it, be a fit Pattern for the
heigths, and lengths, and depths, and breadth of the Love of Christ, ora just
Measure of it, I very much question.

Many things we meet with that are full of delight, but one may take a Surfeit
of Sweetmeats, and therefore I shall only trouble the Reader with his
Concluding Argument, taken from the Sacraments: Which are (says he) the
Instruments and Symbols of our Union with Christ. And if by Christ he
understands the Church, it is not worth the while to make a Controversy on it;
we will grant, That Union with the Church consists in Union with it; and the
surest Means to be United to the Church, is to be United to it; and this way
seldom fails: But if he had a mind to conclude something else, he had done like
a Neighbor to have informed us; for I must needs confess, I am in the dark:
But yet we shall not lose all our labor: For these Sacraments represent both
our external and real Union with him. And it is worth all our pains and
patience, to hear one of his Lectures upon this Subject:

First, for our External Union; Baptism is a public Profession of the
Christian Religion, that we believe the Gospel, own his Authority, and submit
to his Government:

Secondly, These Sacraments signify our Real Union to Christ: Thus Baptism
signifies our Profession of becoming New men, our profession of Conformity to
Christ in his Death and Resurrection. Now look how much Conformity to Christ's
Death and Resurrection, is better than owning his Authority, and submitting to
his Government, just so much is our Real Union, better than our external, which
if one so exactly versed in the essential differences of things as our Author*
had not told us other wise, ordinary Capacities had judged to be both one: That
little advantage there is, the External Union carries it: For as to our
External Union, Baptism (he tells us) is a Profession of it; but as to our Real
Union, Baptism only signifies a profession of it; and then it will be somewhat
better to make a Profession of submission to Christ's Government, than to make a
signification of a Profession of Conformity to his Death. I shall therefore
rather acquiesce in the Judgment of the Catechism about the Signification of
Baptism, than in our Authors; which makes this Question: What is the inward and
spiritual Grace? Ans. A death unto sin, and a New Birth unto Righteousness; for
being by Nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the
children of Grace.

[4] His last, and most famous Observation is: That Fellowship and Communion
with God signifies, what he calls a Political Union: And would we knew what
that was: why it is this: To be in fellowship with God and Christ signifies to
be of that Society which puts us into a peculiar Relation to God; that God is
our Father, and we his Children, that Christ is our Head and Husband, and Lord,
and Master; and we his Disciples, and followers, his Spouse, and Body. It Is
below the generosity of the Eagle, to catch Flies; an Employment more suitable
to the impertinent humor of Domitian; and therefore it may be expected, that
our Author should scorn to play so mean a Game, as to impose upon our weakness
with the Ambiguity of a poor word. [To be in Fellowship,] carries a sound to a
mere English Ear very like to [Union,] but if we examine either the Synonymous
word [Communion,] or the Greek words, [(...)), and (...)] which are rendered
Fellowship and Communion; and how those words are used in Scripture, we may
abundantly satisfy our selves, that they signify something very distinct
from, Union or Relation. Fellowship, and Communion, are words of the same
import; and the Greek (...) is indifferently rendered by either of them: 1 Ioh.
1. 3. (...): And truly our Fellowship, etc. And v. 6. If we say, that we have
fellowship with him. (...): 2 Cor. 3. 14. (...): The Communion of the Holy
Ghost; and the Greek word (...), is once translated Fellowship: 2 Cor. 6. 14.
(...); For what Fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? Now, what
the general Nature of Fellowship, Communion, or Participation, and
Communication, is; the Apostle will clear up to us, Phil. 4. 15. Now ye
Philippians know; That no Church communicated with me, as concerning Giving,
and Receiving, but ye only; (...); which he explains, (if there be need of
that,) v. 16. Ye sent once and again unto my necessity. Communion therefore, or
Communication, is the Mutual bestowing of those good things which are in each
others power, grounded upon some Union, and Relation between the Parties. And
this is more fully expressed by that Scripture phrase, (...): To have, hold,
exercise, or maintain Communion, or Communication of all those good things
which may be expected from each other in a Relation: 1 Ioh. 1. 6. (...). I must
profess my self therefore wholly dissatisfied with our Authors New Notion of
Communion, That it signifies the same thing with Union: That (...), and (...),
are Terms adequately Measuring each other: There must be first a Relation,
before there can be a communicating of those good things which presuppose the
Relation. Thus the Love of a Father to his Child, his Care over him, his Bounty
to him, is founded in his Relation to him, as his Son; and the Child's filial
Love, Duty, Fear, are all b^tomed upon the Relation which he holds to his
Father. Thus we conceive first a Real Union between the Head and the Members,
before we can conceive the Head should communicate spirits to all the parts, to
quicken them to Motion. And this the Apostle expresses, Col. 2. 19. That they
who do not, Hold the Head, [that are not united to Christ,] can never receive
from him those supplies, or Communications of Spiritual Nourishment, that they
may increase with the increase of God. And thus must there be an Union between
the Husband and the Wife, before there can be a Communication of what is in
each others power: That is, they must give what they are, before they can give
what they have: And this Order and Method is well observed in the Liturgy,
(though our Author is pleased to make himself very merry with it) where the Man
first takes the Woman to be his wedded Wife; and then assigns, or makes over
what he has to her Use; with all my worldly Goods I thee endow: For he that
gives Himself, will never stick at a'l the Rest. And thus the first thing that
God gives to his in Covenant, is Himself: Heb. 8. 10. I will be their God; and
then follows the Communication of all his Covenant Mercies. v. 12. I will be
merciful to their Iniquities, and remember their sins no more: And in the same
Order the Soul proceeds in its Restipulation with God: 2 Cor. 8. 5. First gave
their ^wn selves to the Lord. Now as the Union, or Relation is for kind, so
also are the Communications that flow from, or follow upon the Relation and
Union. If the Union be a more general Union, the Relation a more common
Relation, the Communications in due proportion will be more general, and
Common; we are Related to all men, none are so remote, but they are our
Neighbors; but yet we have a more special and peculiar Relation to all
Christians: And hence is it, that the Apostle apportions out to us, the Nature
of those good things that we ought to commuicate to both, Gal. 6. 10. Do good
to all, but especially to them that are of the household of Faith. The great God
as Creator, is Related to all; and therefore does good to all. Psalm. 36. 6.
Thou preservest Man and Beast: Yet, as he stands more nearly related as a
Father to some, than others, so he commnicates more choice and peculiar Favors
to them: Hence is that Prayer of David, Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with
the favor thou bear to thine own People; O visit me with thy Salvation;
that I may see the Good of thy Elect ones. And because the Electing Love of the
Father, and the Redeeming Love of the Son, are exactly parallel, therefore has
Christ a general (...), as well as a special (...)* 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the
Savior of all men, specially of them that Believe: It was never doubted, but
the Relation of a Master to his Servant ought to produce suitable
Communications to that Relation: And yet those of a Father to his Child, are of
another and sweeter Nature, those of the Husband to the Wife, yet more
endearing; and those of the Head to the Members still more intimous and
intrinsecal: Now that Communion is a Communication of Good things flowing from
Union, the Apostle will not suffer us to doubt; Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is
taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in All Good things:
Where the Relation between the Teacher and the Disciple, is the Foundation of
that Communication of all good things; but if indeed our Author will abide by
his Notion, That Union and Communion are both one; Then if his Parishioners do
but hear him preach, they may spare the Impertinency of Tithes, it is but Actum
Agere, and Commu^ion is satisfied in the Notion of Union; so that they have
here a general Release of all Minute and Praedial Tithes, under his own hand,
from the beginning of the World to this Day.

The Sophistry of our Authors Argument from 1 John 1. 3. we have already
considered and discovered: He leads us now to 1 Cor. 1. 9. God is faithful, by
whom ye are called into the Fellowship of his Son Jesus: All the advantage he
can expect from these words, is upon a presumption of his Readers Simplicity,
that he will not spy small faults; to be called into fellowship with Christ,
cajouls the Ear into a Conceit of Union: But that which spoils all is, our
Translation reads unto the Fellowship, or Communication, or Participation of
his Son, and the Mischief on it is, the Greek reads, (...): But let us see
however, how he will improve it: Where (says he) the Fellowship of Christ can
signify no more than fellowship with the Church, because the Apostle adds in
the next Verse, [I beseech you brethren, that you all speak the same thing,
that there be no Divisions among you.] I confess he has a heavy hand at
Reasoning, and it goes hard with us that must continually feel the weight of
it: But yet,

1. The Apostles Argument will conclude as strongly from the Communications of
Grace from Christ, unto Peace among our selves, as from Union, q. d. You have
all been made partakers of the Communications of Grace and Peace from Christ;
you have many mercies in hand, and more in hope, much in possession, but
infinitely more in Reversion, and will you run into Factions among your selves?
But,

2. The very plain Truth is: The Apostle argues neither the one way nor the
other; Verse 9. has no such Influence upon Verse 10. but the Rise of his
Discourse is from Verse 3. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father,
and the Lord Jesus Christ. Where you have:

First, The Union and Relation. God our Father: Our Lord and Savior.

Secondly, The Communion that flows from that Relation: (...) and Peace, i. e.
All new Covenant-Mercies: And because whatever Grace, or Peace, comes from the
Father as the Fountain and Spring, from the Son in a way of Purchase and
Procurement, comes also from the Holy Ghost, by way of Immediate Efficiency;
therefore it is called also, (...), 2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of our Lord Jesus,
the Love of God, and the Communion, or Communication of the Holy Ghost, be with
you all. You all, that is, The Church of God at Corinth, with all the Saints in
Achaia, Chap. 1. ver. 1. who are supposed to be already United to Christ, both
in our Authors false Notion, and in the true. Now this Communication, he calls,
The Grace of God given them, or Communicated to them by Jesus Christ, Verse 4.
And shows the Measure of it, Verse 5. Ye are enriched in every thing by Him.
And Verse 8. He shows that God would confirm them in, as well as enrich them
with his Grace to the end: And for a Proof of this, he minds them of the
Faithfulness, and Steddiness of God in his Covenant. Verse 9. God is Faithful,
by whom ye are called unto the Communication of our Lord Jesus Christ. The end
of your Effectual calling to an Union with Christ, is a Communication of this
Grace and Peace from Christ. And then,

Thirdly, Our Authors Memory is very Treacherous. For first he observes: That
Communion with God, signifies a Political Union; and that Political Union, was
such a one as is between a Prince and his Subjects, page 156. And that,
certainly, has the Persons of both, for the Terms of the Relation. And page
185. He observes, That our Fellowship with the Father and the Son, is founded
on our Fellowship with the Christian Church, and therefore fellowship with the
Father and the Son; and fellowship with the Christian Church, are two things
really distinct, for it would be harsh to say, a thing is founded on it self.
And yet after all this: Fellowship with Christ can signify no more than
Fellowship with the Church. And thus, the short and long of the Business, is
this, Union with Christ, is Union with the Church: And Communion with Christ,
is Communion with the Church: And Union with the Church, is Communion with the
Church. Quod erat Demonstrandum.

But we are terribly Threatened with an Argument, from 2 Cor. 6. 14. Be ye not
unequally Yoaked together with Unbelievers, (...); Where the Apostle refers to
a Levitical Ordinance, Deuteronomy. 22. 10. Thou shall not Plow with an Ox, and an
Ass. In proportion to which, the Apostle forbids Believers to join in the same
special League and Covenant, with Unbelievers. Now the Reason why he disswades
them from such an unequal union, is, because the end of all union, is a
Communion, or Communication, each to, and with other in that Union. But to be
sure, where there are such Contrarieties of Interests and Inclinations, in the
Persons joined together, there can be no assistance to the same common Work:
The Cedar in Lebanon, and the Thistle in Lebanon, are not qualified for a
Match, for they will never serve and accommodate each other in the Duties of
the Relation. When the Wise God chose a Wife for Adam, he provided one that
was Homogeneous with him, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, that she
might be a Meet-help for him. But now (says the Apostle) If you join your
selves with Unbelievers; (...): What participation of good things can you
expect from them, whose Religion is as contrary to yours, as Righteousness is
to Unrighteousness? And (...); What Communication can there be between Light
and Darkness? Pagans can Communicate nothing to you but their uncleanness, and
I would not have you communicate with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, Ephesians.
5. 11. Again, (...): What Concord has Christ with Belial? What Symphony or
Harmony, can there be in your Conversations? You will be always Jarring? There
will be no Melody or Music in your Converses: When you would be praising to
their Idols: so that never was there greater Confusion of Tongues at Babel,
than there will be in your Society. And then, (...); what Portion can a
Believer have with an Unbeliever? He will not, ought not partake of the Lords
Table with you; and you will not, ought not partake of the Table of Devils with
him. For, (...); what Consent, or Suffrage will the one give to the other? The
living God will not vote for dead and dumb Idols: The Arc will never endure
Dagon: How absurd therefore must it be, to enter into a Relation with them,
with whom you can enjoy no Fellowship in that Relation?

One Reserve he has still left from the Lords Supper, whereby our Fellowship
with God and Christ, are expressed, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The Cup of Blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ?

Now (says he) it is called a Communion, because it signifies,

1. A Communion of Christians with each other. 2. A Fellowship with God.
That is, it is called a Communion because it is no Communion, but only the sign
of a Communion. There is indeed an outward and visible sign; and there is also
an inward and invisible Grace, really exhibited and communicated from Christ by
the Ordinance, to the worthy Receiver. And thus much he might have learned from
the Church Catechism:

Qu. What is the inward part, or thing signified?

Ans. The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken, and
received of the Faithful in the Lords Supper.

Qu. What are the Benefits whereof we are partakers Thereby?

Ans. The strengthening and refreshing of our Souls, by the Body and Blood of
Christ; As our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine.

And the Liturgy in the Office of the Supper, expresses, not only a
Communication of real Nourishment from Christ, to our Souls; but a mutual
communication of our Praise and Thanksgiving to God for Christ, and to Christ
for his Flesh and Blood; which compleats the Communion: The Body of our Lord
Jesus Christ which was given for Thee, preserve thy Body and Soul into
Everlasting Life; and Take, and Eat this, in remembrance that Christ dyed for
thee; and feed on him in thy Heart by Faith, and be Thankful.

But to put this out of doubt, That all Communion is grounded upon Union, I
will quote our Author to our Author; for Nothing cuts the Diamond like it self.
God (says he) entertains us at his Table as his own children. Why then, let it
be referred to the Man that comes next; Whether sitting at Gods Table, does not
presuppose us to be Children? Surely, we are not therefore Children because we
sit at the Table; but we therefore sit at the Table, because we are Children.
Again, p. 152. Our Author (whose word ought to go far with himself) assures us,
That Baptism is the Sacrament of our Admission into the Church. There Is our
Union then however; and the Lords Supper finding us already united, affords us
a communion, or a participation of those Privileges, which flow from that
Union. So that, whether our Union to Christ, consist in our Union to the
Church, or no; yet still there must be an Union to the Church, before we can
hold Communion with it, in those Mercies and Blessings which Christ has
entailed upon it.

And thus has our Author made a quick dispatch of Communion with Christ in the
Lords Supper; could he but as fairly dispatch it out of all other Exercises of
Religion, he might seriously Triumph, that he had cut off the Neck of all
Religion at one Blow: Well, success waits upon the Bold Undertaker, and there is
no hurt in a daring Attempt. Prayer (says he) and Meditation, and such like
Acts of Devotion, are no where called Communion with God. Our Author is just
now turning Quaker. Thou man, where do thou read, that the People of God put
off their Hats, or wore Ribbands and Lace? But to satisfy him, Prayer and
Meditation are not called, nor are they Communion with God; but Means whereby,
and Ways of Gods appointment wherein, we hold Communion with him: In these and
other Ordinances we communicate to him the Actings of our Faith, Fear, Love,
delight, Praise, etc. and by these he communicates to us of his Grace,
Strength, Favor, Mercy, to help us in the time of our Need. In Prayer we pour
out our hearts before him, Psalm. 62. 8. In Prayer and Meditation, We lift up
our Souls to the Lord, Psalm. 25. 1. Hence that frequent Expression of the
Ancient Christians, Sursum Corda, continued in the Liturgy: Lift up your
hearts: Ans. We lift them up to the Lord: But a few dribling Objections he has
against this also.

1 Object. Communion does not consist in Transient Acts.

Ans. 1. Communion does consist in those permanent Effects conveyed by
transient Acts; the Effect of Prayer abides, when the Act is over.

2. The Lords Supper is a Transient Act, both in opposition to Permanent and
Immanent, and yet there is a real Communion between Christ and Believers
therein.

2 Object. You will not say, a poor Man has Communion with his Prince, when he
puts up a Petition to him, to beg his Charity.

Ans. It Is more than our Author can tell, whether we will say so or no. If a
Prince commands his Subjects, to make their Addresses to him, in all their
streights; promising, that the great distance between them shall not prejudice
their Supplications, and shall appoint a Person near and dear to himself, to
receive from them, and present to him all their Petitions, that in his Name
they may find Acceptance and Answer; if now his poor Subjects shall give faith
to his Promises, make use of his Indulgence, own their Relation to him, and
improve the Mediation of that Master of Requests, and upon the Relief of their
Wants, Redress of their Grievances, shall return their humble and hearty
thanks; and learn to love their Prince more, to serve him better, to become
more loyal Subjects; methinks here is that which may be called Communion
grounded upon Union.

3 Obj. To Pray to God, is an Act of Homage which we owe to him as our Creator
and Father.

Ans. I looked every moment when he should Confute himself; for now he will not
deny, that Relation to God as our Creator and Father, precedes this Communion:
It Is a Duty (says he) that results from Relation. Therefore, (say I) It Is not
the Relation it self: And therefore I shall still conclude, that Communion does
properly denote the Communication of good things, bottomed upon that Union and
Relation we have to and with each other; and that our Author has most
wretchedly abused his Time, and his Reader, in a weak Endeavor to prove, That
Communion consists in Union; and has merited the Character of Hanno the
Carthaginian (given him by the great Historian,) That he was a Person very
skillful in the Art of seeming Reverend.

SECT. 2. Of our Union to the Person of Christ.
THis Section may well be called, Our Author's Lamentations; wherein he most
passionately bewails, how some men have obscured Plain things, to his no small
trouble (I assure you) to vindicate them to their Primitive Clearness. We (who
are not privy to his Nocturnal Elucubrations) do little think what pains it
cost him to scowre off all that Rust, which (in so long a tract of time as
Sixteen hundred years, through the Sleepin^ss of the Ancient Fathers, and the
Sluttishness of all the Christian Churches) Religion had contracted, to the day
of the date of his Reformation. But there are others too that whisper out their
Complaints, How Christ in the beginning of his Gospel, bequeathed to us a
Religion Decent, but not Gaudy; Plain, but yet Powerful; not courting
Proselytes with Meretricious Gallantry; but Matron-like Modesty: Whose Attire
was indeed more coarse, and homespun, yet withal very warm, and fitted to its
end: But nowa-days all is trimmed up with Ribbands and Lace, and set off with
Fan and Feather. It was a Complaint as old as Austin, That men loaded Religion
with servile Burdens, which God in mercy would have left free: So that the
condition of the Jews was m^re tolrable, that were subject to Legal Sacraments,
and n t to the Presumptions of men. Thus ev^ry one co^plains of faults, but
very few that I can fee will mond ny.

I suppose our Author will be content, that the Reformation of Worship be
committed to the Churches care; but for reducing the Doctrine, that is a Burden
he has reserved for his own shoulders: And methinks I see him (like the sign of
the Atlas, supporting the Globe) cheerfully heaving at the weight, and yet
never so much as once crinkle in the Hams.

God (says he) was pleased to institute a great many Ceremonies, and many of
them of very obscure Signification, i^ the Jewish Worship, to aw their Childish
Minds into a greater Veneration of his Majesty. Now let the Reader substract A
many, out of A great many, and the Remainder will inform him, just How many of
God's Institutions, had Any light in them. Had this Divinity fallen into some
men's fingers, they would perhaps have made desperate work with it: For, 1. Some
might say, Nay then, if God's own Ceremonies were invented to aw Childish
Minds, we can never hope for better from Humane Ceremonies, but that they
should fright the Churches Children out of their wits. 2. Others would censure
it as guilty of horrid Profaneness, to assign such a Reason for God's sacred
Institutions, as must imply, That he was forced to go subtly to work with his
people, and to use the Artifice of Mormo's and Scarce-crows to fright them into
Reverence; as women terrify their children with Robin -- with the Raw-head and
Bloody-bones. And 3. Some would not stick to say, That surely some prying pate
or other would have discovered the design, and then instead of conciliating
more Reverence, it would certainly have exposed his Ordinances, if not the
Author of them, to contempt. But they who had seen Mount Sinai all on flame,
and smoke; they who had heard the sound of that dreadful Trumpet, who felt the
Earthquake without, and a greater Heart-quake within at the presence of the
Almighty God, were convinced that God needed not to have recourse to those
little slights of Ceremonies to aw their Childish Minds into a Veneration of
his Majesty. 4. Others expect when our Author should make God himself a
Ceremony, contrived to manage this bulky and unruly World with more ease: For
some it seems, have got it by the the end, that Primus in Orb Deos fecit
Timor. 5. But all agree in this, That this Doctrine argues our Authors gross
ignorance in the true end of those Ceremonies: All which had a fair and clear
Prospect toward a Redeemer, Col. 2. 17. They were a shadow of good things to
come, but the body was of Christ. But men may speak their pleasure, our Author
has determined against them, That God's Institutions were to fright Children:
But now (says he) in these last days, God sent his Son to make a plain, easy,
and perfect Revelation of his Will; to publish such a Religion as may approve
it self to our Reason. Well! whatever we have gained, I am sure Religion has
got no great matt^r by the Bargain: For then their Reason was to crowch to
God's Religion, though in an obscure Ceremony; but now poor Religion must stoop
to Reason, must appear before the Tribunal of Reason; and if it does not acquit
it self well, and give a Rational and Satisfactory account of its Tendries, it
must be bored through the Tongue with a red-^ot Iron, for an Heretic: And
which is the worst on it, this Reason holds its Consistory in our Authors brain,
so that if he be but (...) with a Rheumatism, the droppings of his Nose must be
imposed upon us for Twice distilled Reason. Nor yet can I perceive, wherein
Religion does more approve it self to our Reason, than formerly to theirs: For,
1. As to the Moral part of Religion, that was as agreeable to Natural Light
then, as '^is now; Murder, Adultery, Stealing, were equally condemned by the
Sentiments of all Mankind in all Ages. 2. For the Ceremonial part, which
depends upon the mere Authority and Sovereign pleasure of the Legislator, they
had as good Reason for their obedience, as we can claim for ours. There was as
fair Reason pleadable for Circumcision, as for Baptism; for the Passover, as
the Supper; the first Reason from which all instituted Worship springs, being
the Will, and the last Reason into which all is resolved, being the Glory of
the Supreme Lawgiver. 3. The Perfection of Christ's Revelation, above that of
God to the Jews, lies not in giving us a new Moral Law, or adding any thing to
it; but in exhibiting Himself* as the Substance of their Ceremonial Law, who
was revealed (though less clearly revealed) to them in Types and Figures.

And now Dr. Owen shall have a short truce and respite from Persecution, whilst
the storm falls upon Dr. Iacomb. Some cavilling spirits have made a Q^estion,
How the Air and Earth could afford sufficient Matter for Rain to make an
Universal Deluge? But I more wonder, whence our Author could furnish himself
with such a vast stock of s^olding Materials and Utensils, as might maintain
such a constant Tenor of Fury and Rage against these men? What Cistern or
Receptacle is able to hold such a body of Rancor, as may feed that stream which
perpetually turns his Mill? Some thought, surely these Doctors had a great hand
in burning the City; or have robbed the Temple at Delphos; or however that of
Toulouse. But I relieved my self against that Suspicion, by a seasonable
Consideration, That it is not the custom to hear ill, but for doing well: And
therefore my thoughts began to reel to the other side; Whether possibly they
had not club'd together, to build, or endow some Hospital, or College; or had
bought in all the Impropriations, and laid them to the Church, because it must
be some glorious Work, that could purchase our Author's Indignation; and at no
lower rates could they entitle themselves to his severe displeasure. At last
with much beating about, I found that they had both zealously and strongly
engaged against the Socinians, for the Doctrine of the Church of England; and
then no Penance shall ever expiate their Guilt, or procure an Indulgence for
such Delinquen^y. But then the Difficulty recurred upon me, Why he should slip
his Hold of the one, and fasten upon the other? Yet I considered, that Nature
is much delighted with Variety: And I have heard some that pretend to know
something in those matters, say, That it is not Policy to fight long with one
Enemy; for in a while, they will understand* our manner of fighting, and become
as good at our Weapon as our selves. But now attend!

When we enquire (says he) what this Union between Christ and Believers is?
They answer, It Is a Mystical Union through the Spirit and Faith. And truly they
answer pretty well! For that it is a Mystical Union, they produce the Apostle
Paul for their Voucher, Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great Mystery, but I speak
concerning Christ and his Church. The Apostle is there discoursing of that
intimous Oneness, (good Sir be not angry!) that is between the Husband and the
Wife: That the Wife is the Husbands own self, verse. 28. He that loves his
wife, loves himself. Now covertly, the Apostle, with one and the same labor,
will show us how mystical and intimous that Union is, which is between Christ
and his Church, v. 29. No man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church: For we are members of his body, and
of his flesh, and of his bones. And for this cause (says the Apostle, verse.
31.) a man shall leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they two
shall be one flesh: But now (says he) that which I have discoursed to you will
seem very abstruse; and, as some will phrase it, mystical nonsense, and
unintelligible Drollery; but, I speak concerning Christ and his Church: For
however this be true, That the Husband and Wife are but one flesh, in the eye
and consideration of the Law; yet it is more eminently true concerning Christ
and his Church, who in the consideration and eye of God, are but one Spirit.
All Metaphors and Similitudes taken from outward things, come infinitely short,
and cannot decypher that mystical Union, which is between Christ, and all true
Believers. Your Political Union, is but a new-invented Bawble; your Natural
Union, is lean, and hungry; your Civil Union is low, and flat; it is a Mystical
Union! Ay, but this Paul was an obscure Author and writes very darkly: But yet
he may comfort himself the better under this hard Censure, since God himself
cannot escape the Lash of Virulent Pe^s, emboldned with an Imprimatur; whose
Institutions are reproached, to be of Obscure Signification, to aw the Childish
Minds of men into Veneration. And then, that the internal Ligaments of this
Union, are the Spirit and Faith; as the Scripture is free in affirming, so our
Author is shy in denying; only he throws away a little scornful Drivel upon it.
This Mystical is a hard word! Let it be so! Dr. Iacomb shall explain it, on
Romans 8. p. 42. And first (says the Doctor) There is an Union of three Persons
in one Nature. 2. There Is the Union of two Natures in one Person. 3. There Is an
Union of Persons, where yet Persons and Natures are distinct. Concerning which
he observes, 1. Here Is an Union, but no Transmutation, Commixtion, or
Confusion. Here Is an Union of Persons, but no Personal Union. Say you so
Doctor? then I promise you, here is one has made bold with some of your names;
for page 103. he tells his Reader, and me amongst the rest, That these men
place all their hopes of Salvation in a personal Union with Christ. But pray
Dr. go on! The Person of Christ is united to the Person of a Believer, and the
Person of a Believer to the Person of Christ: But for this our Author has a dry
flam; As it must needs be where the Person of Christ, is united to the Person
of a Believer! Silly Man! the Doctor observes, that Christ is united to a
Believer by the Spirit; and a Believer united to Christ by Faith. Though the
Terms of the Relation are the same in Christ's Union with a Believer, and a
Believer's Union with Christ, the Bond that unites them is Distinct. A Father
is related to his Son, and a Son to his Father, yet Paternity is one thing, and
Filiation another; and the Foundations of these Relations differ: The
Foundation of the one, is to beget; of the other, to be begotten. But (says the
Doctor) Faith is the uniting Grace; and this Faith receiving Christ, 1 John 13.
it must also unite us to the Person of Christ: But of this our Author doubts,
because men are not united to every thing they receive. Alas-a-day! yet when a
Master receives any one to be his Servant, that Reception is the bottom of his
Relation. If a Woman receives a person to be her Husband, that Reception
creates an Union. But I had rather the Reader would give himself the
satisfaction to peruse the Doctors Book, where he shall find these things laid
down with Modesty, backed with strength of Reason; Scripture, and the suffrage
of Learned Christians: And if our Author thinks, that a few Squirts and Flashes
(which he is resolved to call Wit) be a sufficient Confutation, he shall enjoy
the Contentment of admiring his own Excellencies, without any Rival. Again;
This Union (says the Doctor) may be thus described, ' It Is that Supernatural,
Spiritual, Intimous Oneness, and Conjunction between the Person of Christ, and
the Persons of Believers, through the Bonds of the Spirit and Faith; upon which
there follows mutual and reciprocal Communion each with other. I will not
conceal from the Reader my thoughts; I really expected, that our Author should
have highly commended the Doctors Modesty, who in a subject so Sublime, as
might well exercise the Tongues of Angels, should draw his Description with a
Peut estre, it [may be described:] And the rather, because by that means he has
not excluded our Authors greater Abilities from traveling in the subject, but
left room enough for his Defining Faculty: But instead of that, I s^e he is
Angry still, though impotent. This Oneness and Conjunction are hard words! So
they are indeed! It Is hard to say, Whether they will prove Arabic, or Syriac,
or Welsh or Wild-Irish: But to be sure, they came but lately into England, and
are not yet made Denizons to purchase our Author's favor. The great danger is,
lest we should mistake this Conjunction, for one of the Eight parts of Speech.
Oh Sirs! what inextricable perplexities has this one lewd word involved the
Nation in, since it landed? The old Shiboleth was an innocent Chrysom to it.
Political Union and Machine, are sorry Sneaks to it: Indeed Tetrachymagogon,
and Syncategorematical come pretty near: But Oh Conjunction! This Conjunction
is not to be tolerated in a Land professing the Seven Liberal Sciences. And yet
after all this, I dare venture an even Wager, That as many understand
Conjunction, as Opposition, and more than know what to make of Antithesis; and
yet that never choked our Author, but he could swallow it without making any
Bones of it, or a Vespasian- face at it, p. 264. But if some small splinter
should stick in his throat, the Doctor will be that charitable Crane to pluck
it out; for he adds, Believers are said to be joined to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
Now if no words will down with him but such as melt in the mouth, let him
substitute Joining for Conjunction, and that will serve for a Vehicle, with a
spoonful of Syrrup of Mulberries to supple the passage.

Our Author finding that the Doctor has bewildred himself, will endeavor to
help him out. It Is a plain case (says he) if Christ and Believers are united,
their Persons are united too; for the Person of Christ, is Christ himself, and
the Persons of Believers, are Believers themselves; and I cannot understand how
they should be united without their Persons; but then they are united by mutual
Relations, as the Person of a Prince and his Subjects, of a Husband and his
Wife, are united by mutual affections. This I confess a surpassing kindness;
and therefore that frequent reckonings may make us long Friends, I shall call
some small Follies to account, ere they be forgotten. 1. I am more confirmed in
my old Observation, That our Author writes only from hand to month. He has told
us, p. 157. That our Union to Christ, is not an Union to his Person, but
confists in a sincere Union to his Church. And so again, p. 151. and yet now,
If Christ and Believers are united, their Persons are united too; for he cannot
understand (no not for his heart, I warrant you) how they should be united
without their Persons. 2. He charges the Doctor with owning an Adhesion, nay a
Natural Adhesion of Persons. I confess, I never admired any man's Confidence
more; that in the face of the Doctors words, which he himself had quoted,
directly affirming the contrary, should charge him with asserting, a Natural
Adhesion of Persons: Thus he reports the Doctors words, The Person of Christ
and Believers are united, and yet it is no Personal Union. Again, the Doctor
thus, It Is a Spiritual, and Supernatural Conjunction. Our Author had need tell
nothing but Truth; for he is the poorliest qualified for a Liar, that I have
met withal: And now let it be referred to the Groom-Porter, Whether Adhesion be
not as like to choke narrow throats, as Conjunction. 3. He says, Christ and
Believers are united by mutual Relations: And then makes a Quaere upon it,
Whether all the Absurdities he would fasten upon the Doctors words, will not
recoyl upon his own: For it signifies no more, than if he had said, Christ and
Believers are united by their Union, and related by their Relation; and thus
Christ, is Christ; and Believers, are Believers; and Union, is Union.

The Truce is now expired, and he is once again falling upon Dr. Owen: For as
the Serpents in Africa lay aside their Poison whilst they drink, and then
presently suck it up again; so I was pretty secure, our Author would lick up
that vomit again, which he had cast in Dr. Iacomb's face, that he might serve
the other with the same sauce. But whilst I am considering his Extravagances,
there comes to my hand an Answer from the Doctor, wherein since he has
condescended to chastise our Author in person, it may justly supersede any
further attempt of mine in his Vindication.

At p. 243. I meet again with our Author, where he falls upon that weighty
point of Justification: In his exposing of which Truth, he takes occasion from
a passage in Dr. O. (I see I must mention him again) Com. p. 55. There is no
man whatever, that has any wants, in reference to the things of God, but
Christ will be to him that which he wants: (I speak of those [N. B.] who are
given him of the Father.) Is he Dead? Christ is Life! Is he weak? Christ is the
Power of God! Has he a Sense of Sin upon him? Christ is Complete
Righteousness! Jer. 23. 6. The Lord our Righteousness. Which words being
fortified with express Scripture, it concerned our Author to take good advice,
and to go gingerly to work in perverting of them. Two Artifices he uses, which
like Fire and Water, will make the strongest Cloth shrink. And, 1. He lops off
one whole Sentence, p. 214. and then exclaims. This sounds like Universal
Redemption! What, downright Arminianism? Really I am sorry for it! Is the
Doctor sheer gone over to the Remoustrants? Come! come Sir! you have a Card in
your Sleeve; pray produce it! I speak (says the Doctor) of those who are given
him of the Father. Now where are your ears? Does this chink like Universal
Redemption? But so true is the old Observation, He that is prepossest with an
Opinion, finds it in all he reads. 2. If that way fails, another will hit: What
Comfort is this to us (says he) that Christ was Righteous, if we continue
wilful, and incorrigible sinners? Yes, says the Doctor, have thou a sense of
sin upon thee? Christ is Complete Righteousness. Fie upon it! put on a Mask for
shame! Is the Soul that labors under the sense of some particular sin, a
wilful and incorrigible sinner? It Is the repenting, the broken, and the
sorrowful sinner, that the Doctor directs to Christ. Our blessed Savior has
invited those that labor, and are heavy-laden, to come unto him; promising,
that he will give them rest. I wonder our Author could forbear twitting him,
that he encouraged wilful and incorrigible sinners? But, pray, what would our
Author say to a Soul that has the sense of sin upon him? without peradventure,
Repent of thy sin, forsake thy sin, etc. And does he think that Repentance will
save a wilful and incorrigible sinner? one that Repents and sins, and sins and
Repents again, and goes on in a circle of sinning, and halfrepentance? Say but
the same for the Doctor: He Counsels the Soul, under the sense of sin, to
believe; but then it is only the Repenting sinner that will, that can, that
ought to make his Address to Christ, that he may find rest to his Soul.

For our Author's Method in prosecuting this great Point, I dare not warrant
it. Such as it is, Reader shall have it as cheap as I had it, my duty is to
Follow, and not to Dispute.

[1.] His first enquiry will be, In what sense Christ is called our
Righteousness? and what the Scripture intends by those Phrases of, The
Righteousness of God; the Righteousness of Faith; or, The Righteousness of God
by Faith? He begins with that famous place, Jer. 23. 6. where Christ is
expressly called the Lord our Righteousness. To which our Author returns three
things; A pitiful Scoff, a woeful Evasion, and a wretched Answer, worse than
both. 1. He begins with a Scoff: A very express place to prove that Christ is
our Righteousness; that is, that the only Righteousness, wherewith we must
appear before God, is the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us. Who these men
should be that thus expound it, I cannot Divine, unless it be the first
Reformers of this Church? and they do indeed tell us, Artic. 11. That we are
accountted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and not for our own Works and Deservings: Wherefore that we are
justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and full of comfort. And
I believe our Author experienced it to be a most sweet and comfortable
Doctrine, when he subscribed it for a fat Benefice: But in the mean time, these
men (whoever they be) have a very hard task on*t. For one while they must not
draw one Conclusion from the Person of Christ, which his Gospel has not
expressly taught; to use their own Reasons to deduce one single Inference from
Gospelpremises, is present Death. But what now if they produce express
Scripture, that Christ is our Righteousness? Why, that is as bad! for this is to
interpret Scripture by the sound of words. 2. He retreats to a most woeful
Evasion, Is there no other possible sense to be made of this Phrase? If it be
possible to procure another Sense for Love or Money, it shall never go thus:
The Cause looks with a very desperate face, when once it comes to this; when
men are ready to shoot the Pit, and only watch for the Creep-hole of a bare
Possibility. If they intended honestly, they would lay things together as well
as they can; labor to find out the meaning of God's Spirit, with Sobriety and
Humility, and never strain their Wits, and vex and torture the Scripture with
utmost Possibilities: The Text tells us, that the nam^ whereby Christ shall be
called, is the Lord our Righteousness. Now it is granted, that this was not
designed to be his Praenomen, or Cognomen, that which should distinguish him in
Common Discourse from other persons; and therefore, He shall be called, is no
less than, He shall Really be our Righteousness: Thus, 1 John 3. 1. Behold what
manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called (that
is, that we should become) the sons of God: Isa. 9. 6. His name shall be called
(i. e. he shall Really be) Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. The true intent and meaning of which
place, I know how some have attempted to elude, by this fine device of the
Possibility of another meaning; and whether our Author sharpened his weapon at
their forge, he knows best. But, 3. He returns an Answer worse than both the
other: Righteousness in Scripture is a word of a very large sense, and
sometimes signifies no more than Mercy, Kindness, Beneficence; and so the Lord
our Righteousness, is the Lord who does us good. But, 1. Is it not vainly
supposed, That for Christ to do us good, is inconsistent with being our
Righteousness? 2. Though Christ be a Redeemer of Mercy, Kindness, and
Beneficence; yet he is nowhere called, The Lord our Mercy, The Lord our
Kindness, The Lord our Beneficence: Which clearly proves, that when he is
called, and really is, The Lord our Righteousness, the expression implies more
than an Imparting, or Communication of good things to us. Hence some would say,
That if our Author's Conscience were not larger than the sense of this word, he
had never given so stretching an Answer. But (says he) Righteousness signifies
that part of Justice, which consists in relieving the oppressed. Isa. 54. 17.
Their Righteousness is of me, says the Lord, which is a parallel expression
to, The Lord our Righteousness, and signifies no more, than that the Lord would
avenge their Cause, and deliver them from all their Enemies: So that all the
benefit we are to expect from Christ, is Temporal Salvation and Deliverance. To
which I answer: 2. That the Reason of Christ's glorious Name, The Lord our
Righteousness, assigned by the Prophet, that in his days Judah shall be saved,
and Israel shall dwell safely, is interpreted by the Angel, Matthew. 1. 21. to be
this, He shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.
And the end why God raised up his Son Jesus in the World, is expressly assigned
to be, To bless his people, in turning away every one of them from their
iniquities, Acts 3. 26. Thus Romans 11. 26. Out of Zion shall come the Deliverer,
and he shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. To turn away iniquity from us;
and to turn us away from iniquity, is I hope something of a more useful import,
than to relieve the injured and oppressed, and deliver them from their Enemies.
I do not at all envy our Author therefore the glory of his discovery, that for
God to justify good men, is to deliver them from the violence and injuries of
their Enemies: And I would gladly hope, that all good men have something better
wherein to glory. In Ier. 33. 16. the Church is called, The Lord our
Righteousness; because she only glories in the Righteousness of Christ, her
Head and Husband; to whom being so nearly related, and with whom being so
closely united, his Righteousness, is her Righteousness; and therefore she, who
upon the account of the imperfection of her Inherent Righteousness, can find,
no, not the least, matter of boasting before God, yet has whereof to Triumph in
Christ her Savior; Isa. 45. 24. Surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I
Righteousness: In the Lord shall all the seed of Jacob be justified, and shall
glory. Now the Apostle, whom I take to be a competent Interpreter of Scripture,
assures us, that God has taken special care, that in his dispensing of Grace to
sinners, No flesh shall glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. which he has well
provided; for ver. 30. since Christ is made unto us of God for Righteousness;
and therefore he that glories, let him glory in the Lord: Which is exactly
parallel to that of Isa. 45. 24. In the Lord shall all the seed of Jacob be
justified, and shall glory. Come we now to our Author's Interpretation of Isa.
61. 11. which is of the same leaven with the former: I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: For he has clothed me with the
garments of Salvation, and covered me with the robe of Righteousness, etc. This
Text one may perceive struck cold to his heart, and he gives us as cold an
Answer, that is ready to freeze between his lips. The Garments of Salvation
(says he) and the Robe of Righteousness, signify those great Deliverances God
promised to Israel. Signify! I would our Author would write a Dictionary of
the Signification of words. We use to say, A bad Answer, is better than none:
Reform the Proverb for shame; for such an one is worse than none. 1. It Is
evident, that the Triumph of the Church was upon the view of Jesus Christ,
verse. 1. Anointed to preach Good-Tidings to the meek, to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
Prison to them that are bound: To proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord:
Which our Savior Christ applies to himself, Luke 4. 18, 19. when he was far
from working out for the Jews those great Deliverances by improbable means,
which should make them glorious in the eyes of men. 2. The Virgin Mary quotes
this very place, Luke 1. 46, 47. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior; where the joy of her heart broke out at her
lips, in Contemplation of that Eternal Redemption wrought out by him, in whom
she could more seriously glory as her Savior, than as her Son: And it is a
wonder to me then, men can patter over their Magnificat every day, and not
observe it. 3. It Is observable, that the word (...), which we render [Decketh]
signifies to Adorn as a Priest; and implies, that Christ as our High Priest,
shall present us acceptable to God upon his Account. 4. There Is nothing more
familiar with the Spirit of God, than to clothe Evangelical Mercies, in a
Mosaical Dress; and to express New Testament Salvation, in OldTestament Phrase:
Thus Gospel-Believers, are understood by Israel; the Church, by the Temple;
Evangelical Ministers, by the Legal Priests; and the covering of Sin, by the
covering of Nakedness; and by the decking with Ornaments, and a^dorning with
Jewels, the representing true Believers, accepted with God through a better
Righteousness than their own.

[2.] The Reader would admire to hear these glorious Gospel-Promises recorded
in the Old Testament, thus interpreted to bare skin and bone: But our Author
confesses, he swarms with prejudices against the Doctrine of Imputed
Righteousness. When Prejudice sits upon the Bench, it is like to go very ill
with poor Truth that stands at the Bar. As a Bribed Fancy will admit the most
feeble Appearances, for plain Demonstrations of what it longs should be True;
so a mind fore-stalled with prejudice, will despise the clearest evidence, for
what it desires to be false. And we need no other instance of all this, than
our Author's great Indisposition and Averseness to receive the present Truth.

And, 1. I perceive he is very much stumbled at one thing; That in all our
Sa^iour's Sermons, there is no mention of his Imputed Righteousness. Now because
the same Charity that commands me, not to lay a stumbling block in the way of
my Neighbor, enjoins me also to remo^e it out of his way, or however, to help
him over it; the ensuing Considerations will afford him that Civility, if he
please to accept it. 1. If our Savior had mentioned the Imputation of his
Righteousness a thousand times over, he could easily have evaded it at his rate
of answering; for he might have said, This is but to interpret Scripture by the
sound of words; or if that had been too frigid, that it is sufficient to say,
The words may possibly have another meaning, though he could not tell what that
should be; or, that by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, no more is
meant, but the Accepting of our own Righteousness, which Christ has commanded
in the Gospel. 2. It may be of good use to him to consider, Whether Christ's
Silence raised his prejudice against the Doctrine; or his own prejudice against
the Doctrine, raised the conceit that Christ was silent in it? Whether it was
the want of an Object to be seen; or the want of eyes to see the Object? For
most men are deaf, when they have no mind to hear; and blind, when they have no
will to see. For, 3. Christ in his Sermons has plainly revealed the case to be
such between God and man, that without a better Righteousness than their own,
they are all lost for ever, Matthew. 5. 19. He that breaks the least of these
Commandments, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, shall
never come there. Now the universal Suffrage of all men's Consciences is, That
there is no man that lives, and sins not; and therefore Christ has determined
upon him, that he shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I never yet
heard, that God has dispensed with one jot or tittle of the Moral Law; but, Do
this and live, is as strictly exacted as ever: So that unless a Surety be
admitted, and the Righteousness of another owned, the case of all the Sons of
Adam is deplorable and desperate. To deny then the Righteousness where in the
believing sinner may stand before this Righteous and Holy God, is to affirm the
Eternal Damnation of all the World. 4. Christ has plainly discovered to us such
ends of his Death and Sufferings, as evidently prove the impossibility of being
justified by our own Righteousness, Matthew. 20. 28. He gave, (...) (...), his
Life, [or Soul,] a Ransom, [a Rede^ption-price,] for [instead of] many: Which
is no whit less than that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was made sin for us
(who knew no sin) that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; And
the same with Isa. 53. 10. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, when he shall
make his Soul an Offering for sin, etc. Again, Matthew. 26. 28. This is the Blood
of the New Testament, which is shed for the Remission of the sins of many.
Whence it is plain, that God in pardoning sin, in justifying and accepting the
sinner, has such a respect to the Satisfaction of Christ in our stead, as may
properly be called, the Imputation thereof to us. 5. Though Christ mention not
the Imputation of his Righteousness, (...), yet has he mentioned that
Righteousness, which it is certain from the Scriptures, must be imputed to
Believers, or they can have none of that benefit by it, which they are said to
have, Matthew. 3. 15. Christ fulfilled all Righteousness; and verse. 17. In him
(or upon his account) God is well pleased, comes to delight in Believers, whom
he accepts in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. '(...); He has graciously accepted us
in his Beloved one. Hence it is the Holy Ambition of all the Saints, 2 Cor. 5.
9. to be accepted of him, or in him, '(...): That regard then which God has to
the Obedience of Christ, as the Reason for which he accounts a Believer
righteous, we judge, may commodiously be called, the Imputing of Christ's
Righteousness to them, without the Leave, License, or Faculty of our Author.

A second Prejudice that is deep-rooted in our Author's breast against this
Doctrine, is, That Christ exacts from men a Righteousness of their own, if they
would find mercy with God. A Righteousness of their own? Ay, but let them be
sure they come honestly by it. The Righteousness of Christ must be made ours,
or else we shall never find mercy with God: We must also have another
Righteousness of our own, an Inherent Righteousness, if ever we expect to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, and find mercy with God in his great Day. But what
is that Righteousness for which we are just and accepted with God? But for the
removing of this small prejudice, may he please to consider: 1. How easy it is
to vapor and make a flourish with those Texts that require an Inherent
Righteousness, as a necessary Qualification for Eternal Salvation; and yet how
hard to produce one place that mentions our own Inherent Righteousness, as that
which answers God's holy Law, makes Reconciliation with God, and constistutes
the sinner spotless and blameless before God, the Holy, Righteous Judge; yet
such a Righteousness we want, and such a one we must have. 2. Our own
Righteousness is very pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, being the fruit
of Faith, and following after Justification. So says the Church of England,
Artic. 12. But (says She) Works done before the Grace of God, and the
Inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasing to God, for as much as they spring
not out of Faith in Christ, Artic. 13. Which two Articles I shall leave to our
Author to confute, at his best leisure.

A third Block which I perceive lies in his way is, That our Savior should
never once warn his Hearers, to beware of trusting to their own Righteousness.
But, 1. Christ preached to the Jews, who had had warnings ^now to beware of
splitting upon that Rock: They might have taken warning from the Churches
Confession, Isa. 64. 6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy rags. All the warning in the World signifies
nothing to them that are resolved to interpret, Our own Righteousness, by
Ceremony and Hypocrisy. Had Christ inculcated the danger, even to Tautology,
all may be evaded by that happy Gloss, which he keeps Leiger by him: True
indeed, he warns us to beware of our own Righteousness, but he intends no more
hereby, than the works of the Ceremonial, and external acts of the Moral Law.
3. Christ had indeed given them fair warning, but if they will not take it, the
sin must lie at their own doors, and the Condemnation upon their own heads,
Luke 18. 9. He spoke a Parable to them that trusted in themselves, that they
were righteous, and despised others, etc. Now it may seasonably be here
remembered: 1. What was the design of this Parable? And that the Evangelist
tells us, was to meet with them that trusted in themselves, (...), men that
presumed very highly upon their own Abilities, to answer the Law of God; and
therefore despised others, who made such a stir about their own Impotency to
keep it; and kept such a coyl about the shortness of their obedience to it;
like the poor Publican, who being conscious to himself of both, makes his
retreat to, and shelters himself in the free Grace, and rich Mercy of God to
miserable sinners. 2. It will be seasonable to enquire, What that Righteousness
was, upon which the Pharisee in the Parable so stiffly insisted, as that in
which he durst adventure to appear before God? And that (as our Savior puts
the case) was a Righteousness made up of obedience to Gods Commands: And those
both Prohibitory, he was no Extortioner, no Adulterer, no Unjust Person; and
Affirmatively, he paid his Tithes exactly, (which will go a great way) and
fasted twice a-week. 3. Let it be considered, that however many of the
Pharisees of those days were Hypocrites, yet our Savior frames his Parable of
a Pharisee, not according to what many of them were, but what they seemed to
be, and were reputed for amongst men, who admired their Sanctity, and
reverenced their Devotions; and therefore he describes not a Person acting his
part well upon the Stage, but living up to very high Seize of Nature.
For, 1. The duties instanced in, are only some particulars, in the name of all
the rest: He instances in his praying to, and praising of God, which comprehend
all the duties of the First Table: His freedom from Adultery, Extortion; and in
a word, from Injustice, which is the whole of the Second Table. Again, He
instances in duties of the Judicial Law, paying Tithes; and of the Ceremonial,
Fasting; with a little touch perhaps of Supereragation, [ Twice in the week.]
2. When Christ introduces a person, saying, he was no Adulterer, we may
reasonably suppose, he taught him to speak in the proper sense of the word
which Christ himself allows. Now in Christ's Dialect, to be no Adulterer, is
not to commit it with the heart, Mat. 5. still abating for Humane Frailties.
And, 3. This is evident, because our Savior describes not this Pharisee, as
praying in the corners of the streets, or in the Synagogues, to be seen of men;
but in obedience to God's Command, Going up to the Temple to pray; and there
praying to God, (...), in his own heart, between God, and his own Soul: All
which evidently prove, that our Savior puts not the case of a stinking
Hypocrite, but of one who went as far as Natures legs would carry him. But, 4.
The miscarriage of this Pharisee lay not in this, that he was, what he
pretended he was not; or was not, what he pretended he was; but that he trusted
to himself for a Righteousness, to be compounded out of all these Ingredients,
wherein he would dare to stand before God, and in despising others, which is
the natural Product of Self-Righteousness: And yet upon our Author's
Principles, I see not why he might not trust to himself, that he was Righteous,
if Righteousness be to be made out of Obedience; and despise others too, since
his own free will exerted, and natural strength improved, had made him differ
from another, even from that Publican.

But yet, 4. There Is one Prejudice more remaining, which perhaps may stick more
with him than all the rest: He is apt to admire our Savior's Sermons in the
first place, before the Writings of the Apostles, though inspired men. I should
be loath to weaken his Admiration of our Saviors Sermons: But he may do well to
examine, Whether his Aptness to admire them before other Sermons given forth by
the same Spirit, may not proceed from great Ignorance, or a worse Principle?
For though our Savior's Person had more Authority than the Persons of the
Apostles; yet the Writings of the Apostles are of equal Authority with those of
the Evangelists, to command our Faith and Obedience. The Epistles of S. John
are indicted by the same Spirit by which hepenned the Gospel: It Is the Authority
of Christ in both; the Infallible Spirit speaking in both, which are the Reason
of our Belief of both: All Scripture is given by Divine Inspiration, 2 Timothy 3.
18. The same Spirit of Christ that spoke in the Prophets of the Old Testament,
and the Apostles in the New, 1 Pet. 1. 11. And such Comparisons must needs be
very odious, where the Spirit of God has made none.

But the total sum of all these Prejudices, we shall have in one Dilemma; Did
not our Savior instruct his Hearers in all things necessary to Salvation? or
have the Evangelists given us an imperfect account of his Doctrine? If the
first; then our Savior was not faithful in the discharge of his Prophetical
Office: If the latter; you overthrow the Credit of the Gospel. Well! I hope we
may outlive this horned-Argument, for all the terror of its looks: 1. Christ
was faithful in his Prophetical Office; he instructed his Hearers in all things
necessary to Salvation: But then there are some great and weighty Doctrines,
which it was necessary to the Salvation of the Gentile World to know, wherein
the Jewish Church had been sufficiently instructed already. The Doctrine of
Atoning God, making Reconciliation for sin, expiating Transgressions, was
abundantly clear from their Sacrifices: The Theory of God's justifying a
sinner, was evident from thence; they knew what Imputation signified, by the
transferring of the guilt of the sinner, upon the head of the Sacrifice: And
therefore when Christ came, his main business with the Jews, was to convince
them, that he was the Messiah promised of old, and typified in their
Sacrifices: His Work they knew, all the Question was, Whether he was the
Person? Matthew. 11. 3. Art thou he that should come? or do we look for another?
Joh. 10. 24. If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Christ's Sermons
therefore suppose them instructed in the Doctrine of Justification: But when
the Apostle Paul, who is called, The Apostle of the Uncircumcision, comes to
preach and write to the Gentiles, he must be more express; they knew little of
God, and nothing at all of a Redeemer, they must be taught their Catechism, and
the first Rudiments of Christianity; and therefore do we find these great
Points more explicitly handled in his Discourses, which are more sparingly and
more covertly delivered by the Evangelists. 2. The Evangelists have given us a
perfect account of Christ's Doctrine; but then the perfectness of that account,
is not to be measured by what Christ preached, but by what they were commanded
to record and transmit to Posterity. S. John was faithful in giving us a
perfect account of Christ's Sermons; but his faithfulness, and the entireness
of the account he gives us thereof, is not to be taken from every Miracle
Christ wrought, or every Sermon he preached; for he omits that whole famous
Sermon preached by Christ in the Mount, recorded by Matthew. And S. Matthew was
also faithful in his account, and yet he omits the excellent Prayer recorded by
John, Chap. 17. and yet both of them, and both the other, have conveyed down to
us, whatsoever, was delivered to them, (...), from above, Luke 1. What strange
work would our Author's Dilemma make amongst the four Evangelists, if it were
discharged at them? Did Christ instruct his Hearers in all things necessary to
Salvation? or, Was the Evangelist John short in giving us a perfect account of
his Doctrine? If the first; then Christ was not faithful in his Prophetical
Office: If the latter; then you overthrow the credit of the Gospel. And
therefore, unless you can prove every Article of the Christian Faith, from
express words, in that one single Book of his Gospel; and particularly, The
Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness, our Author will retain his inveterate
prejudices against it. Nay, we may fly a great deal higher; Christ was faithful
in the discharge of his Prophetical Office, and therefore no doubt, whenever he
preached a single Sermon, he acquainted his Hearers with all things necessary
to Salvation, and the Evangelists have delivered us a perfect account of every
such Sermon; and therefore unless you can prove every Article of your Creed,
from every single Sermon of Christ, our Author is like Thomas, he will not
believe but upon his own terms; but will justify his prejudices against it,
That the Doctrine is certainly to be found nowhere, because he finds it not
everywhere. Christ preached so much of necessary Truth in every Sermon, as he
judged necessary; the full account of his preaching must be gathered from the
rest: And every Evangelist has registered so much of Christ's Miracles, Sermons,
and the passages of his Life, as he had in charge; and what is omitted in one,
must be supplied from others. And all the Evangelists have delivered so much of
what Christ taught the Jews, as is needful for us to know; and what is further
necessary for Gentiles to know, is abundantly, and explicitly made up from
other holy Persons, divinely inspired for that very end. The whole will of God,
necessary for us to know for salvation, is not so explicitly revealed in any
one Book of the Sacred Oracles, but we have need to receive Information from
the whole. Nor were the Writings of any one Prophet, Evangelist or Apostle,
designed to complete the Canon of our Faith, but the whole Scripture. I say not
this, as if I at all questioned, much less denied, that the Doctrine of
Christ's Righteousness imputed, is laid down by the Evangelists, though some
men's prejudices will not permit them to see it, either there, or any-where
else; but that it is there spoken to more implicitly, our Savior doing another
thing, and touching upon it by the way, as supposing them already instructed in
it: And that the Writings of the Apostles, qualified to preach to the Gentiles,
by the pouring forth of the Holy Spirit upon them, have more clearly commented
upon that, and other important Doctrines, and beaten out that Gold which was
before in the Lump; and though of equal weight, yet not so dilated: So that
there remains no more just cause of Dispute about these matters, with them who
believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God: And as for others, they can never
want Objections, whilst their Corruptions and Unbelief continue in full force,
strength and power.

But, 5. There is another Prejudice which extremely gravels him; That in all
the New Testament, there is no such expression as the Righteousness of Christ:
And this (he says) is worth our observing. A Learned Observation it is! but I
think the whole New Testament is but one great expression of the Righteousness
of Christ, or else it is but one great blot. However, I am glad that he will
own, that the NewTestament mentions the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness
of Faith, and the Righteousness which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ. For the
Righteousness of Christ, is the Righteousness of that Person who is God. They
who crucified Christ, are said to crucify the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and
that Blood by which the Church is purchased, is called, the Blood of God, Acts
20. 28. that is, the Blood of that Person who is God, though not as God: Thus
the Righteousness of Christ, the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of
Faith, are expressions of the same import. They describe the same
Righteousness, under various Considerations; being called the Righteousness of
God, because it was the Righteousness of him that is God; the Righteousness of
Christ, because it was fulfilled in his own Person; and the Righteousness of
Faith, because Faith makes Him, and thereby his Righteousness, to become ours.
However, we desire to plead for no more of Christ's Righteousness to be imputed
to us, than we can evidently prove, was inherent in him, and fulfilled by him:
And if after all, our Author be so passionately fond of his Prejudices, he may
keep them to himself. But now he will examine these expressions more distinctly.

(1.) For the Righteousness of God: He confesses, That in the New Testament,
most commonly it signifies, that Righteousness which God approves, and
commands, and which he will accept for the Justification of a sinner. That was
well jumbled! God approves, and commands a Righteousness in a Believer, which
he will not accept for the Justification of a sinner: That Righteousness which
God will accept, he has commanded us to seek in Christ; but that Righteousness
which he has commanded us to find in our selves, is not that Righteousness
which he will accept for our Justification. Inherent Righteousness, may be
called the Righteousness of God, because he commands it, but especially,
because he works and creates it: But the true Reason of the expression is,
because it is the Righteousness of him who is God, and only discovered by the
Wisdom of God, and accepted by God, in the Justification of a believing sinner.
But though I agree not with him in the Reason of the Name, let him make the
best of it: Now (says he) this Righteousness consists in a sincere and
universal obedience to the Commands of God: That Is Magisterially dictated
however. But where may we find this Righteousness? It Is contained (says he) in
the Terms of the Gospel. We are as wise as we were before: Why then we are
posted over to Romans 1. 17. The Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith. Evident it is hence, That the Gospel reveals that Righteousness by which
we are justified, and as evident, that the Righteousness of God, and of Faith,
are the same thing, under diverse Considerations; but that the Righteousness of
God, consists in an universal obedience to Commands; or that these are the
Terms of Justification, it speaks not one syllable; only it speaks aloud that
our Author had a very loving Inclination it should be so. Then we are turned
over to Matthew. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.
What then? Why; It is called the Righteousness of God. It is called! What is
called? without all peradventure the Righteousness of God, is called the
Righteousness of God, not only there, but wherever else we meet with the
Expression: But what are we the nearer? Why, this is the same with the
Righteousness of his Kingdom? But what Kingdom? and upon what account? and in
what place is the Righteousness of God, called the Righteousness of the
Kingdom? But go on! Now the Kingdom of God signifies, the state of the Gospel.
Well, proceed! And the Righteousness of God, or of his Kingdom (signifies) that
that Righteousness which the Gospel prescribes, which is contained in the
Sermons and Parables of Christ: Ergo, etc. Quod erat Demonstrandum! Round-about
our Coal-fire! And now who can be so hard-hearted, as not to allow our Author
rarely qualified, to Reform the Religion of Christendom? What man would not be
content to be argued out of his Seven Senses, with such potent Demonstration?

(2.) We must observe farther (if at least it be farther) that this
Righteousness of God (which he commands and rewards) ^is the Righteousness of
Faith, or Righteousness by the Faith of Christ. We have heard so: The Gospel
commands us to believe in Christ for Justification; for he is our
Righteousness. This will not undo us yet: But Faith is often taken objectively,
for the Gospel of Christ. Faith is sometimes so used; but that [Faith in
Christ] is so used, we wait for evidence. He produces it from Acts 24. 24.
Felix sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the Faith of Christ, that is,
concerning Righteousness, Temperance, and the Judgment to come. But here our
Author is taken napping. 1. He corrupts both the Original, and the Translation
(unless he has other Bibles than are come to our hands) for neither the Greek
nor the English say, He heard him concerning the Faith of Christ: (which words
are more liable to a perverse insinuation,) but, (...), concerning that Faith
which is in, or upon Christ. 2. He prevaricates with his Reader most palpably,
in making those words, [ concerning Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to
come] to be an Exegesis of the foregoing words [ The Faith that is in Christ:]
Whereas the Apostle argued with Felix about the Nature of these things; wherein
he knew he was Defective, to awaken his secure and sleepy Conscience, to
consider what need he had by Faith to fly to Christ for a better Righteousness
than his own. The Apostle took the true Method of Gods Spirit, to insist upon
Righteousness, to convince him of his Injustice, Bribery; upon Temperance or
Continence, to convince him of his Adultery; and upon Judgment to come, to
alarm him with the righteous Judgment of God; that so being terrified by the
Law, he might more gladly entertain the Doctrine of Faith in Christ for
Righteousness, wherein he might stand before God; which otherwise his proud
unhumbled heart would never have brook'd, and submitted to.

[3.] His Next step is, toward the deciding the Controversy about the way of
Abraham' s being justified before God: And a great and weighty Question it is;
for Abraham being called, The Father of the Faithful, it might seem strange,
that the Father should be justified one way, and his Children another; when
Believers are therefore, and only therefore, his Children, because they walk in
the steps of his Faith, Romans 4. 12. And seeing (as our Author Confesses) he was
set forth as a Pattern of our Justification; It were to be admired, If the
Exemplar, and the Copy; the Archetype, and Ectype, were of Diverse kinds. It
will be of good use therefore to enquire, What way Abraham was justified?
Though the best way to resolve it, is to enquire, What way Believers under the
Gospel are justified? Now the Apostle is very punctual herein, Romans 4. 11.
Abraham received the sign of Circumcision; a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all
them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that Righteousness might be
imputed to them also. Look what way Abraham was justified, the same way are all
true Believers justified (for he is Father of the faithful; and they his
Children only, because they tread in the steps of the same Faith:) but Abraham
was justified by Faith, by the Righteousness of Faith, and in a way of
Imputation (whatever these Expressions signify;) therefore Believers under the
Gospel are justified by Faith, by the Righteousness of Faith, and in a way of
Imputation. Again, Gal. 3. 6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was
accounted to him for Righteousness: v. 7. Know ye therefore, that they which
are of Faith, are the Children of faithful Abraham: Where the Apostle
demonstrates, that the sameness of a Christians Faith with Abraham's, is as able
to denominate him one of Abraham's Children, as if he came out of his loins.
Ver. 9. So then, they which are of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. If
they have the same Faith with Abraham, they shall have the same Blessing with
Abraham; for says he, v. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us; that the Blessing of Abraham might come upon the
Gentiles, through Jesus Christ. All the advantage the Gentiles receive by
Christ (and they need no more to make them perfectly and eternally blessed) is,
that Abraham's Blessing may come upon them: But if we have not Abraham's Faith,
we must never expect a part in Abraham's Blessing: Nay (says the Apostle) v. 8.
Abraham had the same Gospel preached to him, that we have. The Scripture
foreseeing (that is, the Spirit of Christ which gave forth the Scripture) that
God would justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel to
Abraham. Now the preaching of the Gospel, is the Spirits Engine, for the
begetting a true, saving, and lively Faith: If then Abraham had the same
Gospel, the same Faith, the same Blessing with Christians, he was justified the
same way; but so had our Father Abraham.

But what is our Author's judgment in the case? I confess that is hard to
discover, p. 243. he gives us, The Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of
Faith, and the Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, as
Synonima's. And again expressly, p. 245. he observes it to us for a choice
discovery; That the Righteousness of God, is the Righteousness of Faith, or
Righteousness by the Faith of Christ. And now p. 246. he is peremptory, That
this Righteousness of Faith, and this alone, can recommend us* to God: Which
(says he) the Apostle proves from the example of Abraham; and adds, That
Abraham, who was the Father of the faithful, was set forth for a pattern of our
Justification. Now scarce one of his Readers in a thousand, but would have been
trying Conclusions out of his premises: Abraham's Righteousness, was the
Righteousness of Faith: But the Righteousness of Faith, is the Righteousness of
Faith in Christ; therefore Abraham's Righteousness was the Righteousness of
Faith in Christ. Again (says he) the Apostle proves, that this Righteousness of
Faith, and this alone, can recommend us to God. If then there be but one only
Righteousness that can recommend us to God, either Abraham and Christians have
one and the same Righteousness, or else one of them must needs want a
Righteousness that can recommend them to God. But now from these premises, our
Author concludes, that Abraham's Faith, was not a Faith in Christ. Then say I,
His Righteousness was not the Righteousness by Faith in Christ: And then it was
not neither the Righteousness of Faith, no, nor the Righteousness of God; for
our Author has warranted us, p. 243, and 245. That the Righteousness of Faith,
the Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness by the Faith of Christ, are but
all one Righteousness. But here we have the Quintessence and Elixir of our
Author's rational Abilities: To this purpose he argues, The Father of the
faithful, and his believing Children, are justified both one way, But Abraham
the Father of the faithful was justified one way, and therefore Believers, who
are his Children, are justified another. Now I like our Author's Conclusions
dearly, when they are together by the ears with their premises. Again, Thus he
reasons; Abraham was set forth for a pattern of our Justification: But nothing
ought to be like its pattern; and therefore you may be sure if Abraham was
justified one way, Believers are justified another. Again, The Apostle proves
what way Believers are justified, from the example of Abraham: But now the
Apostle you know, always argues from one sort of things to another, his way of
concluding is by (...): And therefore, if Abraham was justified by Faith, you
may conclude from thence, then Christians are justified by Works; and if
Believers are justified by Faith in Christ, then to be sure Abraham was
justified some other way. The plain truth is, our Author is got into a Cramp,
and has so hampered and bangled his matters, that I am very confident none of
his Readers do understand him, and it were well, if he understood himself.

There are two Enquiries he will make to enlighten us in this Mystery.

1. What that Faith was whereby Abraham was justified? 2. What Agreement there
is between the Faith of Abraham, and the Faith in Christ.

(1.) What that Faith was whereby Abraham was justified? To which he answers:
1. Negatively, It was not a Faith in Christ. Which Determination might have
better become any man's mouth than hi^, whose hand has subscribed the Seventh
Article of the Church of England: Both in the Old Testament and the New,
Everlasting Life is offered to Mankind by Jesus Christ, who is the only
Mediator between God and man, being both God and man. And I do the rather urge
him with this Article, because it speaks not only what respect God might have
to Christ, in bestowing Eternal Life; but that there was an offer to Mankind of
Eternal Life, through Christ, which speaks that respect which Believers had to
a Mediator in their Faith* But perhaps these Articles are but matter of course
and form, and therefore I shall press him with what has more weight than a
sorry Subscription: The Righteousness of God (says he, p. 245.) is the
Righteousness of Faith, or Righteousness by the Faith of Christ: But Abraham's
Righteousness, was the Righteousness of God; and therefore it was the
Righteousness of Faith, or the Righteousness by the Faith of Jesus Christ: Yea,
(says our Author) Christ was the material Object of Abraham' s Faith, that is,
he believed the promise of God's sending Christ into the World, John 8. 56.
Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad. Hence
it is evident, that Abraham had a great and personal concern in Christ's coming
into the World, which made his heart leap within him: The same which the
Apostle expresses, Romans 5. 11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we have received the Atonement: For what cause of all this
triumph, all this joy, that Christ should come into the World, some thousands
of years after he should be dead, and buried, and rotten in his grave, to
preach a Gospel in which he had no concern, and for which he should not be one
pin the better? But our Author will prove that Abraham's Faith was not a Faith
in Christ, because no man could believe in Christ till he came. But I prosess
my self otherwise persuaded, and that the actual exhibition of Christ in the
flesh, was not at all times absolutely necessary to a believing in him. Abraham
believed that testimony which God gave of his son, that in him all the Nations
of the earth should be blessed: He believed that God would bless him for the
sake of Christ. He saw Christ slain from the Foundation of the World in
Sacrifices: He saw a Redeemer, as that way which God had chosen to bruise the
head of the Serpent; which St. John expounds, 1 Epist. 3. 8. by destroying the
works of the Devil; and Paul, Heb. 2. 14. by destroying the Devil, that is, so
far as he had got the power of Death into his hands by sin: and in that
security which he received from the promise of God, and from Christ, who was
the Reason of its being made good, Yea and Amen, His Soul did rejoice with
exceeding great joy; for so much (...), and (...) do import. But our Author has
a Notion of Believing that is worth two of this, and will do his work: To
believe any thing upon the Authority of Christ, is the true Notion of believing
in him. To which I answer, 1. Supposing this to be the true Notion of
believing, yet might Abraham receive a Doctrine upon the Authority of Christ,
before his Manifestation in the Flesh: Christ was Mediator before his
Incarnation, nor was his Assumption of our Nature absolutely necessary to the
discharge of his Prophetical, but of his Priestly Office. A Body was prepared
him, that he might have what to offer in Sacrifice to God, Hebr. 10. 7, 8. It
was the Spirit of Christ that spoke in the Prophets, 1 Pet. 1. 11. and to deny
this, is to deny something more than all the Thirty nine Articles, namely, the
Nicene Creed, I believe in the Holy Ghost, who spoke by the Prophets. But, 2. I
deny that to receive a Doctrine upon the Authority of Christ, is the true and
full Notion of believing on him: Faith in general implies an assent to a Truth
upon the Authority of the Revealer; but to make this a saving, a justifying
Faith, the assent of the Understanding must draw along with it the Consent of
the Will. A true Faith is described by such terms as include the Concurrent
Acts both of the Will and the Understanding; and therefore that which the
Apostles Creed expresses, I believe the Resurrection of the Body; the Nicene
Creed renders, I look for the Resurrection of the Dead: Taking in that Act of
the Soul, whereby it waits and steadfastly hopes for the goodness of the thing
promised; as well as credits the Veracity of God in the truth of the
Proposition. And thus Abraham believed in Christ, he looked and waited for that
rich Mercy wrapped up in that promise of the Messiah, and all those spiritual
Blessings that were to come through him. 3. The Reason of the Promise, is the
Object of Faith, as well as the Truth of the Promiser. Abraham believed the
Promise to be true, upon the Authority of him who gave it forth; but he saw
also that it was upon the account of Christ, a Mediator, that God would
communicate to him the Blessings of the Covenant opitomized in that, I will be
thy God. And this was that Gospel or Gladtidings which was preached to Abraham,
Gal. 3. 8. But our Author threatens we shall hear more of this presently: And I
promise him when we do, it shall be fully considered. 2. He answers
Affirmatively, Abraham believed God. To which I say, Subordinat a non pugnant:
To believe God, and to believe in Christ, are very well consistent. That
Abraham believed in God, and therefore he believed in Christ, seems to me to
carry as fair Reason, as that other of his: Abraham believed God, and therefore
he did not believe in Christ; for the Scripture represents them as well agreed,
1 Pet. 1. 21. Through Christ we believe in God.

[4.] Our next Task must be to Combat with our Author's scruples, and
certainly never did man so snithe with prejudices against Truth: It Is hard to
conceive how Abraham should learn this Mystery from that general Promise, [In
thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed.] Prejudice will, I
confess, make an easier matter than this very hard; and unbelief, impossible to
be conceived: And yet were there not something worse than Prejudice at the
bottom, the difficulty could not be insuperable: For, 1. Abraham had one
Promise that we know of, to clear up the meaning of this. Several Promises give
Reciprocal light to one another: The first Promise assured him, That the Seed
of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head: This shows to Abraham the
necessity of having that Enmity removed, which the Devil by sin had sown
between God and his Creature; the removing of this Enmity could not be, whilst
Satan had the Dominion over the Creature: A Seed is therefore promised, to heal
all that misery which sin brought into the World. This Promise was committed to
the Church of God, which was a faithful Guardian, to keep so precious a Jewel
committed to its trust: In this Seed (which God had now revealed should come
out of the Loins of Abraham) God promises Blessedness, which mutually sends
light to the other Promise, that God would not only by the Promised Seed,
Deliver from evil, but bestow all good. 2. Abraham might have other and better
Comments upon both these Promises, than we are concerned to know; it is enough
for us, that we are taught in general, that Abraham was justified the same way
that we are; and what that is, the New Testament abundantly declares: And
therefore it is more ingenuous to conclude, That Abraham was justified by a
Faith in Christ, because we are so; than, That we are not justified by the
Righteousness of Christ, because Abraham was not so. 3. Abraham understood the
true use of Sacrifices, which are a clear Paraphrase upon the Promise, in what
manner God would reconcile the World to himself, namely, by laying the sins of
the Offender upon the head of that Sacrifice, which in the fullness of time
should be offered for a Propitiation to God. In the Faith of which grand
Propitiation, all true Believers lived and died: And when at length he was
exhibited to the World, John the Baptist points to him, as the Accomplishment
of all their former Sacrifiees, and the Answer of all their Prayers and Hopes:
This is that Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World, John 1. 29.
But, 4. The Promise it self is not so obscure neither, but that upon this
single Supposition, That God would bless the World with spiritual Blessings in
the promised Seed; they might easily conclude, they could not be blessed in
themselves; and therefore not in their own works and deservings, but in the
Righteousness of another, who must be more acceptable to God than themselves.
5. We ought to entertain charitable thoughts of God, of his Goodness and Mercy,
that he would not preach to Abraham the Gospel in an unknown tongue; that is,
would not give him a Promise, without the full latitude and extent of its
meaning. And, 6. We are assured of the matter of fact that God did, because he
had the same Gospel preached to him, That God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, Gal. 3. 8. Now as it is a strange way of Preaching, to speak in a
Language not understood; so it is as strange a Gospel that knows no Mediator; no
Redeemer. Whatever then was the Object of a Gospel-Faith, was the Object of
Abraham's Faith (for substance) and whatever did constitute a
Gospel-Righteousness, made up his Righteousness.

And yet after all this, our Author has mustered up more self-created
Prejudices, to stumble his own belief of the way of Abraham's Justification:
For he supposes, that Abraham must believe many things incredible, and know
many things not knowable, before he could come to the knowledge of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness: As, (1.) He must be well assured, that
the Blessings here meant are spiritual Blessings, etc. But if this be the worst
on it, it would stumble me more to believe, how he could believe Blessedness,
without pardon of sin, and eternal life. I cannot tell whether I shall satisfy
another, but I have satisfied my self in this matter, from these
Considerations: 1. That Abraham upon his believing, was justified in the sight
of God; and methinks it looks like a mere whimsey, to fancy a Notion of
Justification in his sight, that has neither pardon of sin included in it, nor
eternal life attending of it. It Is strange to me to hear of Justification
before God against Temporal Evils: And if Abraham had no other, I think he was
never perfectly justified. 2. The Determination of the Church of England is no
light matter with me, Artic. 7. They are not to be heard, that feign the
Fathers looked only for Transitory Promises. But it seems, that in this one
particular, the Church was not infallible; for they are to be heard, and read,
and licensed, and advanced too, who dare f^ign, and write, and preach, That the
Patriarchs either looked for none, or at the best but Transitory Promises. 3.
When I read, that Abraham was so earnest to see Christ's day by Faith, and when
he got a sight of it, he was glad; I begin to think with my self, what should
be the ground of so great a joy, at so great a distance. Spiritual Promise he
is allowed none; and was it worth the while to rejoice in the foresight of some
temporal Advantages that should come to the Jews, when he should be turned to
dust and nothing? especially, seeing the coming of Christ either brought
spiritual Mercies (...) the Seed of Abraham, or none at all: So that he had
more cause to sit down and lament, that he had no promise of Love from, or Life
with God, either for his Person, or Posterity. Ay! but (says he) the Promise
was not so clear, but men might mistake i^. That may be I confess! And so may
the clearest that ever God gave to the sons of men. If men will set their wits
on work, and serve, and torture, and vex, and wrest every letter and syllable,
and in all this forsake the Conduct of God's Spirit, and scorn the Catholic
Judgment of the Church in all Ages, to gratify their Airy Crotchets, I do not
remember a Promise of God to secure them against mistaking his Promises. Ay!
but (says he) we know that the whole Jewish Church did so for many Ages. If he
knows it, he knows more than I do (but that is no great wonder) and than any
man alive besides his own Knowing self: And yet they had more particular
Promises concerning Christ than that was, and yet expected only a temporal
Prince. I will deal openly with him; I do not believe, that the whole Jewish
Church for any Age, much less for many Ages, no not for any one day in any Age,
did expect a Messiah to deliver them only from temporal evils: That there was
great degeneracy in that Church in some Ages, I deny not (there is so amongst
Christians) especially toward the latter times of their Churchstate: But that
ever the whole Church so far degenerated, as to lose the expectation of a
Redeemer to deliver them from sin, and its consequents, and to endow them with
spiritual Blessings, I demand better proofs than Confidence, before I
subscribe. And, 1. For Abraham, it is evident he sought a heavenly Country; and
therefore I conclude, That the believing Jews, who had (says our Author) more
particular Promises concerning Christ, sought a heavenly one too; or their more
express Promises were ill bestowed on them, Heb. 11. 9. By Faith, he (Abraham)
dwelt in the promised Land, as in a strange Country. The promised Land was a
strange Country to him that sought a heavenly one, whereof that was but the
figure, the rind and bark; for that Promise had greater excellencies
underneath, to his discerning Faith; ver. 10. For he looked for a City that had
foundations, whose builder and maker is God: Verse. 13. All these died in the
Faith -- Confessing that they were Strangers and Pilgrims; for they that say
such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country. Verse. 16. But now they
desire a better, that it, a heavenly Country; therefore God is not ashamed to
be called their God. 2. It Is evident, that the Messiah was promised, Isa. 53.
4. To bear their sins, and carry their sorrows. Verse. 5. To be wounded for
their transgressions, and bruised for their iniquities. Ver. 6. To have all
their iniquities laid upon him. Ver. 8. To be stricken for the transgression of
God's people. Ver. 10. To have his Soul made an Offering for sin: And now to
assert, That the whole Jewish Church expected only a temporal Monarch, is to
throw such dirt in the face of God's people, as is very scandalous. 3. If any
of them at any time expected temporal Deliverances, temporal Honors, Revenues,
etc. from the Messiah, it was not inconsistent utterly with an expectation of
better things from him; for the Disciples themselves had been hammering some
such conceit in their heads, Acts 1. 6. (perhaps mistaking in the Chronology,
and Antedating that Mercy, which in its season they might have reason to
expect) and yet by our Author's good leave, I will be so charitable as to
presume they looked for pardon of sin, and eternal life from Christ: Nay, I
could name instances nearer home of those that expect from the Gospel large
in-comes, and yet we may reasonably believe, have nobler things in their eye,
and would scorn his Atheistical spirit, who would not forgo his part in Paris,
for his share in Paradise. (2.) He must know, that Christ was to die for our
sins, without which (according to our Doctor) it is impossible God should
forgive sins, considering the Naturalness of his Vindictive Justice to him. Now
to untie this knot in the Bulrush: 1. I question not that Abraham understood
clearly, That God was essentially holy, and that his Rectoral, or Governing
Justice, was founded therein, Genesis 18. 25. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth
do right? That it should be with the righteous, as with the wicked; or with the
wicked as with the righteous, were far from God: Which Consideration might
stagger his Faith about the pardon of his own sin, and his only relief could be
from the Faith of the Messiah's undertaking with God: In which he had this
satisfaction, that however he found difficulties in the way of believing, yet
still he gave credit to God, and his Testimony concerning a Redeemer, leaving
the Modes and Circumstances of the Mediatory Office, as a secret in God's
bosom. 2. I am confident our Author cannot prove, that Abraham knew nothing of
Christ's death. This I know, he had Sacrifices, which might sufficiently
instruct him in the demerit of sin, and what the sinner had deserved, and in
the necessity of Compensation to be made to God's Justice, for his violated
Law, and reproached Government: And whether Abraham might not once open his
mouth to God, to be instructed in their noblest signification and design, I
cannot tell. 3. I do not know of any absolute necessity, that Abraham should
understand the Circumstances that should lead toward the fulfilling of the
Mediator's work, or in what particular way God would justify a sinner: It was
enough that God had firmly revealed, that he had made sufficient provision for
it by a Mediator. Abraham believed steadfastly, that the means God had chosen
were proportionable to their end, and the rest was to be left to God. 4. And
herein lay much of the Bondage that Believers were in: Under the
Old-Administration of the Covenant of Grace, they had not so satisfactory an
account of the particular means how the Redeemer should work out their
Deliverance; which way he should accomplish the great work of Propitiation; and
therefore when fresh guilt, contracted by fresh sin, lay upon the Conscience,
their faith was staggered, and peace broken, because they had a clear Objection
against their pardon, from their sins; but not so clear a Solution from the
promise of the pardon of it; the Promise being encumbred with so many
intricacies, that the only refuge was a Retreat to the Faithfulness of God in
general: Which yet was no easy work, under the Scruples and Cavils of present
guilt, and the Accusation of Conscience. Ay! but (says he) this was more than
the Apostles understood, till after the Resurrection, though Christ had
expressly told them of it* Was it so? Then, 1. They could never know it to the
World's end: For if telling, and express telling will not make us know, there is
no remedy, we must be content to be ignorant: But this is our Author's humor,
to reproach all the World for So^ and Fools but himself, and a few more
Rational Heads. The Jews were all Fools, they had more particular Promises than
Abraham, and yet they looked only for a temporal Prince: The Apostles they were
all Naturals, for they had been told, and expressly told of it, and yet
understood no more than the wall. I wonder what could have been done more to
make them know it, unless it had been beaten into their heads with a Beetle. I
suppose our Author has got this fancy from some such place, as that Mark 9. 31.
The Son of Man is delivered into the hands of Men, and they shall kill him, and
after that he is killed, he shall rise again; but they understood not the
saying. But can we be so vain as once to imagine, that they understood not the
Grammar of those words? that they knew not the literal sense of dying. No! but
they had not such clear satisfaction about some of the Consequents of it:
Perhaps they had not such a firm and steadfast belief of the truth of it, as
might bear up their hearts at an even rate of Tranquillity and Calmness, under
their temptations and trials; they might not improve the Truth, to encourage in
a patient waiting for the Resurrection of Christ: And that this was it that
pinched them is plain* they declare it, Luke 24. 19, 20, 21. Concerning Jesus
of Nazareth -- how the chief Priests delivered him to be condemned to death,
and crucified him, but we trusted that it had been be, that should have
redeemed Israel. They believed his Crucifixion, but were staggered about his
Resurrection: Hereupon Christ rebukes their slowness of heart to believe all
that the Prophets had spoken, how Christ ought to suffer, and to enter into his
glory, ver. 25, 26. Besides, it is a common Rule, That verba intellectus
implicant affectiones; words that in their bare sound, only denote the
understanding, yet in their true intent and meaning, take in the will and
affections: And again, Negatives are often put for Comparatives; I will have
Mercy, and not Sacrifice, that is, I will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice. So
here, They understood not, that is, They understood not so much of it, as such
clear Expressions deserved.

(3.) Another great Scruple (for I see there is no end of them) is this, He must
understand the perfect holiness, and innocence of Christ's life: But that was
the least thing of a thousand: He needed no Elias to explain that; a very
Nullifidian would have believed, that he whom God had designed to bless others,
must needs be perfectly blessed himself. It Is true, had Christ's work been no
other than what our Author has cut out for him, he might have discharged it,
without an absolute sinless Perfection: A Prophet might have revealed the whole
will of God, and afterward confirmed his Doctrine by his death; but to be a
Propitiatory Sacrifice, this required that Christ the Antitype, should be holy,
harmless, undefiled, and separated from sinners: And in this God was punctual
and precise, under the Law, that the Sacrifice of Atonement should be without
spot, and without blemish. And thus much Abraham might learn from his own
Sacrifices; and had he conceived the least suspicion, that Christ would prove a
sinner, it had damped his joy and triumph in the foresight of his day. Ay! but
(says he further) he must understand that he fulfilled all Righteousness, not
for himself, but for us. Answ. 1. It Is a most wretched and unrighteous way of
procedure, to call things clear and evident into question, for the sake of some
that are obscure and disputable: It becomes ingenuous persons, to agree to what
is clear and certain, leaving them upon their own Basis, and to reduce the
doubtful to them. It Is plain that Abraham was justified by Faith, his
Righteousness, was the Righteousness of Christ: If the measure of his knowledge
herein, be unknown to us, yet that he had a knowledge, is not so. If God
revealed this to Abraham's Faith, I doubt not but he believed it: That he did
not, is more than our Author can prove. If he shall attempt it, his Arguments
may be considered; in the mean time, his Conceits and Crotchets ought not to
prejudice the Truth: But if God did not reveal it, Abraham's Faith might live,
though not be so vigourous and strong without it. 2. Abraham might know, that
what Christ suffered, he suffered not for himself, but in the stead of those
for whom he suffered; for he saw the Sacrifices die, and yet not for their own
sins. And why he might not conclude, That what a Redeemer did was for others
too, I cannot tell. 3. There Is many a sincere and sound Believer, that
understands not all the Terms of Art that are used in the Explication of the
Doctrine of Justification, that perhaps cannot tell you, which part of Christ's
obedience answers this, and which the other exigency of the sinner; and yet
believes the Thing, that Christ is made to him Righteousness of God: He is not
so well versed in the Nomenclature of the Schools, as to call every thing by
its proper name, but goes downright to work; he renounces his own
Righteousness, sees the necessity of a Redeemer to make his peace with God;
accepts of life upon God's terms, and leads a holy life suitable to his present
mercies, and future hopes, and leaves the rest to the Learned World to wrangle
about, who may perhaps dispute themselves gravely and learnedly into Hell,
whilst the poor honest man believes his Soul into Glory.

(4.) He must understand the great mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of
God. Understand the mystery of the Incarnation? I assure you it is fair if it be
well believed! I have not met with many, not with any, that understand the
mystery of it, to this day. It Is more advisable for our Author, to secure his
own Faith in this point, than Abraham's Understanding. Abraham was a Believer,
and received his Religion upon the Authority of the Revealer; but our Author
will own none but what approves it self to his Reason; and whether the
Incarnation of Christ have had that happiness with him, I cannot tell: and
therefore to deal plainly with him, I have some Conjectures that may weigh
against his Prejudices, which incline me to choose Abraham's Faith even in this
particular before his own. But however that be, the Scripture assures us, that
Abraham was justified the same way that New-Testament-Believers are: One God,
one Lord Jesus Christ, one Holy Spirit, yesterday, to day, and the same for
ever; and if his poor prejudices must control divine Revelations, I cannot
help it. An Atheist would believe there i^ a God, but that he cannot get over
all Objections; and our Author would believe the Gospel-report, of the way of
Abraham's Justification, but that he cannot weather all the Prejudices, which
he first creates, and then pleads.

(5.) He must understand the nature of Faith, and of rolling the Soul on Christ
for Salvation, and renouncing all Righteousness of his own. Answ. I question
not but the Father of the Faithful, one so much in the exercise of Faith,
understood very well the nature of it, and that he would hardly have lighted
his Candle at our Author's Torch; but it is grown the Mode, for junior
Understandings to vilify the gray Heads of the Fathers, and to count them all
Bl^ck heads, that think not to a hairs breadth with them. Abraham knew, that
Faith consisted in a firm belief, that what God had promised was true, and that
the things of the Promise were exceeding good, and so to him: He gave a full
assent and consent to both, with their special Reasons; he embraced the mercy
of the Promise with thankfulness, and joy; and credited the veracity of him
that made the Promise, with security of mind; and he felt by experience, that
quiet, and satisfaction of Soul, that arises from an interest in him that gave,
and that Redeemer that was given in the Promise: And if he must be jeered for
rolling himself on God, and on his Christ, for ought I know he must bear his
burden.

[5.] And now conformable to his old awkward humor, our Author will attempt
the deciding the Controversy, Which way Abraham was justified, from Heb. 11.
And this, I say, is a perverse and awkward way of proceeding, to wave the
proper places, Romans 4. Gal. 3. where the Apostle professedly disputes the
point, and fix upon one where he disputes it not. Two things he would persuade
us to believe him in.

1. That the Apostle in this Chapter discourses of a justifying Faith. To which
I answer, That the Apostle does indeed Treat of a Faith that justifies, but not
of Faith as it justifies. A justifying Faith has many excellent, and admirable
uses, does a Christian noble service, besides that of justifying him before
God. It teaches him to trust God in all the ways, and methods of his*
Providence, to depend on him for all the good things of this life, as well as
those of a better: It deals with the Promises of the life that now is, and
those of that to come: It encourages us to pray, Give us this day our daily
bread; as well as, Forgive us our trespasses. It instructs us to commit our
concerns to his fatherly love, and care; to wrestle vigourously with all the
oppositions we meet with in the Profession of Christianity; to walk
comfortably, cheerfully, conscientiously in our particular Callings; to despise
the things that are seen, which are but temponal, in comparison of those which
are not seen, and are eternal. It taught Abel to offer Sacrifice to God,
whereby he had the witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gifts.
And if our Author can see no difference between being made Righteous, and
having the witness of it in his Conscience, he needs a Collyrium which I cannot
help him to. It taught Enoch also to walk with God; from whence he had the same
testimony, that he pleased God: The same Faith that justified him, procured him
a testimony of his Justification, but not as it justified him. The Direct Act
of Faith is one thing, and the Reflecting Act of Faith another. It taught Noah
also to take Gods warning of the approaching Deluge, and to prepare an Ark to
escape the danger: Whereby he condemned the World, and became heir of the
Righteousness which is by Faith; that is, he had more full assurance of his
Acceptance with God; According to a common Rule, Multa tun^ fieri dicuntur
quando facta esse manifestantur.

2. He would persuade us into his Notion of a justifying Faith: This justifying
Faith (says he) is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things
not seen. But the Apostle does not here intend to give us a strict Definition
of a justifying Faith, but a Description of its most noble effects: A
justifying Faith produces these effects, but not at all times, nor in all
persons justified; it is Faith in its vigor, not in its essence, that is here
described: By this Faith the Elders obtained a good report before men, and
their own Consciences; yet was it not this Act of Faith that justified them
before God, though it was the same Faith that produced this Act, by which they
were justified. Whereas therefore he would oblige us yet more by his critical
skill in the Gr. (...), is a firm and confident expectation of those things we
hope for^ and (...), an Argument of the Being of those things we do not see;
For my part I am not much edified, and therefore let him make merry with his
own Talents. That which follows will be more for our Information; for he will
now speak to the Act, the Object, and the several kinds of Faith.

(1.) For the Act of Faith: It is (as he says) such a firm and steadfast
persuasion of the truth of those things that are not evident to sense, as makes
us confidently hope for them. But this seems to me to be a hungry description
of the Act of justifying Faith* The Scripture has other apprehensions of this
matter, which describes the Act of faith by receiving, John 1. 12. To as many
as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. Where, if the Evangelist may be trusted to make his
own Exegesis, Receiving of Christ, and, Believing on his name, do mutually
interpret each other. It Is not enough that the Understanding be engaged in this
work, which may be found in the worst of men and Devils; the Will must also
conspire with the Understanding: For that which Faith is conversant about,
being not only true, but good, there must be an Act of Choice, as Knowledge,
that the whole man may be employed about it.

(2.) Says he, The Object of Faith must be unseen things; As the Being, or
Providence of God, or a Future state, something past or to come, the Creation
of the World, or the final Dissolution of it, or the accomplishment of any
Promises or Predictions. I grant indeed, that these things may be called
tropically, the Object of our Faith; but as they are things to be obtained,
they are more properly the Object of our Hope: But that which Faith primarily
eyes, that which is its proper Object, is the reason of its Assent and Consent:
And thus God in Christ, through the Promise, is the proper Object of a
justifying Faith. The mercles of the Covenant of Grace, are many of them
reserved for a future estate, when the Soul shall be better qualified to enjoy
them; but Faith respects God actually giving himself in Covenant to be our God,
through a Mediator: When we say, we believe Heaven, we belief Life Everlasting,
etc. the meaning is only this, we believe God has promised to give Heaven, to
give Life Everlasting, through Jesus Christ: I believe such a thing will be;
that is, I believe God, who has engaged that such a thing shall be. The
Authority of God speaking in the Promise, is the true Reason, and proper Object
of Faith, and the things contained in the Promise, as they are such, are not
the Object of my Faith properly, but have other powers of the Soul that are
concerned about them.

(3.) The different sorts of Faith (says he) result from the different Objects
and Motives of it. The Apostle takes notice of two kinds of Faith in this
Chapter (Hebr. 11.) and faith in Christ makes a Third, which are all the kinds
of Faith the Scripture mentions. Now I am afraid I shall grow every day less in
love than other with our Author's Accurateness in Divinity: For, 1. What a mad
way is this, to distinguish Faith into its several kinds and sorts, from the
multiplicity of the things that it believes! for at this rate he could have
minted not three only, or threescore, but three hundred sorts and kinds of
Faith. The different sorts, or kinds of Faith result (says he) from the
different Objects and Motives of it. But (say I, in his sense) the Objects and
Motives of Faith are innumerable, and therefore the sorts and kinds of Faith
are innumerable also. The Object of Faith (says he) must be unseen things; The
Being, or Providence of God, or a Future state, something past or to come, etc.
Now according to this Doctrine we must believe the Being of God with one sort
of Faith, his Providence with another; the Creation of the World with one kind
of Faith, its Dissolution with another; Heaven with one kind of Faith, Hell
with another; things past with one kind, things to come with another;
Prophesies with one kind of Faith, Promises with another: And then for the
Motives of Faith, they are various; The Power of God, the Wisdom of God, our
Experience of God, the Goodness of God: So when I believe any thing, and take
the Power of God able to accomplish it, for my Motive; I believe it with a
Faith of another kind from that whereby I believe the same thing, and take the
goodness of God for my motive: And now there is a Foundation laid for one of his
plain Demonstrations, that Abraham's Faith differed toto genere from Paul's;
because Abraham in believing, took his encouragement from the faithfulness of
him that had promised; and Paul, from his Abilities to keep what he had
committed unto him: So that I think I have not over-shot my self in saying,
That he may upon these principles, coin as many several sorts, and distinct
kinds of justifying Faith, as he can possibly spend in seven years time, and as
he grows out of sorts, he may stamp as many more. 2. I am not satisfied that
the Apostle mentions two, and but just two sorts of justifying Faith in this
Chapter: For the Apostle mentions one and the same Faith; By Faith, we believe
the Worlds were created; by Faith, Abel sacrificed; by Faith, Enoch walked with
God; by Faith, the Elders obtained a good report; by Faith, Noah took Gods
warning; by Faith, Sarah conceived; by Faith, Abraham offered up Isaac, etc.
But if these Faiths were of several sorts and kinds, the Apostle could not
manage his Argument with Consistency; nor should he so insensibly have passed
from one sort of Faith to another, without fair warning, that he had no plot
upon his Readers imbecility. 3. It Is full as easy to make All the sorts of
Faith appear in the Chapter, as two, if it had pleased the Painter: For, 1.
Here Is evidently the Faith of Christians, verse. 3. Through Faith we understand,
[we Christians] that the Worlds were framed by the Word of God. 2. There Is
Enoch's and Abel's Faith, which our Author allots for a second kind of Faith.
And then, 3. The Faith of Noah, Abraham, and all the rest, and their's
constitutes the third sort o^ Faith. 4. Much less am I satisfied, that Faith in
Christ makes a third kind of justifying Faith, distinct from the other two:
Faith is but one; the Reason into which our Faith is ultimately resolved, is
but one; the Mean whereby we believe in God, is but one, even Jesus Christ, by
whom we believe in God: But the things, the good things propounded in the
Promises are infinite: So that I doubt not when any necessity shall urge him,
he can reduce all these three sorts of Faith into one again by Synaeresis, or
split any one of them into a couple, by a Diaeresis: But now let us look into
his three sorts of Faith.

1.. The first (says he) we may call, A natural Faith. I confess he may call
things what he pleases, only let him be sure he do not miscal them; the rather,
because he has not Adams faculty, to make inspection into their Natures. But
what is this natural Faith? A belief (says he) of the Principles of natural
Religion, which is founded on natural Demonstrations, and moral Arguments, as,
that God is, and that heis a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. But I
am still of the same mind, that there is no such thing, (nor ever was) as a
Religion of sinners, whereby they can draw nigh to God, and worship him with
Acceptance, but what supposes Divine Revelation, as the means of
Manifestation; and a Redeemer, as the medium of Reconciliation. It is owned,
that this is a Principle of all Religion, that God is, and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him: But there must be somewhat more than
this, namely, Ability and strength from God, that we may diligently seek him,
and a Mediator through whom we may seek him, with him, with Acceptance. But
(says he) This was the Faith of Abel, and Enoch, whereby they pleased God.
Answ. There was this in their Faith, but this was not the whole of their Faith:
Well! he will prove it; 1. There Is no mention made of the Faith of Abel, and
Enoch in the Old Testament. A worthy Argument! A non scripto negative, in a
matter of Fact! The Old Testament mentions it not, therefore there was no such
thing; this is pure trifling: For though the OldTestament mentions not expressly
their Faith, it mentions their Acceptance with God, which without Faith is
impossible to be obtained. And secondly, The New Testament mentions both their
Faith, and their Acceptance: Which Faith was of the same kind with the rest of
those eminent Worthies mentioned with them; as is evident from that even Tenor
of Discourse the Apostle uses: By Faith Abel, by Faith Enoch, by Faith Noah, by
Faith Abraham, etc. without any ground of the least suspicion that he leaps
from one sort of Faith to another. 2. God (says he) required no more of these
good men. Answ. 1. But there was something required to make them good men. 2.
How can he prove, that God required ^ more of these good men? God required more
of Adam, even Faith, in that first Promise of a Mediator; and how Abel should
lose it, or having it, not believe it, and yet be such a good man, is past my
skill to conceive. 3. He tells us, p. 26. That God afforded good men the
frequent Apparitions of Angels: The head of whom was the Son of God, who, in
praeludium futurae incarnationis, frequently appeared to the ancient Fathers:
And he is not sure either what God revealed to them, or required of them. 4.
God required more of Abel, a Sacrifice; and that not merely as a part of his
Obedience, but as Propitiatory, which by the blood and the fat, which always
accompanied that kind of Sacrifices, is evident. 3. Says he, They had no other
particular Revelations of God's with Answ. If they had no other, they had none
at all* for natural Demonstrations, are not particular Revelations. 2. Adam had
more particular Revelations; and it being a Promise wherein Posterity was
concerned as well as himself, and concernid so deeply, I shall not question his
fidelity in deriving it to posterity, without proof. 3. Abel had the use of
Sacrifices, which suppose Revelation: For what Light of Nature could teach me,
that God would delight in the death of his Creatures, that had not transgressed
the Laws of their Creation: Abel's was (...), a bloody Sacrifice; nor is God
ever the more entitled to, or possessed of any Creature by being offered dead,
than if it were presented alive: And if natural Demonstrations, the Light of
Nature, was the Foundation of the Practice, it is still obliging; for natural
Light, with its Demonstrations, varies not. 4. We are sure, that Enoch had the
Spirit of Prophecy, was an eminent Prophet in his days, and therefore had
particular Revelations; and amongst many, one Revelation of Christ, Jude, ver.
14. Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesi^h of these, saying, Behold, the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all,
etc. The same with that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire to take
vengeance, etc. for to Christ is the power of executing vengeance committed,
John 5. 27. And therefore I cannot but conclude, That he who had a particular
Revelation of Christ's coming to judge the World, had particular ones also, that
he should come into the World to redeem it. And now how vain must our Author's
Argument needs be, from the silence of the Old Testament, to infer, That Enoch
and Abel had no particular Revelation, when the NewTestament proves, that Enoch
had particular Revelations: And if Enoch had this Revelation, which yet is not
mentioned either in the Old Testament or the New, but only in this place, how
many more might he have, which are drowned in the Gulf of Time, and this one,
by special Providence, escaped the common Shipwreck? But, 5. That which
abundantly proves, that they had particular Revelations, and Revelations of
Christ too, through whom God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, is
this, That their Sacrifices in God's Institution of them, and their own
Application of them, from the first rise of them, had respect to Christ, who is
therefore called, The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8.
Which, without partiticular Revelation, they could never have understood.

. 2. His second sort of justifying Faith, he calls a Faith in God: Which puts
me to a stand, Whether he would have us take the former for a justifying Faith
or no. If the former were not a Faith in God, how could it justify? If it was;
then how comes Faith in God, to constitute a new and distinct kind of
justifying Faith? But what is this Faith in God? A belief (says he) of those
particular Revelations, which God made to the Fathers of the Old Testament.
From whence it is easy to prove, that every time our Author repeats his Creed,
I believe in God, we are bound to take him for one of the Fathers of the
Old Testament: If this be a true Definition of Faith in God, all the Saints in
the New Testament are misbelievers. But of this (says he) the Apostle gives us
many examples, Noah* Abraham, Sarah, Moses, etc. Perhaps the Reader will wonder
why Enoch and Abel should be left out of the Catalogue of the Fathers of the
Old Testament; but he must reflect, and remember, that they are ranked already
in the Classis of examples for the natural Faith: And truly, if he had pleased,
he might have created a new sort of Faith for every Pair in the whole Chapter:
Thus Abraham and Sarah would have done well in a Form by themselves; nay, to
have advanced the Conceit, he might have created a particular kind of Faith,
for every particular person of them: Each of them had their particular
Revelations, and particular Motives; Noah, believed the Deluge; Abraham, the
promise of a Son; and David, the warning that God gave him of his Danger, etc.
Now we are told, that the object of Faith is something to come, or something
past, etc. and that the different sorts of Faith, result from the different
Objects and Motives of it: and therefore it had been easy to have allotted to
each of them a different kind of Faith: But let us hear him improve his Notion.
Noah (says he) believed God, when he forewarned him of the Deluge, and in
obedience to him, provided an Ark; and this was imputed to him for
Righteousness: He became the Heir of Righteousness, which is by Faith: But I
find no such thing in all the Copies that I have, that it was imputed to him
for Righteousness. This I find, that he became Heir of the Righteousness which
is by Faith: Which two things are more different than any of his three kinds of
Faith. Noah was an Heir of Righteousness, that is, he inherited those
advantages, which come by Righteousness; he had the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness. As a Son by being his Fathers Heir, inherits the Purchases,
Possessions, Honors of his Father: Thus Noah by being an Heir of
Righteousness, enjoyed whatever Privileges the Promise of God had entailed
upon Righteousness. Noah was (...): The Heir of Righteousness; where
Righteousness is not Ge^itivus materiae, but efficientis. It denotes not that
Righteousness was the thing he inherited, but the true Reason why he inherited
those blessings: Righteousness answers not to the Possession, but to the
Ancestor; not what, but from what he inherited. And this is clear from this one
Consideration, That Noah was righteous before God, before that particular
Revelation was made to him: He was not made righteous, because he believed that
particular Revelation; but God made him that particular Revelation, because he
was already righteo^. Genesis 6. 8, 9. Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord*
Verse. 9. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his Generations, and Noah walked
with God. Verse. 13. God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me.
Ver 14. Make thee an Ark of Gopher wood. Ver. 17. And behold I, even I, do
bring a Flood upon the Earth.

He proceeds to Abraham: Who in obedience to the divine Revelation, left his
Country, went into a strange Land, offered his son Isaac, which seemed to
thwart that former promise, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called; i. e. That from
Isaac should proceed that numerous Offspring which God had promised Abraham;
and yet he was so well assured of the power and faithfulness of God, that
whatever Impossibilities Humane Reason suggested, he would neither disobey Gods
Command, nor distrust his Promise. Now here would arise several Queries: As, 1.
Whether then Abraham's Religion was of the right stamp, seeing it would not
approve it self to his Reason? and, Whether Abraham's Reason was not Carnal,
that suggested Impossibilities against God's Promise? and, Whether our Author
(had he been in Abraham's Circumstances) ought not by his own Principles, to
have disobeyed, and distrusted God both in his Precept and Promise, because
they did not approve themselves to his Reason. 2. It might be enquired, What
inference he will make from hence? and that he tells us is, That the Faith
whereby Abraham, and all good men were justified before God, was such a firm
belief of the Being, and Providence of God, and all the particular Revelations
God made to them, as made them careful to please God in all things: Now this is
still the Question, and is like so to continue, for any assistance we are like
to have from our Author's Arguments. But, 3. There is one thing that I shall
particularly examine, Whether that Promise, Genesis 21. 12. In Isaac shall thy
Seed be called, be made good in that numerous Offspring that issued from
Isaac' s loins? Now if any regard might be had to the Apostle, he would soon
decide the Controversy, Romans 9. 7, 8. In Isaac shall thy Seed be called, that
is, they which are the children of the Flesh, are not the children of God; but
the children of the Promise, are counted for the Seed. See here now the vast
difference in men's judgments. In Isaac shall thy Seed be called; id est, (says
our Author) from Isaac should proceed that numerous Offspring: No, says the
Apostle, In Isaac shall thy Seed be blessed; id est, The children of the Flesh,
are not the children of God; but the children of the Promise, are counted for
the Seed. Again, Romans 4. 16. Therefore it [the Promise] is of Faith, that it
might be sure to all the seed; not only to that which is of the Law, but to
that which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us all. Gal. 3. 29.
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the
Promise. 4. It were easy to evidence, that what the Apostle speaks of
Abraham's Faith in offering up his son, related not to the Act of it, whereby
he was justified, but to the Evidence of his Justification. His third sort of
Faith follows.

. 3. From hence (says he) we learn what Faith in Christ is, which is now
imputed to us for Justification. From hence! From whence? If we never learn
what faith in Christ is, better than from the Faith of Abel, Enoch, Noah, and
Abraham, which are the whole Heavens asunder each from other, as he has ordered
the matter, we must be content to be ignorant of it till our lives end. For who
could learn the special Nature of one thing, from another that differs from it
in the kind? But let us give him the hearing! Our faith in Christ must signify
such a steadfast belief of all those Revelations which Christ has made to the
World, as governs our lives and actions. Why so? To make our faith in Christ,
answer to the faith of Abraham, and all good men in former Ages; without which,
the Apostles Argument from Abraham' s being justified by faith, to our
Justification by faith, is of no force. There is a necessity then granted, that
our faith in Christ and Abraham's, do answer one another, lest the Apostle
should be reproached with a Non-sequitur: Now to perform this, instead of
making Abraham's to be a faith in Christ, as it really is, he debases faith in
Christ, as low as, if not, below the faith of Abraham: He pretends to
under-prop the Apostles Argument, but really he undermines it; and whilst he
seems to provide an Expedient, that his Reasonings may not be invalidated, he
renders them more than Nugatory. For, 1. How can faith in Christ, answer to the
faith of all those good men in former times? Abel, Enoch? when their's was
Faith without Revelations, but faith in Christ is a Faith grounded upon
Revelations: The Motive of their Faith, was Natural Demonstrations; the Reason
of ours is Revelation: The Object of our Faith (in his sense) is Eternal Life;
but whether they had any such thing in their eye, our Author will not grant;
for he that will not allow Abraham, whose Faith was grounded upon Revelations,
to have had any spiritual Promises, will less allow those poor good men the
privilege, whose Faith was only built upon Natural Demonstrations. 2. How can
faith in Christ, answer to the faith of Abraham? He has laid it down as the
bottom of this Discourse, p. 252. that, The different sorts of Faith, result
from the different Objects and Motives of it: But Abraham's Faith had different
Objects and Motives from ours, (as he tells us): And therefore it is of another
nature, sort and kind than ours; for so he says expressly, The Apostle takes
notice of two kinds of Faith, and faith in Christ makes a third: Now will it
not be hard for the Apostle to maintain his great Principle, That Abraham is
the Father of the faithful, if Abraham's Faith and theirs differ toto Genere?
Those things that differ in their special Nature, may yet agree in their common
Nature; but those things that are of diverse kinds, wherein shall they agree?
But all this is but a scandal thrown upon the Apostle, who proves from
Abraham's way of being justified, the way of Christians being justified, Romans
4. As Abraham was justified without Works, so are we. Verse. 2. As Abraham had a
Righte^sness imputed to him, even so have we. Verse. 11. That Righteousness
might be imputed to them also: As Abraham's Righteousness, was a Righteousness
of Faith, even so is ours. Verse. 11. A Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. As
Abraham was justified by free Grace, so are we. V. 5. To him that works not,
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly. Thus was his Righteousness,
the pattern of ours; his Faith the pattern of ours: And is it not a strange Copy
that differs in kind from its Idaea? That Is a huge way off from (...): As if
you should propound a House for your pattern, and draw a Horse to sample it.
Once more look into Gal. 3. 8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith, preached before the Gospel to Abraham: Now
if Abraham had not our Faith, what needed he to have our Gospel? The end of
preaching the Gospel is to beget Faith; and it was an equivocal Generation, if
it begat a Faith of one kind in Abraham, another in Christians: What needed
this circumspect Caution of Providence, that Abraham should have the glad
tidings of the Gospel preached to him, which made him rejoice and be glad, if a
Faith of a lower size would serve his turn for Justification? Again, verse. 13.
That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, through Jesus
Christ. If we have his blessing, surely he had our Faith: Or could Abraham get
the blessing without Christ; but Christians no other way, but in Christ? But
thus has our Author vindicated the Apostles Reasonings, as if he had secretly
designed (as he openly professes of the Wriings of others) to expose them to
contempt.

It may be now seasonable to examine his Definition of a Gospel-Faith; viz.
Such a steadfast belief of all those Revelations which Christ has made to the
World, as governs our lives and actions. If this be to define, put but a
company of Letters in a bag, shuffle them well together, then shake them out,
and they will tumble into as good a Definition as this comes to: But thus did
Atoms by dancing in Infinite and Eternal Spaces, justle one another so long,
till at last they produced this beautiful Fabric of Heaven and Earth. I except
against it; 1. Because the whole Priestly Office of Christ is excluded by it;
Propitiation, Atonement, Expiation of sin, are shut quite out of all
consideration; and the Death and Sufferings of Christ of no regard, unless
perhaps they may come in by way of Motive, to believe his Doctrine as a
Prophet. And if this be his Faith, I must profess, I would not venture my
Salvation in his Church, for the hopes of all the good, or fear of all the evil
this World can either flatter or affright me with; however I beg Grace from God
that I may not. He that has but half a Christ, had as good have no Christ; and
he that takes him not wholly into the Definition of his Faith, may as safely
leave him wholly out. As half a heart in God's account, is no heart; so half a
Savior in Faith's esteem, is no Savior. 2. I except against it, because it
may be found in Hypocrites: They may so far believe the Revelations of Christ,
as to govern their lives and actions, and yet their hearts never be purified by
that Faith. 3. It pretends to define Faith, and yet gives us no Genus of it:
Faith is such a Belief, as governs our lives and actions; that is, Faith, is
Faith that governs our lives and actions: But the Question is, What is that
Faith, that will so govern our lives and actions? For it describes not any
direct influence of Faith upon our Justification, but our obedience. And
whereas he pretends to assign some differences, that may distinguish it from
all other Faith, true or false; yet in plain terms they do nothing less. 1.
It Is a belief of those Revelations Christ has made to the World. Now unless he
can prove, that those Revelations which Christ has made to the World, are
essentially distinct from those which God before made to the World; their being
revealed by Christ, makes no essential difference: For Christ came in his
Fathers name, under the New Testament; and the Spirit came in Christ's name,
under the Old Testament. All Christ's Revelations, in order to the governing
our lives and actions, may be reduced either to Precepts, or Promises: Now
though some have been tampering at it, I cannot find that Christ revealed
either a new Moral Law, or added any thing to the old: Self-denial, Taking up
the Cross, Praying for our Persecutors, etc. were Old Testament duties, though
not met with in New Testament phrase: As a Rule of obedience, Christ meddled not
with it; all he did, was to vindicate it from the corrupt Glosses the Scribes
and Pharisees had put upon it. As to Promises, Christ has revealed no other
Heaven, no other Glory, no other Salvation; only he has cleared up these, given
us more light into them, poured out more Grace, that we might live more in
fellowship with God, and hopes of Glory: But this, and much more, will make no
essential difference in the Revelation. 2. It Is such a Belief, as governs our
lives and actions: But such a Belief was Enoch's, Abel's, Noah's, Abraham*s;
their's governed their lives and actions too, and somewhat more; their Hearts
and Consciences: This therefore will make no essential difference. 4. I except
against it, that it mentions not God as the proper Object of Faith: For though
Christ, who is God, be in the Definition, yet not as God; there is nothing
supposes him to be so, no employment that necessarily requires it should be so
assigned to him; only he is allowed Revelation-work, which a mere man,
instructed with God's Commission, might have done.

And now once again he will reassume his Argument: If by the Righteousness of
Faith, you understand the Righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, and
imputed to us, you utterly destroy the Apostle's Argument for our Justification
by Faith; for Abraham, and all the good men of old were not justified by such a
Faith as this is: They never heard of Christ's Righteousness imputed to us,
etc. Now how does it follow, that because Abraham was justified by such noble
and generous Acts of Faith, therefore we shall be justified by Christ's
Righteousness imputed? But whoever overthrows the Apostle's Argument, I have
some things that will overthrow, and utterly overthrow our Author's. 1. That he
begs, and most shamefully begs the Question, which I think we must be forced to
grant him at last to be rid of him, without any respect to his Argument: For
thus we shut our hands sometimes of those importunate Mendicants, whose
strongest Logic, and most prevailing Oratory, is Clamor and Obstinacy: He has
hardened himself to say, that Abraham was justified without any respect to the
Righteousness of Christ, that he was justified by noble and generous Acts of
Faith; and then concludes, That therefore so are we: And all this, to save the
credit of the Apostle's Argument. But I should rather go the other way;
Believers under the Gospel are not justified without respect to the
Righteousness of Christ, therefore neither was Abraham; and let that save the
credit of the Apostle's Argument. As he cannot prove that Abraham was accepted
of God, without any consideration of Satisfaction made to him by a Redeemer,
and therefore ought not to infer, that we are accepted of God without such
Consideration; so we can prove that Believers under the Gospel are accepted of
God, upon Consideration had of the Satisfaction made to him by a Redeemer, and
therefore may infer, that Abraham was accepted upon the same Consideration. 2.
His Argument will recoil upon the Engineer: For if by the Righteousness of
Faith, you understand a Righteousness of our own obedience, you utterly destroy
the Apostle's Argument for our Justification by Faith: for how does it follow,
that because Abraham was justified by Faith without Works, that therefore
Believers under the Gospel are justified by Works? Again, If there be no
reasoning from Faith of one kind, to Faith of another; and that the Apostle
understood himself better, than to argue at this weak rate (for which we have
our Author's Broad-Seal, p. 257.) And if the faith of Abraham, and our faith in
Christ, be of different kinds, and do constitute two distinct sorts of Faith,
for which also we have his Word and Warrant, ( p. 252.) then let every Reader
try the issue, whether our Author have not utterly destroyed the Apostle's
Argument, for our Justification by faith in Christ, from Abraham's being
justified by Faith; seeing he supposes him to argue from one kind of Faith to
another. For at this weak rate he makes him argue; If Abraham were justified by
faith without Christ, then Believers under the Gospel are justified by faith in
Christ. All that I can conclude from this Discourse of our Authors is, That he
has owned the Apostle an old grudge, and has now found a convenient time to pay
him home.

He promises us now he will bring his Discourse to a head: Which I am right
sorry for, hoping he had been at the foot of it: And yet I am glad it shall be
reduced to a head, for hitherto it has been like the Hydra, when one head was
lopt off, another, or two more sprung up in the room of it. But I mistake him:
He will bring it to a head; it has been hitherto like an obstinate, inveterate
Oedema, that scorns ordinary Applications; but now we shall see his Chirurgick
faculty, he will bring the undigested Matter to a Head, and then I doubt it
will issue out in purulent, offensive stuff: But the head of it is this, The
difference between the faith of Abraham, and the Faith of Christians is this;
Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness; and we
believe in Christ, and that is counted to us for Righteousness; which is a
difference without a distinction, and so he has made neither head nor foot of
it: For Abraham believed God, but it was by the preaching of the Gospel to him,
Gal. 3. 8. The Gospel- Doctrine that was preached was this, In thy Seed shall
all the Nations of the Earth be blessed: That Seed was Jesus Christ, ver. 16.
To thy Seed, which is Christ. So that it is as plain as we can desire it, and
more plain than the Enemies of the Christian Religion would have it, That
Abraham was justified through Faith in Christ; and if Abraham believed in God
through Christ, it is certain, that Christians do so also, 1 Pet. 1. 21. Who
through him do believe in God. Abraham' s belief in God, was not exclusive of
Christ; our believing in Christ, is not exclusive of our believing in God: The
Objects mediate and ultimate are the same, and then the Faith is so, if we may
take our Author's word for it (which for his own Confutation we may venture to
do;) and then where is the difference? And thus the Reader has all the head and
foot I can make of this tedious long-winded Argument.

Having thus happily dispatched the difference between Abraham's faith, and the
faith of Christians, he promises to give us the difference between two or three
other things, or between something and nothing; for to acknowledge my ignorance,
I cannot tell what. I turned to the Errata, and there we are bid to read --
Nonsense. I was in good hopes that had been it; but the difference of the pages
soon undeceived me. I shall therefore give the Reader it, as cheap as I had it,
in his own words, and that is good both for Buyer and Seller: And the same
difference there is between the Righteousness of Faith in a general Notion, as
it is applied to Noah, Abraham, and these Worthies of old, and the
Righteousness of G^d by the Faith of Jesus Christ Romans 3. 22. and that
Righteousness which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness of God by
Faith, Phil. 3. 9. Now I have guest, and guest and almost tired my self with
guessing, what those things should be between which he pretends the difference:
One while it seems to be, Between the Righteousness of Faith in a general
Notion, as it is applied to Noah, Abraham, and those Worthies of old, on the
one party; and, the Righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ, etc. on
the other party: Another while it seems to be, Between the Righteousness of
Faith in the general Notion, on one side; and, the Righteousness of God by the
Faith of Jesus Christ, on the second; and, the Righteousness which is through
the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness of God by Faith, on the third; and so
the difference will be tripartite: Whatever the business is, I shall not
trouble my self about it. Of two Righteousnesses I have heard; the one of
Faith, the other of Works, according to the two Covenants from thence
denominated; which do irreconcileably differ, and are as far asunder as the two
Poles, which can never meet: Of two Righteousnesses of Faith I have not heard
till of late; and a happy invention it was for them, whose faith or unbelief
would not stoop to Gospel-Revelations. But that we may not let our time run
waste, I shall a little consider one of his Scriptures, and wait with patience,
till he shall consider the other: That which I fix upon, is Romans 3. 20, 21, 22.
Therefore by the deeds of the Law, shall no flesh be justified in his sight;
for by the Law is the knowledge of sin: But now the Righteousness of God without
the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets, even the
Righteousness of God which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon
all them that believe, for there is no difference; for all have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God: Being justified freely by his Grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. In which words; (1.) I take notice of
the Apostles peremptory Conclusion, By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his [ Gods] sight. Now as this Proposition smiles or frowns upon
our Author, or his Opponent, so will the whole cause stand or fall on either
side. It seems indeed to carry a smart sound of words against his Notions; but
he is well enough provided against all Arguments drawn from express words; and
therefore we must enquire, What that Law is, by the deeds whereof no flesh can
be justified: If it proves the Moral Law, our Author will not deny that he is at
least half undone; and I find him feelingly aware of that all along. Now to
dally no longer with him, nor to put him to a lingering death: The Apostle (who
knew his own mind best) has assured me, that by [Law,] he understands the Moral
Law. 1. It Is that Law by which we have the knowledge of sin. His Argument runs
thus: By the deeds of that Law by which comes the knowledge of sin, no flesh is
justified: But by the Moral Law comes the knowledge of sin; therefore by the
deeds of the Moral Law no flesh is justified. The major is the Apostle's own,
in this very place: The minor is his own too, Romans 7. 13. I had not known sin,
except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet. From whence I argue: By that Law
which says, Thou shall not covet, comes the knowledge of sin: but that Law which
says, Thou shall not covet, is the Moral Law; therefore by the Moral Law comes
the knowledge of sin. The major is the Apostle's own in the place last quoted;
the minor needs no other proof, but that a man be able to read the Ten
Commandments, which is the sum of the Moral Law, the Tenth whereof is, Thou
shall not covet. But now at what a weak rate must the Apostle argue to please
our Author? By the deeds of the Ceremonial Law shall no flesh be justified. No:
Why not? Why, because by the Moral Law is the knowledge of sin. 2. None can
doubt of what Law the Apostle speaks, that considers how he draws this great
Conclusion out of verse. 19. That every mouth may be stopped, and all the World
become guilty before God, therefore by the deeds of the Law, etc. His Argument
is this; By the deeds of that Law by which every mouth is stopped, and all the
World become guilty before God, shall no flesh be justified: But by the Moral
every mouth is stopped, and all the World become guilty before God; therefore
by the deeds of the Moral Law shall no flesh be justified. And this evidently
excludes the Ceremonial Law from any Concern in this Argument: For that Law
never obliged all, or half the World, and therefore they could not violate it,
and therefore not become guilty by it before God. Again, the instances which
the Apostle gives of the violation of the Law, shows what Law he excludes from
Justification, verse. 13. With their Tongues they have used deceit. Verse. 14.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Verse. 15. Their feet are swift
to shed blood, etc. which are all apparent violations of the Moral Law. But is
there never a Creep-hole at which our Author may escape the Apostles Argument?
Yes! yes! p. 245. The great dispute in the Epistle to the Romans is, Whether we
must be justified by the Law of Moses, or by the Faith of Christ? that is,
Whether the Observation of the External Rites, and Ceremonies of the Law, and
an External Conformity of our Actions to the Moral Precepts of it will justify
a man before God? etc. This sorry evasion has all its small pretense, from that
(...), from the deeds; which our Author would willingly persuade himself,
signify nothing but Observation of Ceremonies, and outward Conformity to the
Moral Law. Now that the Apostle in this place directly excludes the Moral Law I
have proved: All the Question is, Whether he disputes against Justification by
external Conformity to its Precepts only; or against Justification by whatever
Obedience is, or may be given to the Moral Law by man, under his present
Circumstances? And against our Author's conceit herein, I oppose these things:
1. It appears not that ever there was such a Question started amongst any
Christians, Whether Hypocrisy would justify a man before God? much less was
it ever laid down in Thesi, and Dogmatically maintained that it would do so.
Many Hypocrites there were then, (there are so now) who may deceive themselves
into a Fools Paradise, that Hypocrisy might not condemn and damn them; but
none ever so forsaken of common sense, as to think that Hypocrisy would
justify, and save them: Many presume to be saved, notwithstanding their sins,
but none to be saved for their sins: If any should so dote, they deserve to
receive their Confutation from Bedlam, rather than the Divinity-Schools. I
cannot therefore once imagine, that the Apostle should so operosely handle a
subject; that he should rowse up his zeal, and knit all the nerves of his
spiritual Reason, to confute what was either nowhere, or so thin, and
transparent a falsehood, that to recite it, was clearly to confute it. 2. The
Deeds or Works of the Law, are the Deeds and Works which the Law commands,
which it primarily commands; but the Law never commanded outward Conformity of
actions, without inward Conformity of heart to its Precepts: These are not the
Deeds of the Law, but such as God abhors; therefore the Deeds of the Law by
which no flesh shall be justified, are not external works only. 3. The Deeds of
the Law, by which no flesh shall be justified, are the Deeds of every one of
God's Laws, the Deeds of every particular Commandment; but the Deeds of one of
God's Laws, of on^ particular Commandment, are only internal Deeds; therefore
the Apostle disputes not only against external deeds. By the Law, is meant the
whole Law; but one part of the Law (extensively taken) reaches internal deeds
only: As is evident in the Tenth Commandment, Thou shall not covet; but
according to our Author's way, the Apostle should have laid down his Doctrine
thus, By the deeds of nine parts of the Law, shall no flesh living be
justified. 4. The Apostle disputes against Justification by such deeds of the
Moral Law, as wherein all the World is become guilty: But by the external deeds
of the Law all the World is not become guilty; therefore he disputes not
against Justification by the external deeds of the Law only. That all the World
is not become guilty by the external deeds of the Moral Law, and a failure
therein, he proves, Romans 5. 14. where he shows, That death reigned over some,
who had not sinned after the similitude of Adam' s transgression. 5. Those
deeds which David excluded from his Justification, the Apostle excludes from
our Justification; for he quotes his Proposition from Psalm. 143. 2. and
therefore takes it in his sense, or else he could not make use of his
Authority: But David excludes all his deeds whatsoever from Justification;
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man be
justified: He durst not once think of God's entering into judgment with him,
upon the account of any thing he had attained: From all which it appears, that
the Apostle excl^es the Law, the whole Law, and the deeds thereof, all the
deeds thereof, from having any concern in the Justification of a sinner in the
sight of God. (2.) We may observe hence, That the Apostle opposes the
Righteousness of God, unto a Righteousness by the deeds of the Law: But now
(says he) the Righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, verse. 21. And
as in verse. 20. he says not (...), by the deeds of the Law, but (...), by the
deeds of Law, of a Law, of any Law: So here he says not (...), without the Law,
as if he intended some singular Law, (...), but (...), without a Law, without
any Law: And hence he fully silences and stops the mouth of our Authors Cavil,
that by the deeds of the Law is meant only an external Conformity of our
Actions to it. But the Apostles words leave no place for ambiguity: For if the
Righteousness of God without Law, a Law, any Law, be manifested, then without
either Ceremonial, or Moral Law; then also without external, or internal deeds
of either: But the Apostle shuts out Law simply and absolutely, The
Righteousness of God -- without Law is manifested. As this term Law, (...), is
more properly predicated of the Moral, than of the Ceremonial Law; so the deeds
of Law, are more properly predicated of internal, than external deeds; and
Analogum per se stans, stat pro famosior, Analogato. If then (as our Author
contends) we are justified by the Moral, though not by the Ceremonial Law, or
by internal Conformity to it, though not by external Conformity to it only;
then the Apostles Doctrine is true in an improper, or less proper sense, but
utterly false in the proper, or more proper sense of the words: For had (...)
words been inverted, they had carried a clearer truth in them; By the deeds,
[the internal deeds] of the Law, [the Moral Law] shall all flesh be justified:
But now the Righteousness of God with the Law, [the Moral Law,] and its
internal as well as external deeds] is manifested: But this is not to interpret
the Apostle, but dictate a new Gospel to him. But further: Hence I have just
occasion to complain of an unrighteous surmise, with which our Author loads
some men, That because they exclude Law, and Law-deeds from Justification in
the sight of God, that therefore they exclude it from having any place in their
Lives and Conversations. The Apostle, who is a zealous Vindicator of the
interest of the Law, as a Rule of our Obedience; yet we see discharges it
wholly from any, from all use, and service in the Justification of a sinner in
the sight of God: Therefore he adds, Before God; and the Psalmist, In thy
sight; to teach us, That though the Righteousness of God without Law, is
manifested, as to the truth of the thing, yet the Righteousness of God is not,
cannot be manifested to us, without a sincere obedience to the Law. There Is a
Justification before God; to this the Law, a Law, any Law, contributes nothing;
but there is a Justification before Conscience, before men, and to this a
sincere, and evangelically universal obedience contributes much. (3.) The
Apostle assures us, That this Doctrine of his is no new fancy, broached the other
day, and set on foot lately in Gospel Times, but the same way by which all the
good men of old were justified, v. 21. It Is witnessed by the Law, and the
Prophets: Now as to the Prophets testimony, though our Author approves not
their Cryptick way of demonstrating, but is all for plain Meridian
demonstration; yet they are full that Jesus Christ was the main consideration
in the Justification of a sinner from of old, Acts 3. 25, 26. Ye are the
Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant that God made with our Fathers,
saying to Abraham, And in thy Seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed; unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Whence it appears,
God's raising up Christ in the World, to bless his people with spiritual
blessings, was no more than what he had covenanted with Abraham, and promised
to him, even in that very Promise which our Author thinks was fulfilled in the
numerous Posterity of Isaac: But now that this Righteousness of God without
Law, should be witnessed by Law, this seems strange: Does the Law witness
against it self? Is it false to it is own interest? But the Law, is God's Law;
and when it witnesses to a sinner, it witnesses home; convinces him of the
perfect holiness of that God who gave the Law; of the peremptoriness of God, in
not abating one jot, or tittle of the Law; of the sinners utter inability to
come up to the Demands of the Law, and therefore the utter impossibility of
being justified by the Law; of the severity of God's Justice in punishing the
violater of his Law, and therefore unless he can find another Righteousness, he
must utterly perish. It Is true, the Law speaks its old Language still, Do this
and live; but then it speaks it only to those who are upon a bottom of
Innocence; for to a Transgressor its language is, Cursed is very one that
continues not in all things. (4.) The Apostle acquaints us, what that
Righteousness of God is which is manifested, verse. 22. Even the Righteousness
of God, which is by the Faith of Christ. Now hence it is evident, that the
Righteousness of God, and Righteousness by the Faith of Christ, are both one;
and therefore Faith in God, and Faith in Christ, are both one. As is the
Righteousness, such is the Faith: as is the Faith, such is the Righteousness;
which perfectly overthrows that Arbitrary distinction, which our Author had
studied for more need; Of Faith in God, and Faith in Christ, on purpose to shut
Abraham out of Christ, and by Consequence out of Heaven, and to lock him up in
the Limbus Patrum.

(5.) The Apostle concludes, That there is no difference (in point of
Justification) all that are sinners by the First, must be justified (if ever
they be justified) by the Second Adam: v. 22. The Righteousness of God which is
by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all that believe; for there is no
difference, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God. As all men
that ever were, are, or shall be, are sinners, under Condemnation; so all that
ever were, are, or shall be righteous in the sight of God, are so by that
righteousness which is by Faith of Jesus. So that every pardoned, accepted,
justified sinner must own, that he is justified freely by the Grace of God,
through the Redemption that is in Christ.

From these and suchlike Scriptures, it is, that Christians ascribe their
Justification before God, not to their own good Works, but to the Free Grace of
God through Jesus Christ: but our Author has a way of proving his Sentiments
worth a thousand of these. Could men (says he) be reconciled to plain sense, it
would need no other Confirmation, but the Natural evidence of naked and simple
Truth. It has been observed of the great Bellarmine (from whom our Author has
borrowed some things) that he never comes in with a [ Procui dubio] but the
next words are a Rapper: the same I observe in our Author, that when he has
done just nothing, he always makes the loudest cackle. It was a handsome Come-of
if you did but mind it; that when he had pestered us with his prejudices,
surfeited us with Arbitrary distinctions, filled our heads with empty Notions,
and when we looked to have been attacked with one of his old, plain, kill-cow
demonstrations, he faces about, and pops us off with this: It needs no other
proof than the Natural evidence of simple and naked Truth.

But now let the Reader take something warm next his heart, let him use his
phial of Essences, for our Author is just now a-coming to examine those Texts
of Scripture which are abused by these men, to set up the personal
Righteousness of Christ, as the only formal Cause of our justification: And
must not those Texts of Scripture be miserably abused indeed, that are thus
pressed in for such a service? What, the personal Righteousness of Christ the
formal Cause of our justification? I have heard some say it was the Meritorious
Cause, some the Impulsive Cause, others the Material Cause, and some that it is
no Cause; but our Author is the first that ever I heard this expression from.
There was once a good Orthodox Bishop, (as Orthodoxy past in that Age) his Name
Downham, he has Written many a long page upon this Subject, and he acquaints us
with the sense of Protestants* Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 1. That the matter of our
justification is Christ's Righteousness, and the form is God's Imputing it; and
this way go most of your Systematical Divines: but from hence I learn it is the
Mode nowadays, for these Gentlemen to Confute (that is, to Rail at) those
long-winded Authors they never had the patience to read, nor the Brains to
understand; but let this pass amongst our Authors Negligences or Ignorances,
till I understand better where to marshal it. In examining the Texts which they
abuse, he will begin and end with Phil. 3. 8, 9. Yea doubtless, and I account
all things loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord, for
whom I have suffered the loss of all things that I may win Christ, and be found
in him not having my own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. The
main Question here will be, What was that Righteousness which the Apostle
renounces, from having any place in his Justification before God? Upon this one
hinge turns all the Controversy betwixt our Author and his Antagonists. They
say it was, whatever inherent Righteousness he had attained or could attain,
whatever Obedience he had performed, or could perform to the Commands of God.
Ay but (says our Author) what proof have they for this? he can learn none, but
that they take it for granted, that My Righteousness signifies Inherent
Righteousness. And really they are to be pitied if not pardoned, that by His
own Righteousness, understand his own Righteousness; for if Inherent
Righteousness, be not His own Righteousness, it is plain he could have none at
all; for an External Conformity of Actions to the Law alone is not
Righteousness at all, but Hypocrisy, and Unrighteousness: but I shall inform
him of some other proofs why they take His own Righteousness for Inherent
Righteousness. 1. That which he calls his own Righteousness (...), he tells you
in the next words, is (...); that which is from Law, from a Law, from any Law
indefinitely: now a Righteousness which is from a Law is such a one as the Law
urges, presses upon and prescribes to the Conscience; but that without question
is an Internal Conformity of soul to the holiness of the Law; but this the
Apostle rejects, therefore he rejects Internal and Inherent Righteousness. 2.
The true Notion of My Righteousness is not to be fetched from some sorry
Conjectures, from precarious Hypotheses, which men (when they are in streights)
invent to avoid present ruin, but from the stable fixed constant use thereof
in Scripture; but so is this expression [My own Righteousness] and [My own, or
your own Works] used in Scripture, viz. for real sineere Conformity of heart
and life to a Law, therefore so ought we to take it here, till we see cogent
Reason to the contrary. That this is the fixed use of the expression in
Scripture we shall see, Genesis 30. 33. My Righteousness shall answer for me in
time to come; which our Author would paraphrase thus, My Righteousness, that
is, My Roguery, Job 27. 6. My Righteousness I hold fast, my heart shall not
reproach me as long as I live. My Righteousness, that is, (would he say) My
Hypocrisy, Matthew. 5. 16. That men may see your good works, that is, in the New
Glossary, Your Complement. Dan. 9. 18. we present not our supplications before
thee not for our Righteousnesses, but for thy great Mercies. The Prophet in the
Name of the Church must be supposed here not to renounce real Righteousness,
but the Sceleton of Obedience: Now had the Apostle designed only to reject his
own Hypocrisy, he was not so barren in expressions but he could have fitted it
with its Proper Name. 3. The Apostle expressly renounces both whatever he had
attained before or after his Conversion, v. 7. These things that were gain to
me, (whilst I was a Pharisee) those I accounted [(...)] loss for Christ: But is
that all? No! Yea doubtless (v. 8.) and I do (now) account [(...)] all things
but loss: I have accounted all things attained in my Judaism loss, when I was
first convinced: and I do now account all things even my own Righteousness
loss, and dung for Christ: and therefore it is to be noted that the Apostle
rises higher in his earnestness, v. 8. Yea doubtless; q. d. Did I say that I
once looked upon all as loss for Christ. I will speak a bolder word than that,
I count all but loss, dung, filth, that I may win Christ, and be found in him
not having my own Righteousness: and that he speaks of that esteem and value he
had of his present Righteousness, is yet further evident from this, that it was
in reference to a future day, the day of Judgment, that he might be found in
Christ, in that day, not sticking to his own Righteousness. Two things our
Author returns to this:

1. It Is a sufficient Answer to say they need not signify so. I confess for
want of a better the Answer may pass: A bad shift is better than None, and half
a loaf is better than No-bread: but if a Man had a better, it was the sorriest
Answer in the World. I see when men are pressed with express Scripture, and yet
are resolved (cost what will) to adhere to their own Conclusions, it is
advisable to cast about, to turn their thoughts into all shapes imaginable, to
hunt for the extremest possibilities: If a Word, a Phrase, an Expression is but
capable of another sense, let it be probable, or improbable, true or false,
agreeable to the scope of the place or alien, all is a case, something must be
said, that they may not seem to say Nothing; And if they can say it is possible
it may be otherwise (as who cannot) though they do not believe themselves, they
hug themselves for their ready wit, and applaud themselves for grave
Respondents. A little matter will blow away this dust: Let them show where
ever, My Righteousness, is otherwise used, and then let them boast of a bare
possibility. 2. My own Righteousness (says he) can signify no more than that
wherein he placed his Righteousness. I beg his pardon for that. It signifies
more than that wherein he placed his Righteousness whilst a Pharisee; and a
great deal less than that, wherein he placed Righteousness after Conversion, in
order to Justification. But if the Apostle renounced whatever he placed his
Righteousness in, then, either he placed it in Inherent Righteousness, or not;
If not, then how dares our Author place his Righteousness there, where the
Apostle durst not? If he did ever place his Righteousness in it; then here he
openly declares before the World that he Renounces it: But (says our Author)
what necessity is there to understand this of inherent holiness? We have showed
you the Necessity before, and shall do hereafter. An External Righteousness
serves most men's turns very well: not so well neither as he may Imagine. And
this is the Righteousness by which the Pharisees (and amongst the rest St. Paul
whilst he was a Pharisee) expected to be justified; but stay a while. 1. We
have proved that the Apostle not only renounced that Righteousness whatever it
was that he had whilst a Pharisee; but that which was his own at the time when
he made that solemn Renunciation of it: whatever he had attained, or might
possibly attain, all went that he might be found in Christ in the great Day. 2.
The Pharisees were generally bad enough in all Conscience, and he need not make
them worse. It Is a sin we say to belly the Devil; It does not appear that the
Pharisees expected to be Justified before God, by an external obedience only
without sincerity: It was not their Principle, though Hypocrisy (as to many
Individuals) might be their Practice. The Case is frequent before our Eyes, a
Drunkard, a common Swearer, etc. will tell you they Hope to be saved, though
they are wicked; but none durst ever assume the Impudence to expect Salvation
because he was wicked: No, he will repent when he can intend it, and trust to
the general grace of God, and some such reserves, which our
Modern-Pulpit-Drollery has furnished him withal. 3. As to Paul whilst he was a
Pharisee (if we take his own word for it when he was none) he was no Hypocrite,
he everywhere vindicates himself as to that: His Persecuting was his great
Crime, in which he protests his sincerity, Acts 25. 9. I verily thought with my
self that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus: and 1 Timothy
1. 13. he avows he did it ignorantly: He durst appeal to his very Enemies how
he had lived from a Child, Act. 25. 4. My manner of life from my youth know all
the Jews if they would testify: and makes a solemn Protestation before the
Sanhedrin, Act. 23. 1. That he had lived in all good Conscience to that very
day: That others of the Pharisees, were Sober, Conscientious men, I do not at
all question; and the discourse of Paul's Mr. Gamaliel, Act. 5. shows that he
had a great deal more Religion in him than most of those who to carry on a
design rail at them for Hypocrites.

Ay, but (says our Author) what his Righteousness was he tells us, V. 6, 7.
Circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, etc. So that My own
Righteousness which is of the Law, is so far from signifying an inherent
Righteousness, a vital principle of Holiness, that it only signifies an
external Righteousness, which consisted in some external Rites, as
Circumcision, and Sacrifices, or external Privileges, as being of the Seed of
Abraham, or an external Civility and blamelessness of Conversation. This
proceeds upon a double false supposition; 1. That the Apostle renounces nothing
but what he had attained whilst he was a Pharisee. 2. That whatsoever he had
renounced, V. 6, 7. did constitute his Pharisaical Righteousness: For, 1. I
must cut him off Circumcision; that was no part of his own Righteousness, a
privilege it was; but nothing performed by him, and therefore could not expect
Justification by it: unless our Author will grant that he had a spice of the
Doctrine of imputing the Obedience of Another to him for Justification. 2. For
Sacrifices, the Apostle mentions them not, renounces them not; for he
understood too well their use and proper End in the Jewish Church; that they
were their visible Gospel, and did lead to Christ (whom now he owned) though
then he was ignorant of him. The Conscientious and believing use of Sacrifices
might put in for a place in Justifying the Sinner, with better right, than such
Obedience to the Moral Law as man was able in his present state to perfom. 1.
Consider them as mere acts of Obedience, wherein the thing done is not so
considerable, as the subjection of the Conscience to the Authority of God the
Sovereign Lawgiver: which in this Case is most signal, for here is only the
will and pleasure of God for the Reason of that costly, and operose service;
whereas Moral duties are vouched for, by the suffrage of the Light, and Reason
of Nature. 2. Consider them as instituted for their peculiar end, the leading
and conducting of Faith to Christ; and so they far exceed and outstrip any
thing the Moral Law (being become weak through the flesh) could assist the
sinner in; for so they are said, actually to procure pardon of sin, actually to
make Atonement and reconciliation, Lev. 17. 11. I have given you it [the blood]
upon the Altar to make an Atonement for your souls, for it is the Blood that
makes an Atonement for the soul, 2 Chronicles. 29. 24. The Priests killed them [the
Sacrifices] and they made reconciliation with their Blood upon the Altar, to
make an Atonement for All Israel. Now let him show me, where ever Atonement,
Reconciliation, are annexed to the Actual performance of the Moral Law. It is
true that the Original design of the Moral Law was Justification, but not the
Justification of a Sinner; but Man being now become such, the Law is utterly
incapable of reaching it is Primitive end: and it is as true also that Sacrifices
upon their own Account could not supply that defect, but as directing the
sinner to him who is the grand Propitiation, and from whose Death they received
all their virtue and efficacy. 3. As to his being of the Stock of Israel, of
the Seed of Abraham, etc. they might expect some favors thence, but that any
was so far bewitched as to believe that all of the Stock of Israel, and the
Natural Seed of Abraham should be justified, cannot be proved. 4. For external
Civility, and blamelessness of Conversation: It would have gone a great way in
our Authors account at any other time; page 384. he asks the question with some
heat and briskness, what? live a blameless, innocent, honest, smooth life, and
yet live in some sin or other? Paul would have past for a Righteous person upon
his producing the Ticket of a blameless Conversation in that Section, though in
this he is rated at for a Hypocrite, and all that is naught: but whatever Paul
was, or was not whilst a Pharisee, it makes no great matter to the business in
hand, seeing he has so freely and openly disowned, whatever was his own
Righteousness after Conversion, in the matter of Justification before God.

But to Confirm all this (says our Author) (...) must observe a double
Antithesis in the words. We must? what, whether we can or no? whether it be
there to be observed or no? what if there be but (...) single Antithesis in
them? It Is no matter; we must observe a double Antithesis if we will purchase
our peace and quiet: I promise you this Antithesis is a very hard word! Graecum
est, non potest intelligi! And I should as soon choose to swallow Dr. Iacomb's
Conjunction (at which our Author made such a sour face in the beginning of
this Section) as this crabbed Antithesis, much more then a Double Antithesis:
but what is this Double Antithesis? Why (says he) The Righteousness of the Law
is opposed to the Righteousness which is by the Faith of Christ. And my own
Righteousness, opposed to the Righteousness of God. There Is your double
Antithesis! Now (says he) the surest way to understand the meaning of this, is
to examine how these phrases are used in Scripture; but in my mind it will be a
surer, I am sure a more Rational way, to examine first whether indeed there be
such a double Antithesis in the words as he pretends, or whether a single one
will not content the Text? And the surest way to understand this, is to examine
the words themselves. And be found in him not having my own Righteousness which
is of the Law; But that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith. Now if any one can find a double Antithesis, or in
plain English a double Opposition in these words, he must have eyes like a Cat,
which some say, can see as well by Night as by Day, or however as well in the
dark as without light. Not having my own Righteousness which is of the Law.
(...). There Is one member of the Antithesis, where the Righteousness which is
of the Law, is a plain Exegesis (there is another hard-word for you) of my own
Righteousness; and not any thing distinct from it: My own Righteousness which
is of the Law; and then comes the other member of the Antithesis; But that
which is through the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Righteousness which is of God
by Faith. (...): where the repetition of the Article (...) (as every hungry
Graeculist knows) is as much as videlicet. The Righteousness by the Faith of
Christ, namely, or that is to say, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith:
and thus Beza, Non habens meam justitiam (nempe) quae est ex lege; sed eam quae
est per fidem Christi (id est) justitiam [quae est] ex Deo per fidem: who for a
smattering in that Language will not envy our Author? So that nothing could by
the Wit, or Ignorance of Man, have been more groundlesly, absurdly, and
ridiculously invented, than this double Antithesis. And, 1. Let us observe how
ill-favouredly it was contrived. The Text-order is this, My own Righteousness
which is of the Law -- That which is the Faith of Christ (even) the
Righteousness of God by Faith. Now if any man would needs have a double
Antithesis to do him some special service, it should have been laid between my
own Righteousness, and that which is by the Faith of Christ; and then between,
That of the Law, and the Righteousness of God by Faith: but on the contrary our
Author without any provocation, without any umbrage of a pretense from the Text
(like old Jacob crossing his hands) has laid them in saltire; My own
Righteousness, to the Righteousness of God, and the Righteousness of the Law,
to the Righteousness by the Faith of Christ. 2. Supposing all that he can
desire, how does this double Antithesis confirm that which he contrived it to
confirm, viz. that my own Righteousness signifies an external Righteousness
only? It has been an old saying, that one absurdity being granted many more
will easily follow. And yet so hard is this Gentleman put to it, that granting
him a many absurdities, he cannot make one follow: but yet the Reader shall
hear what he would serve out of this double Antithesis.

(1.) The Righteousness of the Law (as you have already heard) is an external
Righteousness, which consists in Washings, Purifications, Sacrifices, or an
external conformity to the Moral Law: So we have beard indeed once and again
affirmed, but never confirmed: The double Antithesis was brought to confirm it,
and that must confirm the double Antithesis. I desire therefore once for all to
hear where the Righteousness of Law, the Moral Law, is said to consist in
Externals: The Righteousness of the Law is that Righteousness which the Law
requires; but the Law requires an internal Conformity of heart to our outward
Actions, and of both to the Law of God; therefore the Righteousness of the Law
consists also in an internal Conformity. The Law condemns none that bring the
Righteousness of the Law, but the Law condemns those that bring only an
external Conformity* therefore external Conformity is not the Righteousness of
the Law: and from hence we may be abundantly satisfied what was that
Righteousness of his own, which the Apostle renounces. That which was his own
Righteousness, that he renounces; but an internal inherent Righteousness was
his own Righteousness, therefore that he renounces. The Minor I prove, The
Righteousness of the Law was his own Righteousness (Not having my own
Righteousness that is of the Law) but the Righteousness of the Law was an
inherent internal Righteousness; therefore his own Righteousness was an
inherent, and internal Righteousness. The Minor I prove, That which the Law
prescribes, and commands is the Righteousness of the Law; but that which the
Law prescribes and commands, is an internal and inherent Righteousness, and
therefore the Righteousness of the Law is such a Righteousness. That which God
requires, his Law requires; but God requires Truth in the inward parts, whether
in Ceremonials or Morals; therefore the Law requires the same: And is it not
now an unparalleld piece of Nonsense to call that the Righteousness of the
Law, which both the Law and the Author of it do a^hor? External Conformity
alone, is so far from being the Righteousness of the Law, that it is the
Unrighteousness of the Law: But hence the Reader will begin to get a glimmering
into the true Reason that necessitated our Author to study this device of a
double Antithesis, viz. that Paul's Righteousness which he ^nounced, might not
seem to be the Righteousness of the Law which God required (though not in order
to Justification;) for if his own Righteousness be the Righteousness of the
Law, and he so peremptorily renounces his own, then he renounces the
Righteousness of the Law also; and what that is, this one Consideration is
enough to convince us of: That the Law requires an absolute, perfect, entire
Conformity of the whole Man to it is demands, and claims, without which no man
can expect to be Justified by it. And seeing such is the Case with poor
impotent Man, that he cannot answer it is demands and claims, he can never
reasonably expect it should do him that service: but now see the frailty of our
Authors memory, for just above he told us, the surest way to understand the
meaning of this, was to consider how these Phrases are used in Scripture; and
yet when he undertakes to give us the true meaning of this Phrase ( The
Righteousness of the Law) he cannot afford to give us one single Scripture to
lead us into the true meaning of it.

(2.) The Righteousness by the Faith of Christ (says he) is an internal
Righteousness: Oh but that should have been proved, soundly proved, not begg'^
or borrowed, much less stolen, for it is the main thing in Question; and of all
things in the Syllogism, we should not stand to Courtesy for the Conclusion:
why (says he) it is called being born again, becoming new Creatures, rising
again with Christ, etc. But still proof! proof is wanting! for we think that
those expressions do not denote that Righteousness whereby we are constituted
Just, in the sight of God; but Holiness, and Sanctification of Nature, which
the Gospel evidently distinguishes from that Righteousness whereby we are
Justified; but let him have line enough. Hence (says he) The Apostle tells us,
that the Reason why God sent Christ into the World in our Nature, to die as a
Sacrifice for our sins, and to confirm the Covenant; was, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us (N. B.) who walk not after
the flesh but after the Spirit. Well! what is that Righteousness of the Law
Christ came to fulfill? why (says he) Learnedly from Chrysostom, (...), the
Righteousness of the Law, that is, (...). That which the Law was designed to
work in them; but was too weak to effect it by Reason of the greater power and
prevalency of sin; i. e. the inward holiness, and purity of mind, which was
represented by those externalCeremonies: Most incomparable! and very like
himself! It was but the other side of the leaf, that he told us, that the
Righteousness of the Law consisted in Washings, Purifications, Sacrifices, or
an external Conformity to the Moral Law; but now the Case is altered, and (...)
is grown (...), inward purity, and holiness of mind. It may not be amiss to
call these things over again: 1. If the Righteousness of the Law be only an
external Conformity (as he told us just before) then Christ came into the World
to fulfill in us only Ceremony, and Hypocrisy: for he tells us just now from
the Apostle, Romans 8. 3, 4. God sent Christ into the world, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. Or, 2. If the Righteousness
of the Law, be inward holiness and purity of mind; then St. Paul who rejects
the Righteousness of the Law, in the matter of Justification before God;
rejects also inward purity and holiness of mind for that purpose: but whether
we are to believe, page 264. or page 265. as the honesterof the two, I cannot
tell, nor am much concerned at present. 3. If it be true, that the
Righteousness of the Law, be that inward purity of mind which the Law was
designed to work in us, then what is become of that Antithesis which he coined
between the Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness by the Faith of
Christ? I am very serious, and desire to be resolved; for he tells us here,
that the Righteousness of the Law, is (...), i. e. the inward holiness and
purity of mind; and then tells us immediately after, that the design of the
Gospel is to work that inward holiness and purity: Now why St. Paul should
renounce inward holiness (which was the Righteousness of the Law) to attain
inward purity (which is the Righteousness of the Gospel) is to me a Mystery as
deep as any of those I have met withal in your Systematical Divines. To shut up
this point, The Righteousness of the Law, is that which the Law requires; and
his friend Dr. Iacomb, has furnished him with such a Syncretism of Learned Men,
as may cut his Comb, and spoil his Crowing over his Adversary. Significat eam
rectitudinem quae praecipitur in lege, P. Mart. Iustitia quam lex exigebat,
Vatab. Totum quod lex praecipit, A. Lap. (...), ipsa legis praecepta, Perer.
Iustitia legis, est justitia quam lex praecipit, Estius. Implere justum legis,
est totum quod lex praecipit efficere, Tolet. Ut justificatio legis, id est, ut
justitia quam lex praescribit and exigit, impleretur, Stap. Ut adimpleret opus
praeceptorum legis, Verse. Aethiop. Ut nos impleremus omnia quae in lege Mosis,
and per se honesta sunt, Grot. (...), is any thing that God has thought meet
to appoint or command his People, Dr. Hammond. And now for to divert his
Reader, he has sprung us new game: but I shall adjourn the Consideration of
what immediately follows, that we may not be bewildred and lost in a wood; and
shall fall in with him at p. 273. where he reassumes the present Subject. Thus
y^u see (says he) how the Apostle opposes the Righteousness of the Law, and the
Righteousness of Faith; not as an Inherent and Personal Righteousness to an
Imputed Righteousness; but as an External and Ritual, to an Inherent and
Substantial Righteousness: but we have seen no such matter as yet, and do
believe we are not like to see it. And the rather because he has thrown in a
very suspicious word that would make any one think, that though he sets a good
Face upon the Matter, yet he has little confidence in the Truth of his own
Notions. The Truth is (lays he) The Righteousness of the Law, and of Works, in
the NewTestament signifies only an External Righteousness, which cannot please
God. Now I began to think thus with my self: Does the Righteousness of the Law
signify one thing in the New Testament, and another in the Old Testament? Does
it signify a real Inherent Substantial Righteousness in the Old, and a Ritual
External Righteousness in the New? Sincerity in the one, and Hypocrisy and
Ceremony in the other? this is very unaccountable! Surely (thought I) when the
Apostle argues with Jews, or Judaizing Christians, he speaks in their Dialect,
speaks to their Capacity, speaks that he may be understood, speaks ad idem.
They that had read Ps. 119. 144. The Righteousness of thy Testimonies [of thy
Law] is everlasting, would wonder to hear the Apostle speak against the
Righteousness of the Law: but alas, he only equivocated, and had a mental
Reservation in his Sleeve, and understood all the while Ceremony and
hypocrisy: But this is a Riddle, which because our Author has made of his own
Mother-wit, he is the fittest Man alive to interpret it.

(3) His Second Antithesis is between my own Righteousness, and the
Righteousness of God; and he is considering with himself in what sense they are
opposed. But there is no great difficulty in this, (says he) for the Apostle
himself tells us, that by his own Righteousness he means the Righteousness of
the Law; and by the Righteousness of God, the Righteousness of Faith: and
therefore he will give this the gentle wipe, and away: But now he has quite
spoiled the Humor of the double Antithesis; for, if by his own Righteousness,
he means the Righteousness of the Law, and by the Righteousness of God, the
Righteousness of Faith; then there is but one single Antithesis: between his own
Righteousness which is of the Law, (on the one part) and the Righteousness by
the Faith of Christ, even the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, (on the
other part:) but at these rates he might have given us, a treble, quadruple,
sextuple, Antithesis, and have rung as many changes, when his hand was once in,
upon two Bells, as others can do upon six. The Apostles Words indeed were
clear, very clear, till our Author found it necessary to obscure them, to
deprave the Truth, and conciliate some small reverence to error, to which two
Heads I foresaw from the first, his whole Discourse might be reduced. And thus
much we are secured of, That the Apostle has repudiated his own Righteousness
from any concern in justification; and that we may not doubt what that was, he
tells us, it is that of the Law. What the Righteousness of the Law signifies is
evident, that which always bore that Name; that which the Law commands, and
prescribes, viz. An exact Conformity to the Law of God in Spirit, Soul, and
Body, so far as it is attainable or not attainable. He assures us next what he
owns and adheres to, viz. The Righteousness of Christ, which is also called,
The Righteousness of God. He further acquaints us, how we come to be interessed
in this Righteousness, and that is by Faith; and that we may not ignorantly or
wilfully mistake Faith for the Doctrine of Faith; he assures us that it is by
Believing, by which we obtain this Righteousness. Romans 3. 22. The Righteousness
which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe.

To shut up his learned Exercitation, or scholastical Dissertation, or Diatriba
of Antitheses, our Author will favor us with a Reason, nay, with an obvious
and the most obvious Reason, why this Righteousness of the Law is called their
own Righteousness; because (forsooth) this Legal Righteousness was a way of
their own choosing, not of God's Appointment. Now here he most falsely supposes,
that by the Righteousness of the Law is only meant a Righteousness made up of
the Works of the Ceremonial Law: but I think something has been offered to dash
that fancy out of countenance. I am in haste, and entreat our Author to accept
of short answers: 1. God has not appointed a Righteousness* made up out of any
observances of the Moral Law, to be that Righteousness wherein Sinners shall
stand justified before him: If any will demand Justification thereby, God will
demand exact and perfect Conformity. If therefore Sinners will chase this way,
it is their own Righteousness; and it is time to give it a bill of divorce, God
has not appointed it. 2. External Washings, External Conformity, etc. were no
Righteousness at all, much less the Righteousness of the Law, that which it
required to form a Righteousness; and therefore choose it, or not choose it, this
is nothing to the purpose: The Apostle renounces his own Righteousness, which
is the Righteousness of the Law. And this is further evident from Romans 10. 3.
(which our Author quotes, but miserably perverts.) For they being ignorant of
Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have
not submitted to the Righteousness of God. Here is then the same Antithesis
again, between their own Righteousness, (that of the Law) and the Righteousness
of God, (which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ); and the opposition is so
direct, and diametrical, that 'twas impossible to establish their own, but they
must shake off all subjection to Gods Righteousness. The Question then will be,
Whether we are to be justified by a Legal, or an Evangelical Righteousness? And
to this our Author agrees in words; but his Words intend quite another thing
from the Truth: For by the Law he understands the Law of Moses: and let that
pass too for once. But then by the Law of Moses he understands only the
Ceremonial Law, though sometimes he is content to take in External Acts of
Conformity to the Moral Law: and thus by a Legal Righteousness, or the
Righteousness of the Law, he understands one made up of External Observations
only, wherein the Apostle has clearly determined against him; to whom therefore
from his partial Judgment Seat. I shall appeal, v. 5, 6. For Moses describes
the Righteousness of the Law, that the Man that does these things shall live in
them; from whence I argue against our Author: That Law whose Righteousness
Moses describes, the Apostle excludes from having any place in Justification,
but it is the Moral Law whose Righteousness Moses describes; therefore it is
the Moral Law, which the Apostle excludes from having any place in
Justification. The Major is evident from the Connection of the Apostle's Words,
v. 3. -- They have not submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God. v. 4.
For Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes;
for Moses describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, etc. The Minor I
prove thus: That Law which says, He that does these things shall live in them,
is that Law whose Righteousness Moses prescribes; but it is the Moral Law,
which says, He that does these things shall live in them: therefore it is the
Moral Law, whose Righteousness Moses describes. The Major is the Apostles own,
v. 5. the Minor I prove from Lev. 18. 5. You shall keep my Statutes and
Judgments, which if a Man do he shall live in them. v. 6. None of you shall
approach to any that is near of kin to him. 7. The nakedness of thy Father or
of thy Mother thou shall not uncover, etc. from whence I argue thus: That Law
which forbids incest, is the Moral Law; but that Law which says, He that does
these things shall live in them, is the Law which forbids incest: therefore
that Law, that says, He that does these things shall live in them, is the
Moral Law. Again I argue thus from Gal. 3. 10, 11. That Law which has the
Curse annexed to it for noncontinuance in all things commanded therein, is the
Law which the Apostle excludes from having any place in the Justification of a
Sinner; but it is the Moral Law which has that Curse annexed to it: therefore
it is the Moral Law which the Apostle excludes from having any place in the
Justification of a Sinner. The Major is evident from the place, v. 10. As many
as are of the Works of the Law are under the Curse; for it is written, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things, which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them. v. 11. But that no man is justified by the Law in the sight
of God is evident. The Minor I prove from Deuteronomy. 27. 26. from whence the Apostle
quotes it. Cursed be he that continues not in all the Words of this Law to do
them. That Law which forbids making Images, which forbids setting light by
Father or Mother, which forbids removing Landmarks, which forbids causing the
Blind to go out of his way, which forbids perverting of judgment, incest,
sodomy, is the Law which has the Curse annexed to it; but it is the Moral Law
which forbids all these things: Therefore it is the Moral Law which has this
Curse annexed to it. I cannot foresee what our Author will return to all this,
but his old tawdry Answer. That indeed the Apostle does exclude the Moral Law,
but that is only with respect to External Obedience, without Internal
Conformity: But it is evident that the Apostle excludes the Law it self, and
therefore it must be highly impertinent to enquire what Deeds of the Law are
excluded, when the Law it self is excluded: But yet for his further
satisfaction, I shall bestow an Argument upon that also.

Those Acts of Obedience to which the Promise of Life in the Covenant of Works
originally was most directly made, are excluded from Justification: but to
inward acts of Obedience the Promise of Life was most directly made; and
therefore inward acts of Obedience are excluded from Justification. The Apostle
has secured the Major, Romans 10. 3, 5, 6. They have not submitted themselves to
the Righteousness of God: For Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law,
that he that does these things shall live in them. The Minor is evident, for
God never made a Promise of Life to External Acts of Obedience, without inward
Conformity of Soul to them, and of both to the Law of God. Again, Those Acts,
the want whereof mainly exposes the Sinner to the Curse, are excluded from
Justification; but the want of Internal Acts of Obedience mainly exposes the
Sinner to the Curse: therefore internal Acts are excluded from Justification.
And the true Reason why these inward Acts are excluded from Justification, is
not because they are not well-pleasing to God; but because the case is thus
with impotent fallen men, that he cannot reach the (...), the utmost tittle of
what the Law requires, and theresore must fall under the severe doom annexed to
the violation of the Law in the least punctilio, unless God had provided a
better Righteousness than that of his own Obedience.

After all that has or may be said in the Case, If any one will be so civil and
ingenuous, as out of his pure goodnature to yield our Author a few small
inconsiderable things: As, 1. That there is a double Antithesis, where there is
but one. And 2. That a man's own Righteousness is another thing than the
Righteousness of the Law. 3. That the Righteousness which is by the Faith of
Christ, is distinct from the Righteousness of God. 4. That by the Righteousness
of the Law, no more is intended, than Ceremony and Hypocrisy. 5. That a man's
own Righteousness is so called, not because it is his own, but because he
places his Righteousness in it. and 6thly, one poor sorry triffle more, That
all he asserts is mere Gospel; grant him but this, and he will prove all the
rest with ease: but though I would go a great way to save his longing, yet this
is so large a boon, that it deserves mature advice and serious deliberation.

There are yet a few odd things in arrear, some notice whereof I promised to
take; and seeing we are a little at leisure, I shall do him justice. And first,
let us consider what work he has made with that Text, Romans 8. 3, 4. For what
the Law could not do in that it was weak-through the Flesh, God sending his own
Son, in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the Flesh,
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Now our Authors Paraphrase (as well as we can
scramble it together from broken fragments, and odd shreds of his Discourse) is
thus much. The Ceremonial Law being designed of God to work in the Jews inward
holiness, and purity of Mind, which was represented by Circumcision, Washings,
Purifications, and Sacrifices; it was found too weak to effect this design, and
therefore God sent Christ into the World to die as a Sacrifice for our Sins, to
confirm and seal the New Covenant with his Blood; to work in us that Internal
Holiness and Purity, which is the Perfection and Accomplishment of the
Figurative and Typical Righteousness of the Law: which he gives us in other
words, p. 267. What the Law could not do, i. e. govern our Minds and Passions;
this God effected by sending Christ into the World to publish the Gospel to us,
and to confirm all those great Promises and Threatenings contained in it, with
his own Blood. This is indeed a parcel of excellent Divinity, but that it is
wholly destitute of truth: For 1. he supposes, That that Law, whose weakness
the Apostle assigns as the Reason of Gods sending his Son; was only the
Ceremonial Law; the Falsehood whereof I shall demonstrate (if that be not too
great a word for any man's Mouth besides his own) by and by. 2. He insinuates
that the whole of Christ's being a Sacrifice for our Sins, lay in confirming the
New Covenant; the Falsehood whereof, the next Section will give us direct
occasion to evince. 3. He makes the whole business of the Ceremonial Law, to
represent inward purity, and (perhaps) to effect it: whereas though some of the
Ceremonies did represent inward purity; yet the main of their design was to
lead to Jesus Christ: and particularly Sacrifices which represented that
Atonement and Reconciliation which Christ in due time should make with God on
the behalf of Sinners. Col. 2. 17. The Law had a shadow of good things to come,
but the Body is of Christ. 4. He scandalously charges it upon God, that he
appointed a means to an end; which was found too weak to reach his End: As if
God must try conclusions, and make experiments, before he could be certain
whether his design would take, and his appointments reach their End. 5. He
renders Christ's Coming into the World unnecessary; for what though the
Ceremonial Law could not effect that inward Purity, yet I hope God had means to
effect it, unless he will say all the World till Christ's Coming were
whited-Walls, and painted-Sepulchres: For what was become of the Moral Law all
this while? had it no power to effect that End? 6. He tells us p. 269. That the
Reason why the Law of Moses was abrogated, was because it could not make men
good: But then the Moral Law was either able to make men good, or it was not;
If it was not, why was not that abrogated also? If it was able, and had its
effect, then what need of Christ to come into the World to effect that which
the Moral Law was able to effect without him? But the true Reason why the
Ceremonial Law is expired, is because the Lord Jesus Christ has answered and
fulfilled all that is represented. When the Sun is risen, the Shadows fly away;
there was no formal abrogation either made or necessary to be made; it expired
of course when Christ had made good whatever the Ceremonies had exhibited to
their Faith. 7. He tells that Christ came to work in us that inward Purity,
represented by the Ceremonial Law: but for all his good-morrows, when he is
thoroughly catechifed: Christ's working is no more than those sufficient
arguments and motives, to excite their own wits, whereby they might work it
themselves; and I cannot tell whether he will deny that the Jews had sufficient
motives, and arguments for that end under their Law. 8. He contradicts himself
(which is no news); for whereas he had said p. 265. That the Law was designed
to work in them inward purity: He says p. 269. That the Law nursed them up in a
ritual, and external Religion, and taught them to serve God in the Letter, by
Circumcision, and Sacrifices, or an external Conformity to the Letter of the
Law. And then I hope God could not justly blame them, much less damn them for
being Hypocrites, if they did as well as, and no better, than his own Law
taught them: Nay he adds, That the Gospel of Christ alone teaches us to worship
God with the Spirit, and to offer a reasonable Sacrifice to him. This is
strange Doctrine! but it is less matter for that if it be but true. But was not
God always a Spirit, and did he not always teach his People to worship him with
their Spirits? How osten does God complain that they drew nigh him with their
Lips, when their Hearts were far from him? which he could not well do, if he
taught them no better: It Is a Riddle to me that these Ceremonies should
represent inward purity, and yet not teach it; when they had no way to teach
that Purity, but by representing it. It Is true, the Gospel teaches us to
worship God in the Spirit, in opposition to Ceremonies; but God always taught
his People to worship him with their Spirits in opposition to Hypocrisy. Psalm.
51. 6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts. Did God institute a Law, a Law
so chargeable and burdensome, and all to teach his People to worship like
Parrots, to mumble over their Mattens, and like Puppets to make an outward
noise, without a rational Principle to guide it? If they had no reasonable
Service, why were they reasonable Creatures? But a little more reverence of the
Divine Majesty would confute a great deal of such blasphemy. Let us now
seriously consider the Text: and 1. It will be necessary to enquire what that
Law is, whose weakness the Apostle assigns as the reason of God's sending his
own Son? And for all the Authors presumptions, I am well satisfied it was not
the Ceremonial Law: for what if the Ceremonial had proved weak? what if it had
been resolved into its first nothing, the Moral stood still where it always
did? and what need of Christ's Coming into the World upon that account? There
was a time when the Ceremonial Law was not created, and what if it had been
again repealed and annihilated, things had been but in statu quo: But that the
Law here mentioned is the Moral Law, the Connection of the Apostle's Words, his
Premises out of which he draws his Conclusion, will abundantly manifest. In
Chap. 7. v. 7, He tells us he had not known sin except the Law had said, Thou
shall not covet: But sin taking occasion from that Law, wrought in him all
manner of Concupiscence, v. 8. Nevertheless he clears the Law. v. 12. The
Commandment was holy and just, and good; had an intrinsic goodness,
righteousness in it; and this he calls v. 25. The Law of God. Now the Apostle
having said v. 10. That this Commandment (of the Moral Law) which was unto life
in (God's Original Institution) he found to be unto death: Nevertheless, Chap.
8. v. 1. he assures us, That there is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus; and he shows how Sinners are brought from under that
Condemnation, v. 3. What the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
Flesh, God sending his own Son, etc. (...); That impossible thing of the Law:
where the Apostle adding the Article [(...)] intimates that he spoke of that
Law whereof he had made mention before, which was the Moral Law; that Law which
says Thou shall not covet; that Law which is holy, just, good; that Law, which
is eminently the Law of God, and not that which carries the name of the Law of
Moses. (2) But what was that (...); the impossible thing of this Law? There are
many things that this Law cannot do: It can lay a Command upon the Creature,
but it cannot give strength to obey the Command; it can offer the Promises of
Life to the obedient, and shake the Threatening over the Conscience of the
Rebellious; but meeting with depraved Nature, it cannot redintegrate lapsed
Nature; it can wound, but it cannot heal; it can condemn but it cannot absolve
a Sinner: But yet there seems to be some one thing which above all other
impossibles, is absolutely impossible for this Law to do for man; and that is
to justify him before God: For so he had said, and proved Chap. 3. 20. By the
Deeds of that Law shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight. But (3.) How comes
the Law to be so weak? for certainly it had once such a Power in its primitive
appointment, and was fitted to give life to the Obedient; for we must not dare
to think, that the Wise God ever appointed a Law or the meanest thing in the
World, but it was fitted to reach all those Ends which in his Holy and Secret
Counsel he designed it to: How then comes this Law, the Moral Law, to be so
weak? If any of the Sons of Adam can produce an Obedience every way such as the
Law demands, it is able to give Life Eternal still: The Apostle answers us,
It Is weak through the Flesh: it was not made weak, but became weak through our
weakness. The Law is as strong to reward still, if we were but as strong to
obey as ever. But (4.) How did Christ remedy, and help us in this desperate
Case? for* if we cannot live by the Law, we must die by the Law. The Apostle
resolves us; God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, (and in the
truth of humane Flesh) and for sin, condemned sin in the Flesh: (...); That is,
as an offering for Sin: So near is the relation between the Sacrifice and the
Sin that is laid upon it, that they are called the same. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ
was made sin: that is, he was made an Offering for sin. For so it is expressed,
Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin. The Greek
therefore, (...), does but imitate the Hebrew, (...), which signifies both the
Sin, and the Sin-Offering: thus then Christ supplied the Laws weakness; he who
knew no sin, was made sin, and as he was made sin for us, so are we made the
Righteousness of God in him. Christ could no otherwise be a Sinner, but by
imputation, nor we otherwise Righteous than by the Imputation of his
Righteousness. As the Offenders guilt under the Law could not otherwise be laid
upon the head of the Typical Sacrifice, but by God's Imputing it; so neither
could our Sin otherwise lie upon the Head of Christ, but by his own voluntary
Susception, and thereupon God's Righteous Imputation; but these things we shall
meet with professedly in the next Section.

There is a Metaphorical expression still behind, which our Author cannot
digest; whereupon when he has thrown away a little, and truly but a little wit,
he will ease us of the tediousness of this Discourse. The expression which
sticks so hard with him is that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 8. The unsearchable
Riches of Christ. Now though at another time, I would try a fair fall with him,
whether this (and many others which he thinks it enough for their reproach to
call so) be a Metaphorical Expression or no; yet I have not leisure at present
to attend that Service: for my part, I think that riches is more properly, and
literally predicated of that Grace, that is treasured up in the Lord Jesus,
than of all that paltry trash which has got the vogue in the Dialect of deluded
Worldlings; but I am weary, and shall therefore only make a defensive War of
it. What is then this (...), this unsearchable Riches of Christ? Why, even here
these Men cannot agree, for some are zealous for it, that (whatever is meant
by unsearchable Riches,) yet by Christ is meant Christ himself; others,
(amongst whom our Author professes his Name) by the unsearchable Riches of
Christ, understand the Gospel which St. Paul preached to the Gentiles: And is
it not a small thing (that he should stand so stiffly upon it) for us to
entreat; 1. That the Glorious Person of Christ, his Offices, his Natures, his
Obedience, his Life, his Death, with their proper Springs and Causes, their
special ends and designs, might come in for a good share of the Gospel? But 2.
The Gospel preached is the opening of the Treasures of Wisdom, Knowledge, and
Grace that are in Christ. Those Riches are, or were unsearchable, as they lay
hid and deep in the Counsels and Purposes of the Father and the Son; so far as
they are revealed in the Gospel, they are not unsearchable. But what is meant
by Riches? why, Riches (says he) signify only an abundance. This it is to be
wise above the common sort of ordinary Mortals; most men I dare say, have
hitherto thought that Riches carry in their first Notion, preciousness as well
as plenty: A handful of Gold is more truly Riches, than a heap of Pebbles; but
then what are unsearchable Riches? why, they are so called, because the Gospel
is not a narrow and stinted thing, is not confined to a particular nation, as
the Law was, but is offered to all mankind, etc. I shall not cope with him in
his Grammatical skill, for therein he is unmatchable: but (...) has formerly
signified that which cannot be traced, that whereof we have no footsteps: and
such are the Riches of Christ, such the Counsels of God, to reconcile the World
to himself, by his dear Son; A Mystery whose knowledge depends upon Divine
Revelation, whereof we have not the least track in nature, no more than of a
Ship in the Sea, an Eagle in the Air, or a Serpent upon a Rock: The Light of
Nature is Dark, the Tongue of the Creature Dumb, the Book of the Creation, a
great Blank; and he alone that was from eternity in the Bosom of the Father,
whose Name is Wonderful Counselor, was able to reveal and give us notice of
them.

One small brush at Mr. Brooks will conclude this Section, for it is impossible
for our Author to conclude without reviling; and what evil has this good Man
done? Oh he has spoken a little too prodigally in commendation of Christ, and
it is a standing rule, that whoever will give our Savior one good Word, shall
purchase two bad ones at our Author's Hands for his pains. Now Mr. Brooks (you
must know) had said, thinking no man no harm I dare say; That Christ is
generally rich, rich in Houses, Lands, in Gold, Silver, in all Temporals as
well as Spirituals; with many more friendly expressions of the Fullness and
Preciousness of the Grace that is in Christ: To which our Author returns a
solid though short Confutation: That the Son of Man bad not a place whereon to
lay his head: And is not Mr. Brooks a rash and unadvised Man think you, to rant
it so high in extolling his Riches, and to ascribe to him such vast revenues
and possessions: But let us be Charitable, and put a favorable construction
upon these dangerous words; perhaps, they are not so rank poison as they seem
to be: 1. What if Mr. Brooks speaks not of what Christ was when he appeared in
the form of a Servant; but what he now is since he has reassumed his original
Glory, and as Mediator has all power in Heaven and Earth put into his hands;
and methinks, it is no such flagitious Crime to assert that Christ has the
disposal of all outward things for the good of his Church: But I correct my
self when I remember my Author has told us, p. 162. That Christ has left the
visible and external Conduct and Government of the Church to Bishops and
Pastors; and therefore it may be presumed also he has left the visible
Revenues, and Temporalties to their disposal also; for it is equitable, that the
Maintenance should go along with the work and therefore those Houses and Lands,
the Palaces, the Tithes, the Glebe, the Gold, the Silver, which Mr. B. fancies
are in Christ's hands, are entrusted where they shall be converted to better
uses. 2. What if Christ for a season that he might feel our Infirmities, and
accommodate himself to that dispensation under which his wonderful
Condescension had put him, did wave the use of many things he had a Right to:
Yet 1. He had (...) the Title, when he forbore (...) the Use of those things.
2. He used his Right too for others, when he would not assert it for himself;
He was Rich even then, when he for our sakes he became poor, 2. Cor. 8, 9.
(...); let him not be reproached for his Love, pardon him that wrong! 3. That
Christ had not where to lay his head; signifies no more than that he had no
fixed habitation at all times, but generally went up and down doing good,
healing all manner of Diseases, Preaching the everlasting Gospel; for he had a
House to hide his head in, Ioh. 1. 39. They came and saw where he dwelt: and a
Pillow too to lay his head on, Mark. 4. 38. and could sleep securely in the
midst of the Storm: he wanted not conveniences for his life, but was so
swallowed up of his Fathers work, that he accounted it his Meat and Drink to do
his will; and therefore I hope Mr. B. will outlive this assault and battery
many a fair day. And now all that I can instruct my self or my Reader in from
this Discourse is, That if Mr. Brooks or any of his Brethren shall assert the
plainest Truth that ever the Sun shone upon, our Author by the Laws of his
Society is bound to oppose it.

SECT. 3. Concerning the Nature of our Union to Christ, Whereby, we are
entitled to all his fullness, Righteousness, etc.
WHen the Arm is in danger of being lost by a Gangraen, it were unseasonable
Diligence to attend the Cure of a Cut-finger. When that Vessel in which all our
common Concerns are embarked is ready to sink, it would be unpardonable folly
in the the Passengers to study the security of their particular Cabbins: like
those whom the great Orator laughs at, for presuming their Gardens, Orchards,
and private Walks would be indemnified in the general Ruin of the City. In
this Section our Author lays his Axe to the Root of the Christian Religion;
leaving therefore particular persons to shift for themselves, The Righteousness
of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death, with that influence that they
have upon our acceptance with God, call for defense. Many have been infamous
for horrid Murders: Cain is upon Record for a Fra^ricide, Saul for a Suicide,
Herod's Ambition was to have been a Deicide; but this last Age seems to have
outdone all in an Attempt to Murder the Death of Christ it self: As if,
because Christ by his Death had destroyed him that had the power of Death,
these Men would avenge the Devils Quarrel, and become his second, hoping they
may one day triumph over it and sing, O Death we will be thy Death! In Page
320. Our Author propounds this great Question: What Influence the Sacrifice of
Christ's Death, and the Righteousness of his Life, have upon our acceptance
with God? And he gives us both a Reason, why he moves the Question, and an
Answer to it. 1. The Reason why he moves this Question upon it, Lest any should
suspect that his Design is to lessen the Grace of God, or to disparage the
Merits, and Righteousness of Christ. Now I would make a question upon it;
Whether his Answer to the Question will probably heal us of our suspicions, or
rather beget Iealousies where there were none, and heighten those already
conceived into violent presumptions, if not plain demonstrations, that such is
his Design? 2. His Answer to the Question is this: All that I can find in
Scripture about this, is: That to this we owe the Covenant of Grace: That God
being well pleased with the Obedience of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of
his Death, for his sake entered into a New Covenant with Mankind, wherein he
promises Pardon of sin, and Eternal Life to those who believe, and obey the
Gospel. This Answer contains three things: 1. A Description of the Covenant of
Grace. 2. An Assertion that this Covenant is owing to the Sacrifice of Christ's
Death, and the Righteousness of his Life. 3. a Supposition, that the
Righteousness and Sacrifice of Christ, has no other Influence upon our
Acceptance with God, but that for his sake he entered into such a Covenant (as
he has here described) with Mankind.

(1.) His Description of the Covenant is this: A promise of the Pardon of sin,
and Eternal Life to those who believe and obey the Gospel. A Description so
liable to exceptions, that it describes neither the whole of the Covenant, nor
a New Covenant, nor (upon the matter) any Covenant at all.

. 1. This Description gives us little, very little of the true Covenant of
Grace: for (1.) though he thinks to put us off with a promise of Pardon and
Life to those who believe and obey; the true Covenant of Grace has given us a
Promise of that Faith, whereby we may believe, and of that New-heart whereby we
are enabled to obey the Gospel. And first we have a Promise of the right Faith
made to us in the true Covenant, Ioh. 6. 37. All that the Father gives me
shall come to me, and him that comes to me I will in no-wise cast out, Ephesians. 2.
8. By Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God. And lest it should be Answered, that Faith is indeed God's gift as
all other things are, wherein the Common Providence of God concurs with Humane
industry: The Apostle, as if aware of such a petty Answer, has laid in a Reply
ready, chapter 1. v. 19. That they who believe, do so by the exceeding greatness of
God's power, even according to the working of his Mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Secondly, we have a direct,
and express Promise too of that New-heart from which we give to God
New-obedience; nay, of that New-obedience it self, which proceeds from the
New-heart, or renewed Nature: Ezekiel. 36. A new heart also will I give you, and a
new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the heart of Stone out
of your Flesh, and will give you a heart of Flesh: (there is the new Heart.) and
v. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them: (there is new obedience) thus also,
Heb. 8. 10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their minds, and
write them in their hearts etc. wherein it is easy to observe: 1. That this
New Covenant was founded upon God's free Grace, v. 9. They continued not in my
Covenant (the old Covenant) and I regarded them not, says the Lord: They were
a Covenant Breaking people, deserved utter rejection, yet God will make
another, a better, a New Covenant with them. 2 That the promises of this
Covenant were purely Spiritual; writing his Laws in their minds and hearts. 3.
The parties* Covenanting, God and his Israel; not all and every individual Son
of Adam: But (2.) This Description gives us very little of the true Covenant of
Grace; here is a Promise of Pardon and Life to them who believe and obey; but
perseverance in Faith and Obedience, is left to the desultory and lubricous
power of free will: whereas in the true Covenant of Grace, there is an
undertaking that the Covenant shall be immutable, both on God's part and the
Believers, Jer. 32. 38, 40. They shall be my people and I will be their God;
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them to do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts that they
shall not depart from me. There are but two things that we can possibly Imagine
should make the Covenant fall short of perpetuity, either God's turning away
from his people, or (which is only to be suspected) their turning away from
their God: Against both of these God has made sufficient Provision. 1. God has
promised that he will not turn away from them to do them good. 2. He has
promised that they shall not depart from him, and to fix and determine their
backsliding Natures, he has promised to put his fear into their hearts, which
is the great preservative against Apostasy.

. 2. As it describes not the whole of the Covenant, so it describes not the
Nature of a New Covenant. The Gospel Covenant may be called a New Covenant,
either in opposition to the Old Covenant of Works; or the old Administration of
the Covenant of Grace: Now, 1. This Covenant which he has here described is no
new Covenant in opposition to the Old-Covenant of works. The Covenant which God
made with Adam promised Life upon condition of Obedience; Now the Commands
which God gave to Adam, were as easy as those which are now given to all
Mankind: and much easier too, if we consider, first; That he had more natural
strength to obey and keep them, and as for supernatural strength, our Author
will allow us none, unless by a desperate Catachresis we will call Moral
Arguments so; which to a Creature dead in trespasses and sins, signify just
nothing, without special power from on high, to render them efficacious, which
neither will be allowed us. And Secondly, we are told that Christ has added to
the Moral Law, which is to lay more Load on those who were before overcharged;
so that (as he makes Covenants) Adam's was much the better Covenant of the two:
But he has wisely shuffled in a Promise of the Pardon of Sin, which may seem to
give his Covenant a pre-eminence above that of Adam: But that will not mend the
matter; both because it is better to have no sin in our Natures than such a
Remedy, better to have no Wound than such a Plaster, and also because the
Promise of Pardon is suspended upon the condition of Faith and Obedience, which
without supernaturally real influx of immediate Divine Power reduces the
promise to an impossibility of performance. 2. This Covenant which he has here
described, is no NewCovenant in opposition to the old Administration of the
Covenant of Grace. There were the same promises then that we have now, the same
moral precepts to observe that we have now; and though the word [Gospel] comes
in for a blind, yet the Apostle assures us, Gal. 3. 8. That Abraham had the
Gospel Preached to him.

. 3. Upon the matter, it is no Covenant of Grace at all. For, 1. A Promise of
Pardon and Life, upon Condition of Believing and Obeying, is neither better nor
worse, than a threatening of Condemnation and Death, to them who Believe not,
and Obey not. It may with equal right be called a threatening of Death, as a
Promise of Life: It Is no more a Covenant of Grace than a Covenant of Wrath; and
therefore, 2. (if it be lawful to consider Man as the Word of God describes
him, as dead in Sins and Trespasses, as one that of himself cannot think a good
thought, that can do nothing at all without Christ) It Is no Covenant at all to
him under his present circumstances; for what is the nice difference between a
Promise of Life, to him that obeys, when it is certain beforehand he cannot
obey, and no Promise at all? 3. This Covenant which he calls New, (and well he
may, for it is of his own making, or however of his own new-vamping) assigns the
same conditions of Pardon and Eternal Life; but the Scripture requires other
qualifications for Eternal Life, than for the Pardon of Sin. A Believer may be
justified without a sinless perfection, but without such a sinless perfection
none shall enter into Glory: He may be actually justified, that has not
persevered in Holy Obedience to the Death; but without such perseverance he can
never be made partaker of Eternal Life. 4. This Covenant of his is supposed to
be made with all Mankind, and yet all Mankind never heard of it: Now is it not
very admirable, and to be placed amongst the wonders of the New-Divinity, that
God should enter into a Covenant with all the World to Pardon and save them
upon condition of Faith and Obedience, and yet not let many of them know a
syllable of it? Nay, that he should expressly countermand the promulgating of
the Gospel to them? And yet so has God done even by the preaching of the true
Covenant of Grace: Acts 16. 6, 7. Now when they had gone throughout all
Phrygia, and the Region of Galatia, and were forbidden by the Holy Ghost to
Preach the word in Asia; After they were come to Mylia, they assayed to go into
Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered them not.

(2.) Let us now briefly consider his Assertion: That the Covenant of Grace
(such a one as he has made for us) is owing to the Sacrifice of Christ's death,
and the Righteousness of his Life: That God being pleased with these, for
Christ's sake entered into a New Covenant with Mankind. I must tell the Reader
that I have narrowly pryed into this Section, wherein I find frequent
assertions of this Doctrine, That the Covenant of Grace is owing to, procured
by, founded on the Obedience of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death;
and yet so unhappy have I been in my search that I cannot find any Proof, or
any attempt to prove it* and therefore (till I see evidence to the contrary) I
shall take it for granted, that the Covenant of Grace is owing to, founded on,
and given forth by that free Grace of God, from whence it is justly denominated
A Covenant of Grace; though the intervention of a Mediator, such a Mediator,
was absolutely necessary to put us into the Actual possession of those rich
mercies designed for us by God in that Covevenant; which Mediator himself is
owing to, founded on that Covenant of Grace, and therefore the Covenant of
Grace is not founded upon him: but indeed for that Covenant which he is pleased
to call a New Covenant, and a Covenant of Grace, it is no great matter where
it is founded, and therefore let him dispose of his own Creature as he pleases.

(3.) He supposes that Christ's Obedience and Sacrifice had no other influence
upon our acceptance with God, but that for his sake he entered into such a
Covevenant with Mankind. This is all, however that he can find; But this is a
most miserable All, and either is just nothing, or very near it. For,. 1. Let
him of Courtesy Answer one Question more since he is so good at it, Whether God
was ever at any time unwilling to pardon sin, and give Eternal Life, to those
who did believe his Promises, and obey his Precepts? If he was unwilling; Then
let him show how Christ's Obedience and Sacrifice, did operate upon God to
alter his will, and of unwilling to make him willing: what could there be in
the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, or the Righteousness of his Life, that should
make God more in Love with Faith and Obedience, than he had been before? But if
God was willing, and that without respect to Christ: then how does he give the
Pardon of sin and Eternal Life, to them who Believe and Obey for Christ's sake?
I am sure of our Authors Goodnature in this point; he will say, he has said
it; That some, that many were saved without respect to Christ; The mercy and
Grace of God (it seems) accepting their Belief of particular Revelations, and
their sincere Obedience to his Commands; Repentance supplying the defects, and
shortness of their Conformity to the Law: Now if God did all this without
regard to Christ, how does he do it for the sake of Christ? But there is an
Answer to this, that lies Dormant in the word [Promise] God did indeed Pardon
sin, and give Eternal Life, to those who believed his Revelations, and obeyed
his Commandments; but he never promised he would do it. But now he has drawn
out his Grace and good will into a Promise to pardon sin and give Eternal Life;
upon the terms aforesaid, and this he has done for Christ's sake: And let us
Audit the Account; and all the influence that Christ's Obedience and Sacrifice
bath upon our acceptance with God, is, that we have got a promise from God to
do that which he would have done before; to give us that he would have given us
before; only he would not promise to do it for us, to give it to us. Two things
I shall briefly return. 1. That God under the Old Testament made explicit
promises of the pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life; and if under that
Dispensation, I am sure our Author will say, without respect to Christ: that
this was the Doctrine of the Old Testament, the Apostle asserts, Act. 13. 40.
To him give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. 2 Samuel 7. 14. I will be his
Father, and he shall be my Son: and there is enough in that to secure a promise
of pardon to a repenting Child. Mal. 3. 17. They shall be mine, and I will
spare them as a Father spares his own son that serves him: but it it is added;
If he sin against me, I will chasten him with the Rod of Men, but my Mercy
shall not depart from him. Ps. 99. 8. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God,
thou wast a God that forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance on their
inventions. And as the pardoning Grace that was in God's Nature was revealed to
them, as the foundation of their Faith and obedience, Ps. 130. 4. There is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared; So it is drawn out into a
promise, v. 8. He shall redeem Israel from all his Iniquities, which without
the pardon of them is simply impossible. As for the Promises of Eternal Lise,
we find good old Jacob now giving up the Ghost, and having no hope in this
Life; expressing his Faith thus, Genesis 49. 18. I have waited for thy Salvation,
O Lord! Which doubtless was Eternal Salvation* beyond the Verge of that short
time of his Life, which he knew was expired; Ps. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me
with thy Counsel, (in my pilgrimage) and afterward receive me to glory: but a
more convenient place will offer it self for the discussing of this matter. 2.
If then this be all that the Obedience of Christ's Life and the Sacrifice of
his Death do contribute to our acceptance with God, that for Christ's sake we
have got a Promise, or a more explicit Promise of the pardon of sin, and
Eternal Life than before; then I must be of the same mind still, that it
contributes just nothing to the acceptance of our Obedience with God. Let me
have Liberty to put the Case of two Persons, v. g. David and Paul; let us
suppose these two, equally obedient to God's commands, the former without such
an express and explicit promise of Reward the other, encouraged by stronger
Arguments of clear and numerous Promises of Pardon, and Eternal Life: Which of
these two is more accepted of God? He that performed equal Obedience, upon more
feeble encouragements; or he that upon stronger Motives* yet gave but equal
Obedience? If Reason might determine this Controversy, it would clearly carry
it for him, that bore equal burden with less strength, performed equal duty
upon less inducements: If then this be all the influence that the Obedience and
death of Christ have upon our Acceptance with God; that thereby we have got a
greater help to obedience, the best Answer to the Question had been, that it
has no influence upon our Acceptance with God.. 2. His Answer signifies nothing
or very near it: For the Question was, What Influence Christ's Active and
Passive Obedience have upon our Acceptance with God? And he has framed an
Answer to another Question; What Influence Christ's Active and Passive
Obedience have upon our Obedience? Which is quite another thing. If Christ's
Obedience have any influence upon our acceptance with God, then God for
Christ's sake must accept us, and our Obedience for the sake of Christ, which
otherwise he had not, would not have done; and Christ must be supposed to have
done and suffered something, which had such an influence upon God, as to
procure the favor of God toward our persons and services, which without that
consideration had not been, could not be procured: But if this be all; That God
has made us a Promise to accept that Obedience for Christ's sake, which
(without any respect to Christ) would have accepted, though not say be would
accept; then if our obedience be little, Christ will not make it reputed much,
if imperfect, Christ's Obedience will not render it perfect; and thus in plain
Terms, The Sacrifice of his Death, and Righteousness of his Life procure no
acceptance at all, no not the least of our Persons or Obedience with God. (3.)
His Answer is so like nothing, as cannot be discerned from nothing: The
Question was, What influence Christ's Righteousness and Sacrifice have upon our
acceptance with God? The Answer is, God for Christ's sake entered into a
New Covenant with Mankind, etc. which is to leave the Question just as he found
it (and if he leave it no worse it is pardonable) for it will be enquired still;
What influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his
Death had upon God to move him to enter, into such a Covenant? Under what
Notion did his Life and Death operate upon God? Did Christ make a proper
Reconciliation and Atonement with God? Was his Death a proper Sacrifice? Did it
expiate the Guilt of Sin? No! not a syllable of all this; only for fashions
sake it must be said to have had An influence; though what it is, or how it had
that influence, he cannot tell: But he will speak to these things more
distinctly.

[1.] What influence the Death of Christ has upon our Acceptance with God? But
it is to be supposed that we have had our Answer, and must sit down by it. That
God was so well pleased with the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, that for his sake
he entered into a NewCovenant with Mankind: The Proof is all in all; Why, this
is plain (says he) in reference to his Death; Hence the Blood of Christ is
called the Blood of the Covenant* Heb. 10. 29. It Is plain, that God for
Christ's sake entered into this Covenant, because his Blood is called the Blood
of the new Covenant: but yet it is not so very plain neither; A man may possibly
mistake it for all that he has said to satisfy him: well! But then Christ is
called the great Shepherd, and Bishop of Souls through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. but I can find no such Scripture: well;
However, The Blood of Christ is called the Blood of sprinkling, which speaks
better things than the Blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. which is an Allusion to
Moses his sprinkling the Blood of the Sacrifice, wherewith he confirmed and
ratified the Covenant, between God and the Children of Israel, etc. I expected
it would come to this at long run* God entered into the Covenant for the sake of
Christ's Death, because his Death confirmed the Covenant: A very trim Reason!
The confirming of a Covenant, supposes a Covenant in being; If then all the
design of the Blood of Christ was to confirm and ratify a Covenant, it will
not follow that therefore God did enter into such a Covenant for the sake of
the Blood, but therefore he did not. I deny not that the Death of Christ was a
great Confirmation of the true Covenant of Grace to our Faith: For what
stronger Confirmation could the most jealous Soul desire of the reality of free
Grace promising to pardon sin, and bestow Eternal Life upon believers, than
that the Son of God himself should first take upon him our Nature, and in that
Nature offer up himself to God, to atone and reconcile him to us; that he
should make satisfaction to God's rectoral Justice, and pay the price of our
Redemption, thereby removing out of the way of our Faith the grand impediments
of it* the Justice of God and the Commination of the Law, which stood in the
way of our Pardon, and Salvation? But to obviate our Author's design, I shall a
little divert the Reader with the consideration of these Propositions: 1. The
Confirmation of such a Covenant as he has described ( viz. a Promise of the
Pardon of sin and Eternal Life to those who believe and obey the Gospel) was
not the main end of the Death of Christ: 1. Because there is such an end
ascribed to his Death, which the Death of no other person in the world, could
in any wise reach: but now to confirm the Gospel, and all the Promises thereof
was an end which the Death of another might reach; therefore this was not the
main end of the Death of Christ. The crucifying of Peter, the Martyrdom of
Paul, were a great Confirmation of the Doctrine which they Preached; the
Doctrine which they Preached was the Gospel, and all its Promises; yet neither
was the Death of the one, or other, able to reach the great Design of the Death
of Christ: 1 Cor. 1. 18. Was Paul Crucified for you? Or were you Baptized into
the Name of Paul? None could be Crucified for Sinners in that way that Christ
was Crucified for them, into whose Name they might not be Baptized: but into
the Name of no mere Man might they be Baptized; therefore no mere Man could be
Crucified for sinners in that way, and for those ends which Christ was
Crucified for* Paul* suffered Death for the Churches good, but not in the
Churches stead: He dyed to Confirm what he Preached, and he Preached the Covenant
of Grace with all its Promises; yet he was not Crucified for the Church, his
Soul was not made an Offering for sin, God laid not upon him all our
Iniquities; his Death was not a Sacrifice of Propitiation: And yet all this may
be said of Paul's Death, if those expressions applied to the Death of Christ,
signify no more than a Confirmation of the Gospel. 2. The Scripture assigns
greater ends to the Death of Christ, than confirmation of Promises: 1. His
Death as a Sacrifice atoned God. 2. His Death as a Price paid to God redeemed
us. 3. His Death as a Punishment exacted of God, satisfied his Justice. For the
first, Isa. 53. 10. his Soul was made an Offering for sin: and therefore as on
a Sacrifice of Atonement, God laid on him the Iniquities of us all, V. 6. For
the second, 1 Timothy 2. 6. He gave himself a Ransom, or Price of Redemption for
all. For the third, Romans 3. 25, 26. The Blood of Christ is said to be a
Declaration of God's Righteousness, that he might be just in justifying the
Believer; which Testimonies will call for clearing and vindication in due time.
And these indeed are such ends of the Death of Christ, as will undeniably
prove, that his Death had an Influence upon our Acceptance with God. 3. The
Scripture owns Christ as a proper Priest; and therefore his Work must be
somewhat more, than confirming a Doctrine. A Prophet will abundantly answer
that design: But our Author prudently having cut out Christ some work to do,
has fitted him with an Office too, which is proportionable to it; for to what
purpose should Christ be a Priest, that has nothing to do with his Sacrifice,
but to confirm his Doctrine? The direct and immediate Object of Christ's
Sacerdotal Office was God, Heb. 9. 14, 15. How much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered himself to God, purge your
Consciences? I know these Men will say that Christ offered up himself to God in
He^ven, but not upon the Cross: whereas the Blood of Christ is here compared
with, though preferred to the Blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of a
heifer sprinkling the unclean, some of which were never carried into the Holy
Place; and the Blood of those which were, was first shed at the Altar, before
it could be sprinkled at the Mercy-Seat: And the word here used (...), is a
sacred and religious Word, applied to the Sacrifices which were brought to, and
^ffered at the Altar. Again, Heb. 5. 1. Christ i^ ordained a Priest in things
pertaining to God. His Priestly Employment lay mainly with him, to confirm
promises that relate to us men; but a Priest offers not Sacrifice to the
People, though for the People. Christ's Business as our High Priest was with
God, and in his Undertaking with him, lies the true Reason of the Acceptance
of our Persons and Services with God. 4. The Scripture everywhere expresses
Christ's Innocence, nay his perfect Holine^, the cheerfulness, self-denial,
constancy, universality of his Obedience to his Fathers Will, especially the
Law of the Mediator. He always did the Things that pleased his Father, Joh. 8.
29. He fulfilled all Righteousness, Mat. 3. 15. His Meat and Drink was to do
the Will of him that sent him, and to finish his Work, Joh. 4. 34. He came not
to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him, Joh. 6. 38. And the
Father has witnessed it most solemnly by a Voice from Heaven, That he was
well-pleased with his beloved Son, Mat 17. 5. and yet notwithstanding all this,
and much more that might be said, It pleased the Father to bruise him, and make
his Soul an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53. 10. He loved him, and yet showed all
imaginable tokens of displeasure; he was amazed, sore troubled in Soul, and (as
to the apprehension of his Soul) in respect of comfort forsaken of God, so that
he cried out of it most b^tterly; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
And in the view of his approaching Sufferings was in such an Agony, and
conflict of Soul, that it expressed Clods of Blood from his laboring Body: Upon
consideration of which unexpressible, inconceivable Torments of the Lord Jesus,
the Ancient Church did use to pray, (...), By thy unknown Torments, Lord
deliver us; In imitation whereof perhaps the Liturgy of the present Church of
England uses the like; By thy Agony and Bloody Sweat, by thy Cross and Passion,
etc. Now I would have it resolved to satisfaction, without such pittyful dry
evasions, and paltry answers as we meet with from some kind of men: 1. How God
could at the same time be well-pleased with Christ, and be so well-pleased to
bruise him? 2. How it could consist with the Justice of God, to punish a Person
so Innocent, so Holy, so completely Righteous, over whom the condemning Part of
the Law had no power, seeing he had never violated it, in its preceptive Part,
unless he stood in the st^ad of Sinners, bore their Iniquities, and was charged
with their Guilt? They will tell us, that God used his Prerogative, and
Sovereignty over Jesus Christ; and yet in other causes will not allow him an
absolute and irrespective Sovereignty over the poorest W^etch in the World:
They will tell us too, That all this was not proper penalty or punishment; but
here was the matter of punishment to purpose: and still the difficulty remains,
Why an Innocent Person should suffer the same things materially, which were
only formally to be inflicted upon those who had deserved them? Let none say,
If Christ bore the Punishment due to sin, he must suffer Eternal Death; seeing
no less was due to our Transgressions: For 1. The Eternity of punishment is
only due to sin by accident, as it is found in a finite Person, who being not
able to bear at once, or in the longest time, that Wrath which his Sins have
demerited; Divine Justice exacts of him an Eternity of suffering. 2. Whereas
sin is only infinite, or of infinite demerit, objective, as committed against
an infinite God: The Sufferings of Christ are infinite also subjective, being
the Sufferings of that Person who is God, though not as God; and therefore
Christ in a finite time was able to give infinite Satisfaction. 3. Christ was
such an High Priest, as being God and Man, was able to give an infinite Value
to his Sacrifice of himself as Man: nor let any say that if Christ suffered in
a way of Satisfaction to Divine Justice, and bore what the Sinner should have
born, or that which was equivalent to it, that then the Sinner ought
immediately to be delivered from the Curse due to his sin; for seeing that the
Satisfaction was not made in the Person of the Offender, but his Substitute, it
was necessary that the benefit of another's Satisfaction should be communicated
in such a way as might best please that God, whose Grace was the only Motive to
his Acceptance of a Substitute: It Is the undoubted privilege of the Giver to
dispose of his own Gift in his own Way; and it was absolutely and indispensibly
necessary that the Sinner should be duly qualified to receive so transcendent
Favors, purchased at so dear rates, and fitted to return the Glory due to a
Redeemer, which an unhumbled, unbelieving, unconverted, and unsanctified Sinner
could not possibly be.

(2) The Death of Christ (divested of those its proper respects of a Sacrifice
offered to God to atone and reconcile him: a price paid to ransom, and redeem
us, and a Punishment born to satisfy Divine Justice, was no infallible proof
of the Doctrine which he preached: For 1. Many have laid down their lives to
Abett, and endured extremity of Tortures rather than renege the Doctrine they
have openly preached; their Confidence (the mean while) supported either by a
mistaken Conscience, or perhaps some sinister respects. All that it can prove
in the largest judgment of Charity is, That they suppose their Doctrine to be
true, or else would hardly lose their All, rather than lose a Principle; but
not that therefore the Doctrine is true, because the Preacher dies for it. That
which is false in it self, will not become true, by laying down our life for
it. In the Memory of the last Age, there were some who sacrificed their lives
to the Flames in defense of Contradictory Doctrines: So that to say that the
Death of Christ has no other use, but To confirm the Truth of that Doctrine
which he preached, is but a more modest, civil* and gentle way of saying it has
no use at all. 2. To whom should the Death of Christ confirm the Truth of his
Doctrine, to his Enemies or his Friends? For his Enemies: Many of his
Sufferings, the very greatest and sorest of his Sufferings were out of their
notice; either privately in the Garden, or more privately in his Soul, such as
whereof they could take no cognizance: and for these which were visible; they
looked on them as the just rewards of his violation of the Law. As for his
Friends, his Death considered singly in it self, without respect to its proper
Ends, was so far from confirming of their Faith, or Belief of his Doctrine,
that it was that which shook their hopes, and dashed their expectations out of
countenance: their Hearts died in his Death; and those two expressed the Sense
of more than their own diffidence, Luke 24. We trusted that it had been he that
should have redeemed Israel. But whether to Friends, or Enemies, the Death of
Christ (considered without his antecedent Miracles, and subsequent
Resurrection, and concomitant Sacrifice) was so improper a means to confirm,
that it had proved the clearest Confutation of his Doctrine that malice could
have desired. (3.) The Death of Christ was so far from confirming this
Doctrine, That God would pardon Sinners, that separate this one Consideration
of it as satisfactory to Divine Justice, from his Death; and it quite
overthrows the credibility of the Doctrine, and runs all the World down into
utter despair: For our Author must have a happy dexterity, if he can conclude,
that because God dealt so severely with an innocent holy Person, that therefore
he will not fail to pardon repenting Sinners. We must despair that ever
repentance should make us personally equal with Christ: If then God did these
things in the green Tree, what will be done in the Dry? If Judgment begun at
God's own House, where shall the Ungodly and Sinner appear? He that spared not
his own Son, how much less will he spare the Sinner? It could not be expected
that any should believe Christ, telling them God would pity and pardon others,
who found him so severe to himself: But that indeed the true Reason why God
deals so graciously with the repen^ing Sinner, is because he had dealt so
justly with his own Son, voluntarily becoming his Surety and Substitute. (4.)
There were proper proofs designed by God for the Confirmation of the Doctrine
of Christ; and no need at all to take sanctuary in that which (nakedly
considered) was not so. Those frequent, clear, stupendous Miracles wrought by
Christ, were fully adequate, and commensurate to that End. Reason will teach us
to believe that God will not alter the course of Nature, nor reverse its
standing Laws, to confirm a Lie, to bear witness to a grand Imposture. And
surely they who would not believe Christ to be sent of God, upon his Testimony
to him in those Extraordinary Works, would never believe it for his Death which
was no wonder at all; otherwise than as the fruit of his ineffable Love,
offering himself to God as a Sacrifice for Sin; and so indeed it was the
greatest Wonder of them all. The Enemies of Christ triumphed in his Death, that
they had nailed his Cause with his Person to the Cross; and that which they
feared was his Resurrection: A Miracle so far beyond all exception, to confirm
that he was sent of God, and therefore his Doctrine must needs be true, that
their greatest care was to have prevented it, by sealing the Stone, and setting
a Watch. (5.) But supposing that the Death of Christ had confirmed his
Doctrine, and particularly this, That God would pardon, and save the Believing,
and Obedient Sinner: Yet still what influence has this upon our Acceptance with
God? Will God accept our Obedience the more, because we have greater helps to
obey? May our duty expect a greater Reward because we come easier by it? But
when all is said that our Author can say, it is our Obedience that has the
Influence upon our Acceptance with God, and Christ's Death has only an
Influence upon our Obedience. The same Obedience given to the Commands of the
Gospel, without the motive of his Death, had found equal, if not greater
Acceptance from him, than when drawn from us by so cogent an Argument. But if
the Death of Christ may be said to have any influence upon our Acceptance with
God, because he thereby confirmed his Doctrine; then the Death of the Martyrs
also may be said to have an Influence upon our Acceptance with him; for they by
their Deaths confirmed the Truth which they preached, which Truth was the true
Covenant of Grace. And whereas many of them laid down their Lives with that
Heroical Magnanimity, with that gallantry of Spirit, with more than that
boasted Stoical valor, kissing the Stake, embracing the Flames, triumphantly
singing in the midst of their Torments, professing they felt no more pain than
in a Bed of Roses, as if they were to ascend Heaven in that fiery Chariot, to
the Confutation of their Enemies, the encouraging of their Friends, and the
credit of that Gospel they died for; evidently assuring all, that they were
immediately supported from above to bear with patience, nay with exultation,
those extremities which to Flesh and Blood were intolerable. We see our Blessed
Savior (on the contrary) in his Sufferings strangely dejected, amazed,
troubled in Soul, earnestly begging that if it were possible that Cup might
pass from him, and crying out in the bitterness of his Soul, That he was
forsaken of God; which consideration is enough to satisfy an impartial
Enquirer, That the Sufferings of Christ were fitted for some higher design than
the confirming of Truth, for which end (had there been nothing more in it) the
Death of the Martyrs had clearly out-gone it.

But it is high time to recollect our selves, and return into the way again; for
those pitiful things which stand for proof, that this was all the design of
the Death of Christ, call aloud for examination.

The Blood of Christ says he) is called the Blood of Sprinkling which speaks
better things than the Blood of- Abel, Heb. 12. 24. which is an allusion to
Moses his Sprinkling the Blood of the Sacrifice, whereby he confirmed the
Covenant between God and the Children of Israel, Heb. 9. 20, 21. For when Moses
had spoken every precept to the People according to the Law, he took the Blood
of Calves and Goats, and sprinkled both the Book and all the People, saying:
This is the Blood of the Testament, which God has ordained for you. Thus the
Blood of Christ is called the Blood of Sprinkling, because by his Blood God did
seal and confirm the Covenant of Grace, as the sprinkling of Blood did confirm
the Mosaical Covenant.

There are four things which I shall offer, any one of which cleared up, will
show the vanity of this Period.

. 1. The Blood of Christ, is not called the Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks
better things than the Blood of Abel; only in allusion to the Sprinkling of
that Blood which confirmed the Mosaical Covenant: There is a further, a higher
design in the Expression. The Blood of Abel cried to God from the Earth, for
vengeance upon the Head of Cain; and with the same importunity does the
violation of every Law of God solicit Divine Justice against the
Transgressour; and that with great justice: For the same God, who has
established his Holy Law, in the Promise, Do this and live, has bound, and
confirmed it also with the threatening, If thou sinnest thou shall die. Such
dreadful things did the Blood of Abel (shed in defiance of the Law) speak to
God; But O what sweet, how much better things does the Blood of Christ speak!
It speaks better things to the Justice of God, than if the Sinner himself
should suffer his utmost Indignation: It speaks better things to the Law, than
if the Sinner had felt the weight of its severest Curse: It speaks better
things to the Conscience, than if we had wrought out our inward Peace by our
own Righteousness: It satisfies God's Justice, answers the Law, and quiets the
Conscience: And in reference to this use of the Sprinkling of Blood, viz. the
Atoning, and Reconciling of God, is the Blood of Christ, called the Blood of
Sprinkling; and to this the Apostle refers, Heb. 11. 28. By Faith Moses kept
the Passover, and the Sprinkling of Blood, that he who destroyed the
Firstborn might not touch them. The Apostle evidently points to Exodus 12. 14.
The Blood shall be to you a token upon your Houses, and when I see the Blood, I
will pass over you, and the Plague shall not be upon you. v. 21, 22. Kill the
Passover, and you shall take a Bunch of Hyssop and dip in the Blood, and
strike the Lintel, and the two side-Posts, and none of you shall go out of his
House until the Morning. Now here are several things observeable: 1. That it
was a respect to the Blood of the Paschal-Lamb duly used and applied, in
consideration whereof God would not destroy them with the rest. 2. That if they
expected any benefit from that Blood, they must abide under the shelter and
protection of it. 3. This Blood must be sprinkled upon the Lintel, not upon the
Threshold, to mind them, (as the Jews observe) that they ought not to trample
it under their Feet: And surely that Blood which turns away the deserved wrath
of God from their head, might claim more reverence than to be trampled under
their feet. 4. That this Blood thus sprinkled was considerable in God's eyes,
as it was the Blood of such a Lamb, so chosen ^t of the flock, without any spot
or blemish, and so slain, precisely according to God's appointment: I just
proportion, the Lord Jesus Christ is called expressly our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.
7. Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for you. Now as the Blood of Christ has
the same influence, so it has the same plea: It has the same Influence upon
God, it turns away his Anger, he has a respect to the Blood of Jesus; under
this Blood do we take shelter and Sanctuary; and therefore it pleads with us
that we account it not a profane and unholy thing, for that will be
interpreted a trampling under foot the Son of God himself, Heb. 10. 29. which
is to despise all the Grace and Mercy of God, for whatever Mercy we receive
from God, it is through the intervention of that Blood.

. 2. The whole concern of the Blood of Christ is (...) expressed by the Blood of
Sprinkling. Sprinkling was one way, and but one way of employing the Blood of
the Sacrifices: but it must be shed, before it could be sprinkled, and
therefore sprinkled, because it had been shed as a Sacrifice. Whatever other
use there was of the Blood of Sacrifices, yet the efficacy of all was derived
from this, that that Blood had been once shed at the Altar, Lev. 17. 11. It was
Blood upon the Altar (and that not merely as Blood, but as it was the
Lifeblood of the Sacrifice substituted in the room of the offender) that made
an Atonement for their Souls. And this is evident in that the Blood of many of
the Sacrifices for sin, atoneing, expiating Sacrifices, were not sprinkled, but
only shed at the Altar: What an unrighteous dealing is this then with the Blood
of Christ, to allot it no service but only the Confirmation of a Covenant,
because it is called the Blood of sprinkling? whereas the Blood of the
Sacrifices of old as it was sprinkled, did not express all the ends and uses of
the Blood of Christ.

. 3. That which comes home to our Author is this: The whole design of the Blood
of sprinkling (...) not to confirm a Covenant. As Blood was larger than
sprinkling of Blood; so sprinkling of Blood was larger than the confirming of a
Covenant. (1.) The Blood of the Sacrifice was sometimes sprinkled (...) turn
away God's Anger: thus in the Passover and thus in that very place which our
Author insists upon, Heb. 9. 19. which the Apostle cites from Exodus 24. 5, 6,
7. where we read of a twofold Use of the Blood: First, one half of the Blood of
the Burnt-Offering, and the Peace Offering which had been shed at the Altar,
Moses sprinkled upon the Altar: Now all the use of Blood upon the Al^r was
Atonement, Propitiation, and Reconciliation of God. Secondly, With the other
half of the Blood, Moses consecrates and dedicates the People to the Lord, to
walk before him according to the Tenor of that Covenant: whereas then he will
argue, that the Blood was sprinkled only to confirm a Covenant, because one
half of it was reserved for that as a secondary Use; some surly,
ill-conditioned People would conclude, that it was not used to confirm a
Covenant, because the other half was not employed for that use. (2.) Another
use of the Blood of the Sacrifice sprinkled, was to procure the favor of God,
2. Chron. 29. 21, 22. where we read: 1. That all these Lambs, Bullocks, Rams,
Goats, were offered to God at the Altar; Hezekiah commanded the Priests to
offer them on the Altar. 2. That when the Blood had been shed at the Altar, it
was afterward sprinkled on the Altar. 3. To show that the great operation of
the Blood (even as sprinkled) was by virtue of his having been once shed at the
Altar. The two Goats of the Sin-Offering were only slain by the Priests, after
they had laid their hands on them, and thereby laid the sins of the People upon
them, in their Typical way; but their Blood was not at all sprinkled upon the
Altar, and yet the greatest efficacy is ascribed to them as the Sin-Offering.
4. The design of all these Sacrifices, their Offering upon the Altar, the
shedding and then sprinkling of the Blood; is said to be v. 24. to make
Reconciliation with their Blood upon the Altar and to make Atonement for all
Israel. 5. And that none might harp upon the old humor, that surely the People
were fallen out among themselves, were all in Mutiny and Civil-Wars, and this
Blood was to reconcile them, and make them friends; We are told, It was for all
Israel, for the Kingdom, the Sanctuary, for Judah, for Church and State, Prince
and People: All had offended God, and this was the Typical way of recovering
his favor, and regaining a Communion with him in his Temple. (3.) The Blood
was sprinkled also for Purification and Cleansing, Lev. 14. 5. Answerable
hereto, God has promised in the Covenant of Grace, that he will sprinkle his
people with clean water, and from all their Idols and Abominations will be
cleanse them, Ezekiel. 36. which he effects by the power of the Holy Spirit, and
by the Blood of Jesus. Therefore are Saints called elect according to the
foreknowledg of God the Father, through the Sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1. 2. (4.) The
Blood was sprinkled before the Mercy-Seat, Lev. 16. 15. When the Priest had
shed the blood of the Sacrifice at the Altar, and offered it to God, he carries
in some of the Blood into the most Holy place, and by that Blood intercedes
with God for the People: Thus our Lord Jesus, when by the once offering of
himself he had made an Atonement with God for sin, discharges the other great
part of (...) Priesthood, becomes our intercessor at the throne of Grace, and
in the merit and virtue of that Blood which was once shed for the reconciling
of God, and procuring his favor, he lives for ever to make intercession for
us. And now I suppose it may be left to all indifferent Persons to judge,
whether our Author has not most barbarously Murdered the Death of Christ it
self, and trampled his sacred Blood under his feet, allowing no other end or
use to it, but that o^ confirming a Covenant; whereas considered as the Blood
of sprinkling, it has far greater and higher ends, and yet the Blood as
sprinkled, comprehends not the whole design of that Blood.

. 4. But yet supposing, That all the ends of the Death of Christ were wrapped up
in that one expression [the Blood of sprinkling] and supposing also that the
Blood of the Sacrifices as sprinkled, had no other end or use but the
confirming of a Covenant; yet how will this prove his main Assertion, That we
owe the Covenant of Grace to the Death of Christ? All that will follow is, that
we owe the Confirmation of the Covenant to it, and only the Confirmation of the
Covenant; and then another thing will follow too, that we do not owe the
Covenant it self to it, unless he can prove that procuring and confirming are
Terms of the same importance.

The advantage our Author has got by this way of Reasoning is, that he has
found out a way how to own all Scripture-Expressions, and yet accommodate them
to his own preconceived Opinions. [1.] Hence (says he) we are said to be
justified by the Blood of Christ, Romans 5. 9. That is, by the Gospel Covenant
which was confirmed, and ratified by his Death: To which I Answer. 1. If we may
be said to be justified by his Blood, because his Blood confirmed the Covenant,
then we may be said more properly to be justified by his Miracles; for they
indeed had a proper, direct, immediate, and sufficient evidence in them to
confirm the Doctrine which he Preached; and it is a Miracle almost as great as
any of them, that the Scripture should never once intimate that we are
justified by Miracles, which directly and properly confirmed his Doctrine; and
yet constantly affirm it of his Death, which directly and properly confirmed it
not. 2. Then also, with the same propriety of Speech, we may be said to be
justified by the Blood of the Martyrs, which was a convincing Testimony that
they believed their Doctrine to be true; and then the old Popish Rhyme will
come in fashion again: Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, Da nos
Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. 3. If the Blood of Christ contribute no
more to our justification than* as it confirmed the Truth of this proposition
amongst others; He that Believes, and obeys the Gospel, shall be pardoned and
saved; then it is possible to be justified without the Blood of Christ: God has
given us many Arguments to confirm the Truth of the Gospel: If then I believe
the Truth of what Christ preached upon those Arguments, which are suited to its
confirmation, (as upon the evidence of Miracles, etc.) and accordingly obey all
its Commands; It were very hard if I should miss of Pardon and Life for not
believing it upon one single Argument, and that but a probable one neither:
What if I Believe the Promise upon nine of God's Arguments, and hit not upon
the Tenth, obey upon nine of God's Motives, and want only that single String to
my Bow; shall my Faith and Obedience be rejected because not grounded upon
every particular Reason that may possibly be Mustered up to confirm them? 4. It
will be in vain ever to speak or write again, if such far-fetcht Consequences
be allowed to interpret what is spoken and written. There are no two things in
the world so remote each from other, but they have some kind of Relation and
Affinity; and if this way will salve all, there will hardly be found that thing
in the World, if it may but be conceived to have had any Relation as an
Argument to our Faith and Obedience, but we may be said to be justified by it.
We are said to be justified by the Blood of Christ; True! But how? Why thus:
The Blood of Christ signifies his Death; His Death confirmed his Doctrine; His
Doctrine was he that believes and obeys, shall be justified and saved; Hereupon
we believe it to be true, and in process of time come to obey it, and our
obedience justifies us, and therefore the Blood of Christ may be said to
justify us. And whereas Judas his Covetousness, the Jews Envy, Herod's
Cruelty; and Pilates Flattery, had a direct tendency to the Death of Christ;
why we may not be properly said to be justified by them also at this rate, I
profess I cannot apprehend. Religion is fallen into most cruel and unmerciful
hands in this latter Age, who to give a ^aint color to any little sorry
fancies of their own, care not to interpret Scripture in such ways as shall
certainly open a door to elude the plainest Truths. God is said to have made
the World; Now if any has a mind to eternize his Name, which without some rare
discovery cannot be, let him take our Author's Course, and he is secure of a
Monument. That is indeed a Scripture phrase; but if you examine it thoroughly,
it signifies no more, than that God made a company of Atoms, and put them in
Motion; and then let them alone, they will dance you so long in infinite spaces
till they jostle themselves into that form wherein you see things at this day:
And thus here is a fair Account how God may be said to have made the World,
because he made that which made the World; and the Cause of the Cause, (you
know) may be said to be a Grand-Father-Cause of the thing Caused. But this is
infinitely beyond what our Author will allow the Blood of Christ of Causality
in our justification: for it is only a Confirming Cause of the Promise, and that
in Commission with other things, and they have a greater stroke in the business
than it self, and then when we come to believe that Promise, and that belief
proves strong enough to persuade us into Obedience, then we are justified for
the sake of that Obedience. But 5. The Consideration of the Text it self; Romans
5. 9. is enough to discredit this idle conceit for ever; for Christ is said to
dye for us, and in order to our justification, in the same sense that the (...)
of old (...), who laid down Life for Life, Blood for Blood, Body for Body. v.
6. Christ dyed for the ^ngodly. v. 7. For scarcely for a righteous Man will one
dye; yet peradventure for a good Man some one would even dare to dye. v. 8. But
God commends his love to us that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for
us. v. 9. Much more then being now justified by his Blood, etc.

[2.] Christ (says he) is called a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood,
that is, by a belief of the Gospel Covenant, Romans 3. 25. But how short this
comes of the Apostle's design is obvious from the place. Christ is set forth by
God to be a propitiation through faith in his Blood, to declare his
Righteousness that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in
Jesus: But is God ever the more declared to be a just God, demonstrated to be a
Righteous God, because Christ has confirmed his Doctrine, and we believe and
obey it? The obedience of most men is so imperfect, that when they have done
all, they will need mercy, and that will declare one of God's attributes. But
what provision is here made, that God may be declared Righteous and Just? All
that he has assigned to the Blood of Christ turns not away the least of God's
displeasure against sin or the sinner; Christ dyed to confirm the Doctri^e!
Well, but still God is displeased with sinners; for what Reason is there why
God should be less displeased with them, because Christ dyed to confirm his
Doctrine? Well, but hereupon Man believes this Doctrine to be true; but yet
God's Anger is never the more turned away from the sinner, because he believes
what God says is true. For what Reason is there why God should be less
displeased with him, who believes the Truth, and yet will not obey his
Commands? So that neither the Blood of Christ, nor Faith neither, do reconcile
God to us, or propitiate him for us: well, at last Man gives obedience to the
Commands, and then God is propitiated and reconciled. So that the true
Scripture should have been (had our Author had the p^nning of it) God has set
forth Man to be his own propitiation through his own obedience. And why might
it not have been said, that God set forth the Martyrs to be a propitiation
through Faith in their Blood? For they willingly and cheerfully shed their
dearest Blood to confirm the Truth of the Gospel; and upon their Confirmation
of it some have believed it, and upon their believing it have obeyed it, and
then by that obedience are reconciled to God. And thus may Paul be said to have
dyed for our sins, and Peter to have been Crucified for us, and both of them to
have been set forth by God to be a propitiation through Faith in their Blood.
Nor let any say, that the Death of the Martyrs was not so strong a confirmation
of the Gospel as the Death of Christ: For if we believe the Truth, and obey it
upon more infirm Evidence; yet if that evidence produce a strong Faith, and
that a vigorous obedience, such an obedience will not find less acceptance with
God, because it was begotten by weaker Motives.

[3] The Scripture (says he) uses these Phrases promiscuously, to be justified
by Faith; and to be justified by the Faith of Christ; and to be justified by
Christ; and to be justified through Faith in his Blood; and to be justified,
and saved by Grace: Nay, by believing that Christ is the Son of God, John 20.
31. And that God raised him up from the dead. When our Author has a design upon
any great Truth of the Gospel, then the clearest expressions the wisdom of
God's Spirit shall use, are Phrases, allusive, figurative, metaphorical,
tropical forms of Speech: But the Scripture uses not these expressions
promiscuously, only our Author confounds them craftily. Each of them have
indeed something in common with the rest; and no wonder, all the Offices, the
Active and Passive Obedience of Christ, the whole work of the Spirit, the
actings of Faith, and every saving-Grace, meet in this one great Project, the
glorifying of God, the Electing love of the Father, the Redeeming Love of the
Son, and the Sanctifying love of the Holy Spirit, in the Justification and
Salvation of a Believer: But yet each of these expressions carries in it
something peculiar to it self: for the Scripture abhors to speak at his dull
and cloudy rate, who by diversifying one and the same thing in twenty several
shapes, can vend it for so many several things, when it is but the same notion
disguised in a new-fashioned expression. One denotes the interest of Faith;
another speaks the concern of him who is Jehovah our Righteousness; a third may
particularly point at the influence of his Blood in this matter; another, the
evidence of all this: But by this Argument he may fancy (and that may stand for
Proof) that all things under Heaven signify one and the same thing: for I know
no two things so perfect strangers but have some cognation, some common and
general agreement, and meet in some Latudinarian Third that will clasp their
Interests: They must be related either as Cause and effect, or Concauses of the
same effect; or as joynt-effects of the same universal Cause, etc. but now to
say that all these signify the same thing formally because of some general
coherence, is no more to my edification, than if our Author would prove himself
akin to the great Mogul, because they have two Elbows a-piece: A way of
Reasoning very much unbecoming a Rational Divine, especially one who trades so
much in the essential differences of things. But suppose that all these
expressions do signify one and the same thing: what is that one thing which
they signify? The Answer is ready, That we are justified by believing and
obeying the Gospel: This is the one thing, and this is the one thing that
should have been proved; for if by [Gospel] he understand no more than the
commands of the Gospel, and all the rest, as Promises and confirmations of
Promises, thrown in as Motives and Arguments to that Obedience; then I say we
are justified by something else than the Gospel, (that which he cal's Gospel)
even by the Blood of Christ, which is more than a Motive to Faith, or an
Argument to Obedience (though a most excellent Motive, and Argument to both)
being a proper propitiatory, expiatory, Sacrifice, to remove God's just
displeasure, procure his favor and take away Guilt. But I shall willingly hear
him practice upon the partic^lars.

(1.) Faith, or Faith in Christ, signifies such a firm steadfast belief of the
Gospel, as brings forth all the fruits of Odience: Therefore what? Why
theref^re to be justified by Faith, or by the Faith of Christ, or by Christ,
signify to be justified by believing, and obeying the Gospel. Here Is nothing
but evidence wanting, for we have confidence enough: But then, 1. If a
justifying Faith be such a firm and steadfast belief. of the Gospel as brings
forth all the fruits of obedience, then no Man can be justified till he be in
Heaven, or at least within one step of the actual possession of glory. One of
the fruits of obedience is final perseverance; now Faith may produce one, or
two, or twenty of the fruits of obedience; but yet if it fail before it has
brought forth all the rest, it falls shorts of a justifying Faith. 2. If this
be the true Notion of a justifying Faith, I doubt not to affirm that the Devils
have as true a justifying Faith ( as far as the essence of Faith reaches) as
the best Saint on earth. It Is true their Faith, does not bring forth the fruits
of obedience: but that is only to say, they want a saving obedience, a
justifying obedience; for all that is of the essence of Faith (as it is Faith)
they have; they firmly and steadfastly believe the Gospel to be true, though
their Faith produces not the fruits of obedience. That Faith which justifies
will in due season produce all the fruits of obedience, yet a justifying Faith
(as it justifies) does not include all the fruits of obedience. We read, 1 Ioh.
3. 2. He that has this Hope in him [God] purifies himself as God is pure;
whence it is plain, that a well-grounded hope will purify the heart: but if from
thence any will infer that the Grace of hope, and the effects of hope, are
formally the same, he will miserably expose his own ignorance.

(2.) To be justified by the grace of God that signifies the same thing too,
viz. That we are justified by believing and obeying the Gospel. Now this is
truly wonderful! but how does he prove it? why thus! The Grace of God is the
Gospel of Christ, expressly so called in Tit. 2. 11. as being the Effect of the
free Grace and Goodness of God to Mankind. To which I return; 1. It is very
true, that the Gospel of Christ is called Grace; as being the product of mere
Grace, and contains the Methods of God's Grace in the justifying and recovering
of Sinners. The word Grace signifies either the free Love and Favor of God
toward us, or the effects of that Grace for us, or upon us: and thus the
Revelation of God's Mind and Will, being one of the Effects of Grace, may be
called Grace. But now that the Grace of God is the Gospel, that is, the
Revelation of God's Mind and Will, is not true: Grace is larger than
Gospel-Revelation* The Gospel reveals more Grace than what consists in
Revelation. But he argues thus: The Gospel of Christ is called Grace, therefore
the Grace of God is called the Gospel: as if he would conclude, that because
every man is a living Creature, therefore every living Creature is a Man. But I
wonder why any should pray so earnestly for true Repentance and the Holy
Spirit, if Grace signify nothing but the Revelation of the Gospel? which a Man
may purchase, filleted, and gilded for five Shillings: And all the
Supplications of Christians for Grace, signify no more but that we may have
the Scriptures, which is Grace indeed but not all the Grace promised in the
Scriptures. 2. To be justified by Grace is quite another thing. Romans 3. 24.
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ: (...): justified in a way of free Gift, which excludes the
consideration of any thing inherent in us: for though to be saved by Grace,
might allow some consideration of Obedience, and yet such is the infinite
Disproportion between the Obedience and the Reward, that it may be called
Grace; yet that will not satisfy the Expression, To be justified (...), gratis,
without any consideration at all on the part of the Person justified, for which
he is so justified. (3.) Faith in the Blood of Christ is a belief of the Gospel
which was confirmed by his Blood. Then farewell for ever all discourse, and
writing: The Builders of Babel might ^ooner have guest at one another meaning,
after that the Curse of God had cleft their Tongues into seventy two Dialects,
than here-after we shall understand the Conceptions of Men's Minds by the
expressions of their Mouths. For if when the Apostle says we are justified
through Faith in his Blood, he designs no more than that we are justified by
believing and obeying the Gospel; then for ought I know our Author may intend
as Orthodoxly as any Man living: and when he says we are justified by believing
and obeying the Gospel, he may intend it only by way of evidence; but that we
are really justified through Faith in the Blood of Christ. (4.) To be justified
by believing that Christ is the Son of God, signifies the same thing too, Joh.
20. 31. But here our Author has relieved himself from his old Artifice which
never failed him: the forceing Scripture over to him, when he is lazy, and will
not stir a step to go to the Scripture. The Text speaks its own Language thus:
These things are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Son of God,
and believing ye may have life through his Name; where the Evangelist says not,
They are justified by believing that Jesus is the Son of God, but that having
first satisfied their Faith from Scripture that Jesus is the Son of God, (which
Truth being well studied, well digested, and improved, will give us a marvelous
light into the Mystery of the Gospel, and without which, the whole of the
Gospel is involved in eternal Night) and then believing, they have eternal Life
through his Name, by his satisfactory Blood and Righteousness, and the
Authority which he has thereby with the Father. But believe it, here is harder
work than all this behind; for our Author will propound several Questions, and
when he has done answer them. 1. Quest. What is it to believe that Christ is
the Son of God? Ans. That is, (says he) That Messiah, and Prophet whom God sent
into the World. Very good! Now as I remember p. 4. he told us, That Christ was
anointed to be the Messiah at his Baptism, (let the Reader examine it): Now if
to be the Son of God, be to be the Messiah, and that he was not the Messiah
till his Baptism, then he was not the Son of God till his Baptism; and then for
about 30 years he was (...), a mere Man; and yet this is a great favor I
assure you, for his Baptism was about three or four years before his
Resurrection, and then they are to blame who will suspect this Principle to be
Socinian: well! But yet to believe Christ to be the Son of God, is to believe
him to be the Messiah! Ay, But there is one odd misadventure more in the thing;
that is, that Hebrew is easier than Greek; for if Messiah explain Christ any
better, I am very much out in my reckoning. Some from hence will pretend to
give us a Scheme of our Author's Faith about the Deity of Christ; and perhaps
should they deal with him as he has dealt with others, or half so uncharitably,
it would be found dissonant to what he professedly owns in subscribing the
three Symbols of Faith: but I see no reason to fix an Opinion upon any Man that
he will not openly avow. 2. Quest. But what is the Messiah? Ans. Why, The
Prophet whom God sent into the World to reveal his Will to us: To believe him
to be the Son of God, is to believe him to be the Messiah, and to believe him
to be the Messiah is to believe him to be a Prophet, and that is (as near as I
can measure it) just one third part of his Mediatory Employment. Surely he has
mean thoughts of his Reader's Intellectuals, or great presumptions upon their
good-Natures, or a high esteem of the persuasiveness of his own Rhetoric, that
can hope to proselyte them into a belief (without one Argument) That the Son of
God signifies no other than Messiah, Messiah no more than Prophet, and that the
Prophetical-Office of this Messiah, is the just, complete Object of our Faith.
3. Quest. But what does this Belief of Christ to be the Messiah, the Prophet,
include? Ans. A general Belief of the Gospel which he preached: most rare
Divinity! I suppose we may be saved upon very cheap terms by and by: For 1. A
general Belief of the Gospel, will serve the turn to justify (...) well enough,
that is as far as Faith has ought to do in Justification. If Faith believes
Christ to be the Messiah, that is, a Prophet whom God sent to reveal his Will
to us, it has got a general Belief of the Gospel, which may be without
understanding in particular one syllable of what Christ has revealed of his
Father's Will; and then I suppose, a general Obedience will serve well enough
for a general Faith. 2. We may believe Christ to be the Messiah, yet if we
believe not also what that Person is, in whom the Office of Mediator resides,
we shall understand very little of its Nature, Dignity, and Efficacy. To
believe Christ to be Anointed, signifies very little unless we understand also
who it is that is so Anointed. (5.) To believe that God raised Christ from the
Dead, does the same: Does the same? the same what? Why, it includes a general
Belief of the Gospel, because his Resurrection was the last, and great
Confirmation of the Gospel. Let us now put all this together: We are said to be
justified by believing that God raised up Christ from the Dead, and that
signifies the same with being justified by the Blood of Christ; and both these
signify to be justified by believing and obeying the Gospel; and yet to believe
that God raised up Christ from the Dead includes only a general belief of the
Gospel: In all which there is nothing but what is rotten at the Core. 1. Let us
examine in what sense we are said to be justified by believing that God raised
up Christ from the Dead. The place assigned is Romans 10. v. 9. If thou shall
confess with thy Mouth, the Lord Jesus Christ, and shall believe in thine Heart
that God ^ath raised up him from the Dead, thou shall be saved. Where Salvation
is not promised to a Belief of this Proposition* That God raised Christ from
the Dead, but to a Believing it with the Heart; such a Faith as closes with the
Redeemer included in that Proposition, as is evident from the Faith of Thomas,
Joh. 20. 28. Our Lord Jesus willing to satisfy his doubts and scruples about
the Truth of his Resurrection, shows him his Hands and Feet, gives him leave to
put his H^nd into the Print of the Nails, and the Hole of his Side; upon this
he is satisfied and expresses the Belief of his Heart in these words, My Lord
and my God. When therefore the Apostle tells us, That by believing with the
Heart that God has raised Jesus from the Dead, we shall be saved, he intends
such a Faith, as accepts of, and gives up the Soul mutually to a Redeemer as
its own God and Lord; and not a general Belief that Christ must needs be the
Messiah, because he was raised from the Dead; and if the Messiah his Doctrine
must needs be true, be it what it will, though we know nothing of it. 2. It may
be enquired whether such a general Belief that God raised up Jesus from the
Dead, be a true justifying Faith? If it be: An Implicit Faith will serve tum
for all the Particulars of the Gospel; and this would save abundance of
needless pains that men take in reading of, meditating upon the Scriptures: and
now instead of the Colliers Faith, who believed as the Church believed, at all
adventures, right or wrong, he has introduced another full as easy, The Belief
of the Resurrection of Christ from the Dead: A Faith happily contrived for the
Genius of this sparing Age, which saves us two parts in three of Christ's
Offices, and eleven parts in twelve of our very Creed. 3. Let it be modestly
examined also, whether To be justified through Faith in the Blood of Christ,
and to be justified by believing that God raised up Christ from the Dead, ^e
expressions of the same importance? If they be: then we may be said to be
reconciled to God by the Resurrection, and that Christ in being raised from the
Dead, was made sin for us, a Sacrifice for sin; and it is something strange that
none of the Apostles could hit upon such expressions as might recommend them,
and their writings to our Author's Charity. 4. Let it be considered also,
whether Christ's Resurrection was the last Argument he gave to confirm the
Truth of the Gospel: I think his visible Appearance to his Disciples after his
Resurrection, and those Miraculous Operations he then put forth; his Ascension
into Heaven, whilst his Disciples looked on; his pouring out the Spirit upon
the Apostles, enabling them to speak with Tongues, his empowering them to work
Miracles many years after his Resurrection and Ascension, were all
Confirmations of the Truth of his Gospel, and all subsequent to his
Resurrection. 5. Let it have a place in our Thoughts too; seeing Christ's
Resurrection was the great Confirmation of his Doctrine, without which all the
rest, and especially his Death, had been no Confirmation of it, and yet
Atonement, Propitiation, Reconciliation, Redemption are not ascribed to it,
whether the Death of Christ, to which all these are ascribed, have an Influence
upon our Acceptance with God, only as it confirms his Doctrine? It is strange
that the Apostles should word matters so crosly, to attribute those things to
the Death of Christ, which do most properly belong to the Resurrection, and
those things to the Resurrection which do most properly belong to his Death.
And allout as strange that our Author should make such a noise with Atonement,
Reconciliation, Redemption, and ascribe all these to his Death, when as upon
the sole-Reason of his Ascribing them to that Death, they are much more
rationally applicable to his Resurrection. There are some well-meaning Souls no
doubt that have read our Author's Book, who finding such Glorious things
ascribed to the Death of Christ; Justification by his Blood, Redemption by his
Blood, Reconciliation by his Blood, lift up their Eyes and cry out, What pity
it is that such a sweet young Gentleman that has written such a precious Piece,
of Union, Communion, Sacrifice, Atonement, Redemption, and Reconciliation,
stuffed so full with Orthodox Propositions, should be taken upon suspicion for a
Socinian? and yet when we come to scan these fine words, they prove nothing but
a company of sweet Flowers stuck about his Dead Body: And to be justified by
Faith in the Blood of Christ, is no more but to believe that Christ is a
Prophet sent to reveal God's Will to us. The Conclusion of the whole Matter
then will be this: If the Death of Christ has no other influence upon our
Acceptance with God, but that it confirms to us this Truth, That God will
pardon and save them that believe and obey the Gospel, it has no influence at
all upon God for that End; for which I refer my self to the Reader, and the
Reader to the foregoing Discourse.

He goes on: Hence is it also that the Apostles attribute such things to the
Blood of Christ, as are the proper, and immediate Effects of the
Gospel Covenant, and therefore all the Blessings of the Gospel are owing to the
Blood of Christ, because the Gospel Covenant it self was procured and confirmed
by the Blood of Christ. I am now perfectly cured of my Ambition to be one of
the Corporation of your Rational Divines: and if this be Reason, I do by these
presents renounce it for ever. Here are two words, [Hence] and [Therefore]
which always pretend to inference, and conclusion: I shall examine how well
they make good their Pretenses. First [Hence] I pray whence? Out of what
Premises is this Conclusion deduced? That the Apostles attribute such things to
the Blood of Christ, as are the Proper and Immediate Effects of the
Gospel Covenant? Let us look back as far as fairly we may. To be justified by
Faith, by the Faith of Christ, by Christ, by his Blood, etc. signify one and
the same thing: and Hence it is that the Apostles attribute such things to the
Blood of Christ, etc. And really turn it quite backwards and it will conclude
as strongly. The Apostles attribute such things to the Blood of Christ, as are
the proper and immediate Effects of the Gospel Covenant: and (...) it is, that
To be justified by Faith, by the Faith of Christ, by Christ, by his Blood, etc.
signify one and the same thing. Now when he can once bring matters into this
Posture he is safe, and out of the Gunshot of Reply, for which way soever you
come to attaque him, you must deny the Conclusion. But let us leave out the
[Hence,] and consider the words absolutely. The Apostles attribute such things
to the Blood of Christ as are the proper and immediate Effects of the
Gospel Covenant: To which I answer: 1. It Is just as easy for another (if he
had but a License) to say, The Apostles attribute such things to the
Gospel Covenant, as are the proper and immediate* Effects of the Blood of
Christ; and with better Reason, because whatever acceptance our Services and
Duties, our Repentance and Obedidience find with God, is clearly assigned to
the Blood of Christ. But 2. This is a foul scandalous slander which he throws
upon the Apostles; they give to the Blood of Christ its own proper and
immediate Effects: they rob not Repentance and Obedience to adorn the Sacrifice
of Christ with borrowed Plumes. They give to Christ the things that are
Christ's; and to Faith, Repentance; and Obedience the things that are Theirs.
They ascribe our Redemption to the Blood of Christ, as a proper Price paid to
God; and they ascribe to Faith its own Efficiency to interest us in the
Benefits of that Redemption. They ascribe Reconciliation to the Blood of
Christ, as its immediate and proper Effect, without any intervening Act of the
Creature for that End; and they ascribe to Faith, Repentance, and Obedience
their proper and immediate Concerns, to put us into the actual and full
Possession of all the Fruits of that Reconciliation made with God: They
attribute Pardon of Sin to the Blood of Christ, who was made sin for us, an
expiatory Sacrifice to remove guilt, that is, the Obligation of the Sinner to
punishment; and they attribute the Application of that Pardon unto Individuals,
unto Faith, as that whereby we receive Christ and all his Benefits. 3. If these
be the proper and immediate Effects of the Covenant, and not of the Blood of
Christ; What should move the Apostles always to speak improperly, to affix
Reconciliation, Atonement, Redemption, etc. to the Blood of Christ, and never
to our Obedience? when yet we are neither properly reconciled, properly
redeemed, nor God properly atoned by Christ's Blood, but all these are the
proper Effects of our Obedience.

And now one word to the [Therefore] And therefore (says he) All the Blessings
of the Gospel are owing to the Blood of Christ, because the Gospel Covenant it
self was procured, and confirmed by the Blood of Christ: A very learned
Argument! that is to say; We owe the Blessings of the Gospel to that which is
no true and proper cause of them. The Blood of Christ is not the proper Cause
of our Justification, therefore we owe our Justification to it: His Blood is
not the proper Cause of our Reconciliation, and therefore we are indebted to
his Blood for our Reconciliation. All Effects are owing to their proper Causes;
whatsoever therefore is the proper Cause of our Justification, to that we are
indebted for it: But how naturally would this Conclusion follow from his
Premise? The Blood of Christ is not the proper Cause of Justification,
Reconciliation, and Redemption; and therefore we do not owe our Justification,
Reconciliation, and Redemption to the Blood of Christ: Or thus; We owe all the
Blessings of the Gospel to the Blood of Christ, and therefore the Blood of
Christ is the proper Cause of those Blessings.

And now let the Reader observe, how his Reason brought up in the Rear, has
routed his Reason that marched in the Van. The Blood of Christ is not the
proper Cause of the Blessings of the Gospel: there is your Reason in the Front,
why we do not owe the Blessings of the Gospel to it. And again: The
Gospel Covenant was procured and confirmed by it; There Is your Reason in the
Rear, why we do owe the Blessings of the Gospel to it.

But to do our Author justice, I shall look over these things more severely.
The Gospel Covenant it self (says he) was procured by the Blood of Christ. And
does not this sound more honorably for the Blood of Christ, than to say it
only confirmed a Covenant? To procure (if we might measure the import of the
Word by its sound) implies that the Blood of Christ had some Influence upon
God, that moved him to enter into such a Covenant with Mankind, which without
that Consideration he had never done; but to confirm a Covenant, that supposes
there was such a Covenant in being, only the Blood of Christ gave security to
Men that it should be made good: So that if we know when we are well, we had
best keep our selves so, and sit down contented with this NewHonour and
Efficiency ascribed to the Blood of Christ, that it procured as well as
confirmed the Gospel Covenant; lest whilst we labor to engross more than is
due, we lose what the Charity of our Author has given us: But they who think
they have right to All, will hardly be persuaded to be put off with half; and
therefore I must a little further enquire into this new-start-up Notion of
procuring the Covenant. What this Gospel Covenant is, which our Author so
frankly attributes to the Procurement of Christ's Blood, he has told us p. 320.
A Promise of the Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life to those who believe, and obey
the Gospel: I confess a clear and distinct Notion of what he calls Gospel,
would very much befriend us in our Enquiry: The best I can find, (and it is but
a half-faced one neither) is p. 34. To preach Christ (says he) is to preach his
Gospel, that is, to expound all those Rules of Life, and Articles of Faith,
which are contained in it: Whether this be Gospel or no I shall not enquire, or
whether this be the Covenant of the Gospel I shall not torment him with; but
this is that which Christ has procured for us with his Blood, A Promise of
Pardon, and Life to those who believe, and obey all that is revealed and
commanded, either in the Scriptures, or the New Testament, or the Four
Evangelists, or in one of Christ's Sermons, (I think that must be it) Now I
must here entreat the Reader to open his Eyes and see how he has been cheated
all this while. (1.) It Is very well known he propounded a Question at first,
What Influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his
Death have upon our Acceptance with God? To this he answers separately
concerning the Death of Christ and its Influence; and will come all in good
time to show us, What Influence the Righteousness of his Life has upon God for
that End. Concerning the Influence of his Death, he has been persuading us that
it confirms the Covenant; and now in the Close he has stollen-in a Word we
never dreamt of, that i procures this Covenant: Now I suspect some fraud; for
what Influence has the Death of Christ upon God to procure us such a Govenant?
Had he showed us that, he had deserved better of his Readers, than by all this
Amusing Sophistry.

(2.) He has told us, p. 42. That the Light of Nature, the Works of Creation
and Providence do assure us, that God designs the Happiness of all his
Creatures according to their Capacities; (and they are capable of being
justified and saved): And that God is so Holy, that he has a Natural Love for
all good Men, and is as ready to pardon them when they return to their Duty, as
a kind Father is to receive a Humble, and Penitent Prodigal: And p. 43. Had
Christ never appeared in the World, yet we had reason to believe that God is
thus good and merciful. Now having such good security from the Light of Nature,
Reason being clear in the Point, and the thing so natural, and essential to
God, that he will pardon, and is ready to it, upon Repentance and Obedience,
though Christ had never appeared; what has the Death of Christ done, to procure
this Favor or more Favor from God? We will grant that the Death of Christ has
confirmed the Truth of it more, but what has it added to the Procurement of the
thing? If it be said that Christ's Death did not procure a Willingness in God
to Pardon, but only a Confirmation of his Willingness: I would ask what greater
Confirmation a rational Creature could well desire, than an Assurance from the
Light of Nature, that this was Natural and Essential to God? And I would
further know, what the Procuring of a Confirmation amounts to more than a
Confirmation? (3.) The Scripture has assured us, Genesis 17. That God gave an
explicit Promise to Abraham, that he would be his God, or a God to him: that
is, that whatever Abraham should want, and yet could not want but he must be
eternally miserable, that thing God would be to him: For it is an uncouth
Interpretation of the Promises: I will be thy God, that is, I will be nothing
to thee, do nothing for thee, of what thou mainly want; but for all my
Promise, to be thy God, I will suffer thee to lie under the guilt of Sin at
present, and to fall under eternal Condemnation here-after; though thou walk
before me, and art perfect. If then there was such an Implicit and Virtual
Promise in God's Nature, revealed by the works of Creation and Providence to
Reason; and an Explicit one too in the particular Revelation, that God would
bestow Pardon of Sin and Eternal Life to those who walked before God
inuprightness: The Question is, How did Christ procure such an Engagement from
God, when it was procured before? But supposing that there was never any such
Promise made by God till Christ by his Death procured it; then how did the
Death of Christ prevail with God to make such a Promise, which otherwise he had
never made? (4.) But I suspect more than ever, that we are merely gulled: for
he tells us, That the Blessings of the Gospel are the proper Effects of the
Covenant, but not of that Blood of Christ: so that we are justified by the
Blood of Christ, is properly false, but improperly true; that we are Redeemed
by the Blood of Christ, in an improper Sense, may be said to be true, but in a
proper Sense is utterly false; and then if the Apostles had penned their
Epistles clean backward, they would have been properly true, whereas now they
are properly false: And now who can tell but when he says The Blood of Christ
procured this Covenant, he may not mean in some improper odd Sense that is not
worth a Button?

But yet our Author seems to go higher than all this, p. 330. Our Righteousness
and acceptance with God it wholly owing to the Covenant, which he has
purchased and sealed with his Blood. To Purchase is a very good word when
applied to the Blood of Christ, and therefore because we meet with so few I
shall make as much of it as I can: It denotes procurement in a special way by a
valuable price paid; The Covenant of Grace then Christ has purchased; that
Covenant is a Promise of Pardon and Life to those who believe and obey the
Gospel. In this Covenant there are three things. First, the Material part, the
pardon of sin, and eternal Life. Secondly, the conditional part, Faith and
Obedience. Thirdly, The form of the Covenant, A Promise of the Material part
upon performance of the Conditional part. Now when he owns the Blood of Christ
to have purchased this Covenant; the question is, whether the whole or some
part of it only? If not the whole, then what part is the purchase of his Blood?
1. For the Conditional part, Faith and Obedience, I may secure my self, our
Author will not put them into the particular of the purchase; for then it would
be scarce worth the while to mingle Heaven and Earth with Tragedies, what the
conditions of the Covenant should be if Christ had purchased the conditions
themselves, and therefore as to these, let every man trust to himself. 2. As
for the Material part, Pardon, and Life. I doubt our Author will not yield us
neither that Christ has purchased them, because he denies that the Blessings of
the Gospel, are the proper effects of Christ's Blood; whereas had he purchased
them with his Blood they would have been the proper effects of it. 3. Then it
remains, that Christ has purchased a Promise of bestowing the Material part,
upon our performance of the Conditional part; And thus we are just where we
were two miles ago, and these great words of purchasing and procuring are
shrivel'd up to Confirmation of a Promise; but if he will say that the Blood of
Christ, his Death, and dreadful sufferings were a proper price paid to God, to
procure or purchase a word from God that he would do that which was natural and
essential to him, then we shall thank him, that he has such honorable thoughts
of it, as to judge it worth a good word: The Scripture everywhere ascribes the
Blessings of the Gospel to the purchase and procurement of the Blood of Christ;
but if this be all, that he has got a word from God, it supposes the the
Scripture to swell with Scenical Language, and high Tragical Phrase; which
seems to carry sublime matters in it, but when it comes to be stripped of
Metaphor and Allegory is a mere Anatomy. From this precarious Hypothesis that
the Apostles always write like himself, that is, improperly and impertinently,
and attribute such things to the Blood of Christ which are the proper and
immediate effects of the GospelCovenant, he will unriddle to us many Mysteries
which are vulgarly reputed matters of weight and worth; but if we can spare him
a little Patience, he will so uncase them, that we shall confess, they contain
nothing that may deserve or need the Blood of Christ, or any great matter to be
made about them. [1.] Concerning Reconciliation; The Apostle had said, 2 Cor.
5. 18, 19. All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has committed to us the Ministry of reconciliation, to wit, that
God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their
Trespasses, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation, v. 21. For he
has made him to be sin for us: what the import of (...), reconciliation, and
(...), to reconcile, is, will not create us any great trouble, because our
Author allowing a reconciliation to be made between Jew and Gentile, secretly
confesses that Reconciliation implies the taking away of an enmity, and
bringing the differing parties into a state of Peace and Friendship: But the
Apostle in this place instructs us further. 1. That the proper effect of this
Reconciliation is [not-imputing Trespasses]. God is by Nature a Holy God, as he
is Governor of the World, he is a Righteous Judge; sin is both Contrary to his
holy Nature, and his Holy Law: And therefore as a Holy God, he cannot but hate
sin; as a Righteous Judge he cannot but punish sin: And because this sin is
inherent in, and committed by Man, God hates the sinner upon the Account of his
sin; his Person and his best services, are an abomination to the Lord. From
hence it follows, that sin being a transgression of the Law, in its preceptive
part, renders the sinner Guilty, that is, obnoxious and liable to the Law in
its Sanction, to the punishment. Now this Righteous Judge will certainly charge
the guilty sinner with the penalty due to his sin, but there is a way found out
that he may be reconciled, and not impute to sinners their Trespasses: and this
clearly shows that the Reconciliation here spoken of, is a reconciliation of
God to the Sinner; such a one as makes provision that God shall not impute
iniquity. 2. The Apostle instructs us further in the way whereby Christ made
this Reconciliation of God, v. 21. He was made sin for us; that is, he was
constituted to be a sin-offering, upon whom the Guilt and Punishment of our sin
being laid, the great obstructions to Reconciliation, God's Justice and Holy
Law, being removed (by being satisfied), a way is cleared for a new Peace with
God. And the Apostle as has been observed, cites this from Isa. 53. 10. When
he shall make his Soul an offering for sin the same word signifying both sin,
and sin-Offering. 3. That the Preaching of this Reconciliation made with God,
to the World, was committed to the Ministers of the Gospel, that they as
Ambassadors from God, might treat with them also about their being reconciled
to God; which farther evinces a mutual Enmity, and a mutual Reconciliation;
that God reconciled the World to himself by Jesus Christ, whom God made to be
sin, for that great end, and then established a Ministry to Preach the Doctrine
to the Sons of Men, and to deal with them in the Name of Christ, that they
would also lay aside their Malignity, and accept of the Reconciliation procured
by the Blood of Jesus: Now this Reconciliation made with God respects the
Gentiles and Jews equally; for some might plead that it was the peculiar
privilege of the Jews, as being the only Church of God, to enjoy the benefit
of propitiating Sacrifices: others might think to do the Jews a kindness in
pleading that Reconciliation only belonged to the Gentiles, for they alone were
Enemies to God, and therefore they only needed it; but the Apostle assures us
that Jews as well as Gentiles had need of a Mediator of Reconciliation, and
that Gentiles as well as Jews had a share in the Grace, and mercy of it: God
was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. Thus the Apostle Ephesians. 2. 13.
But now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the
Blood of Christ. v. 16. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one Body
by the Cross. Now here our Author meets us with a window open into his Soul,
that we may see the Pulse of his heart, and what he understands by Christ's
reconciling the World to God. That is (says he) the Gentiles were received into
the fellowship of God's Church, and the Jews and Gentiles united in one Body or
Society. Some that were strangers to our Author's Sentiments would greedily
ask, what was that great quarrel between Jews and Gentiles, that God must send
his only begotten Son, out of his Bosom to dye a most bitter, violent, painful,
lingering, cursed Death, to take it up? That he must be made sin, have
Iniquities charged upon him, to make them friends? That there have been Wars,
and Contentions betwixt the Jews and their Neighbors, Histories both sacred
and profane, abundantly testify; there are such amongst most Neighboring
Nations: But shall we think that God will send his Son into the World to
compose all the bickerings that ever were in the World? But suppose there had
been a Necessity of it, was the feud so inveterate that nothing but the Death
of him that came to make Peace could take it away? must every Man dye a Cursed
Death that comes to make up a breach between two wrangling Neighbors or
Nations? few would be ambitious to be Plenipotentiaries upon such Terms. It is
true, there was a difference or distinction set up by God himself, between the
Jews and the rest of the World, but no quarrel or enmity put between them: But
then, 1. The Gentiles had Liberty to become Proselytes of Righteousness, and
then the union had been made, the Ceremonial Law still standing in force. 2.
God could easily have taken down the Partition* Wall, and laid the Church open
from the enclosure; there was a Time when there was none of that discriminating
Dispensation, and he that set it up could have abrogated, and repealed it,
without such a dreadful way of giving his only Son to be Made first Man, and
then Sin, and then a Curse* It seems strange that God should first Create a
necessity of a quarrel; and then put his Son upon a necessity to remove it at
so dear a price as his own Blood. 3. If our Author was once in the right, there
was no great need of removing these Ceremonies, for (says he) p. 29. The rest
of the World might when they pleased fetch the best Rules of Life, and the most
certain notices of the Divine Will from the Jews; so long then as they might
have a fairer Copy of their Moral-Law, they needed not be beholden to them for
their Ceremonies. But the bottom of the business is this and no other: The
Scripture is most express that Christ is said to reconcile us to God by his
Blood, by his Death, and it would be a burning shame to deny it: What is then
to be done? First, it is resolved on, that it is not to be endured, that any of
the Blessings of the Gospel be allowed the proper effects of his Death or
Blood; why then, some wholesome expedient must be found out that the expression
may be owned, and yet the thing it self rejected: And the best that can be
thought on at present is this, To imagine a most terrible War between Jews and
Gentiles, upon the Account of Ceremonies; such as set the whole World on a
Flame, and involved all Mankind in the dreadful Combustion; not a single Person
in all the World but sided in with one of the parties: And now if* we could but
be Masters of so much Confidence as to say that Christ came, and dyed, and was
made a Curse to make these two Parties friends, there would be something that
might be called Reconciliation. Now upon a serious view of the premises, it was
observed that the Jews had some marks of distinction whereby they were
privileged above, and differenced from the rest of Mankind: Now a difference
you know sometimes signifies a Quarrel, which fell out as luckily as heart
could wish; and therefore these tokens of difference shall be called Enmity,
and Christ's taking away this difference, shall be called the removing of the
Enmity, and by Consequence, Reconciliation: yes, there it must go, if anywhere:
for I see and am glad to see it, that our Author is willing to carry some fair
Correspondency, and not to fall out flat with the Death of Christ. Now (says
he) This Union of Jews and Gentiles is owing to the Gospel which takes away all
marks of distinction; and gives them both equal right to the Blessings of the
New Covenant. But, 1. To what purpose was the Enmity removed between Jew and
Gentile, if the Enmity of God against both had not been removed; all Union on
Earth without Peace, without Heaven, is but a wicked confederacy. 2. The Jews
as well as Gentiles are said to be reconciled. Now whatever grudg the Gentiles
might have against the Jews, yet the Jews had no Cause of any against the poor
Gentiles; did they envy them, their darkness, and blindness, and Alienation
from their Commonwealth? 3. They must both be reconciled to God; and what did
the removal of Ceremonies contribute to that end? But (says he) This
New Covenant belongs to all Mankind, to Gentiles as well as Jews, there is now
no distinction of Persons, no Man is ever the more or less accep^able to God
because he is a Jew or a Greek: very true! I wonder when ever it was otherwise!
Our Author could have Answered himself from p. 27. Those particular favors
that God bestowed on Israel: were not owing to any partial fondness, and
respect to that People, but the design of all was, to encourage the whole World
to Worship the God of Israel; And that the Jews were not accepted for their
Ceremonial Services, we may easily believe, if we can but believe what he tells
us, Page 269. The Law of Moses (...) them up in a ritual and external Religion;
taught them to Worship God in the Letter by Circumcision, Sacrifices, and an
external Conformity to the Letter of the Law; but the Gospel aloue teaches us
to worship God with the Spirit, to offer a reasonable Service to him. And if he
can but assure me that the Gentiles were never the less accepted of God,
because they were Gentiles; I dare give him my Warrant, that the Jews were
never the more accepted of God for their Judaism, according to those Measures
which our Author has given of their Religion, which it seems was mere
Pageantry. [2.] Concerning. Redemption, he acquaints us what it signifies, both
to Jews and Gentiles. (1.) As to the Jews: They (says he) are said to be
redeemed from the Curse of the Law, by the accursed Death of Christ upon the
Cross, Gal. 3. 13. Because the Death of Christ put an end to that legal
Dispensation, and sealed a New, and better Covenant between God and Man. It Is
well he could find any thing small enough to be the proper and immediate effect
of the Death of Christ; but who shall reconcile the Apostle and our Author? The
Apostle says, Christ redeemed them by being made a Curse for them; Our Author
says, No, he only put an end to that Legal Dispensation: The Apostle says, they
were redeemed by a price paid, (...), He brought them out with a price, which
he expresses in words at length, 1 Cor. 6. 20. (...); Ye are bought with a
price: No, says he, Christ's Death put an end to that legal Dispensation. The
Apostle says, they were redeemed, (...); from under the Curse: No, says he,
'twas only a freedom from the legal Dispensation. Two suppositions he makes use
of to give a Color to his matters.

1. Sect. That the Jews were under no other Curse, but that of the Ceremonial
Law. Now, 1. He should have been sure that the Ceremonial Law was a Curse: It Is
a wonder to me, what grievous sins the Jews above all the World should commit,
that God should put them under such a Curse, as should need the Death of Christ
to redeem them from it; especially what great Crimes had Abraham been guilty
of, that God should thus Curse and plague him with Circumcision, which yet the
Scripture calls the Seal of the Righteous Faith, Romans 4. 11. 2. It would be
considered whether ever God gave a Law to any People in the World besides them,
that in its own Nature was a Curse? Our Author once told us, p. 196. That it
pleased, God to Institute a great many Ceremonies in the Jewish Worship, to awe
their Childish minds into a greater Veneration of the Divine Majesty. And
truly, better so than worse; better be frighted into Obedience, than not at all
Obedient: But that ever God designed it for a Curse is past my apprehension. 3.
The Ceremonial Law in it is constitution, end, and design, was a great Blessing:
there they had Pardon of sin, Atonement, Reconciliation exhibited, and sealed
to them, Lev. 17* 11. 2 Chronicles. 29. And all this could be no curse, but to those
who loved their sins better than the pardon of them, and to such every Blessing
of God would eventually prove a Curse. 4. It will appear they were under a
greater curse than what arose from the burden someness, or their violation of
the Ceremonial Law, viz. That Condemnation which came upon all Men by the Fall
of Adam, Romans 5. 12, 13, 14. 17, 18, 19. Such a Curse as was Common not only ^o
Jew and Gentile, but to every individual under both capacities, Romans 3. 9. We
have proved, both Jews, and Gentiles, that they are all under sin, ver. 19.
That every mouth may be stopped, and all the World become guilty before God,
ver. 23. For all have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. And therefore
all had need of free justification by Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ, ver. 24. 5. The Jews were under a curse upon the Account of their
violation of the Moral Law, and their not duly attending to the true ends of
the Ceremonial Law; but if the violation of a Law would make it become a curse,
then the Moral Law was become a curse too; and then they had need of a Redeemer
from the one as well as the other, though both were blessings in themselves.
The Ceremonial Law in particular had this great blessing in it: That as it
discovered to them the demerit, and Wages of sin, in the slaying of the
Sacrifices; so it discovered a remedy two, in the Sacrifices slain for them,
which directed them to look through them, beyond them, and above them, to him
who was the Lamb of God slain from the Foundation of the World: All this was no
curse.

2. Sect. He supposes that the Text, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has Redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, relates only to the Jews:
Whereas the Apostle adds to obviate that Cavil, That the Blessing of Abraham
might come upon the Gentiles: Christ is made a curse for them upon whom the
Blessing of* Abraham came by his Death; but the Blessing of Abraham came upon
the Gentiles by his Death; therefore Christ is made a Curse for the Gentiles.
And that the Law from the curse whereof both Jews and Gentiles were Redeemed by
Christ's being made a Curse for them, is the Moral Law; I have endeavored to
evince in the last Section, but whether to our Authors content or no I know
not. One thing more he supposes, that Christ's Sealing a New Covenant is
Redemption: But there must go more than the sealing of such a Covenant as he
has described: There must be the payment of a Price to Justice, or there can be
no Redemption: To Redeem, is properly to buy back again, that which was
forfeited, and such were Sinners: Their Persons forfeited to Justice, their
Mercies escheated into the hands of the Law; Now comes a Redeemer and gives
himself to God as a (...), a Counter-price, a valuable Consideration, to Answer
the demands of Justice, and the claims of the Law; and this is something more
than abolishing Ceremonies, or Sealing a Covenant; but if our Author can
contrive a way of Redeeming and Purchasing by Paper, Parchment, and Wax, by
Sealing Covenants without paying down a valuable consideration, he will highly
oblige this present Age to read his Book, which is more studious to purchase
this world, than about the deliverance of their Souls from present Curse, and
future wrath, by the blood of a Redeemer.

(2) As for the Gentiles he acquaints us next, from 1 Pet. 1. 18. how they were
Redeemed. Ye were not Redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold from
your vain Conversation received by Tradition from your Fathers, but with the
precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot. In
which words the Apostle evidently shows, That look what place Silver and Gold
do hold in the Redemption of Persons, or things that are Legally under seizure,
the same does the blood of Christ obtain in *the Redemption of sinners: Christ's
blood was not indeed a corruptible price, like Silver and Gold; yet it was a
price, a proper price, though not a corruptible price, and has the same Office
with another price, if we may compare small things and great: and in that he
excepts the corruptibility of this price, he establishes the parallel in the
other particulars, Exceptio in non exceptis firmat regulam. And he gives us
further light into this Affair from that expression (...), with the precious
blood of Christ, or that blood which is a price. So the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 6.
20. (...). Ye are bought with a Price* And yet further: That the blood of
Christ* that is Christ by dying, is this Price; which is evident in that he
compares Christ himself, to the Sacrifices of Atonement, and Expiation, where
the Lamb chosen out for that Service, was to be without spot and blemish. And
thus the Apostle Paul conspires with his beloved Brother Peter, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
Who gave himself a Ransom for all; (...). Now if (...), and (...): will not
evince a proper price paid by way of Ransom for another, we must despair of
ever expressing Truth with that clearnes, but it shall be liable to
mis-construction, by the possibility of another meaning; and it is in vain to
seek a Remedy against that evil, for which there is no Help in Nature. But let
us now hear our Authors Apprehensions about these things. The Gentiles ( says
he) were delivered from Idolatry by the Preaching of the Gospel, which is
called their being Redeemed by the blood of Christ, because we owe this
unspeakable Blessing to his Death. Here are several things which he asserts,
and takes for granted.

1. Sect. That the Apostle speaks here only of the Redemption of the Gentiles,
not of the Jews. A Fancy so idle, that nothing but an absolute necessity to
preserve the Life of his Cause could justify it* Hunger (we say) will break
through stone walls; extremity taught Mariners that use of Jury-Masts, and such
pinching Scriptures have made men rack their wits for evasions: That this
Epistle was primarily written to the Jews of the Asian (...) we need not vouch
Scaliger to prove, c. 1. v. 1. puts it out of doubt. To the strangers scattered
through Pontus, etc. which the Apostle James, Chap. 1. ver. 1. expresses, To
the twelve Tribes scattered abroad: His pressing them with the Authority of the
Prophets, his alluding to Old Testament-worship, Ordinances, Customs; His
urging them with the example of Sarah, do clearly prove it, besides his
Exhortation, Chapter 2. 12. To have their conversation honest amongst the Gentiles,
evidently distinguishes them to whom he wrote, from the Gentiles amongst whom
they dwelt; and yet because of the Communion that was between the believing
Jews, and believing Gentiles, there are some passages in this Epistle that
respect them also: But still the primary intendment of the Epistle was to the
Jews, which one thing destroys all that goodly superstructure that he has
raised upon this supposition that the Apostle here speaks of the Redemption of
the Gentiles only.

2. Sect. He supposes that Redemption signifies no more than deliverance in
general; whereas the Redemption here mentioned is a special way of deliverance
by a price paid. As silver and gold are used in the Redemption of Captives, so
is the blood of Christ in the Redemption of Sinners; but Silver and Gold are
paid as a Price for the Redemption of Captives, therefore so is the Blood of
Christ. Now, what is that which in our Authors New Model of Redemption by
Christ, Answers, the Silver and Gold in the Redemption of Captives? As the
Redemption by Price is always Seconded with deliverance by Power; so
deliverance by Power presupposes Antecedent Redemption* by Price: But here it
is commonly Objected, That if the Blood of Christ be a proper Price, then it
ought to be paid to the Devil, the world, or Sin, for these held the Sinner in
Captivity. To which I Answer, true; if Satan detained the Sinner Prisoner in
his own right, if Souls were his own proper spoils, acquired by right of War,
or otherwise; but the Devil is only an Officer of Divine Justice, a Jailer,
and Executioner of the Sentence of the Law: The World may pass for one of his
UnderKeepers. As for sin that is the bondage and slavery it self. If then God be
satisfied, in whose right, as the great Lawgiver, and Governor, these Sinners
are held in bondage, though Satan repine, and gnash his Teeth, he must quit his
Prey and Prisoners. It is said again, that then upon the payment of* the price
to God, the sinner is immediately set free: But no Reason compels us to Argue
so; for the Price of Redemption being not paid to God by Man himself, but a
third Person, a Mediator between them both: It Is not only convenient, but
absolutely necessary, that he submit to such Terms as shall be agreed upon
between God and the Mediator, that he may actually enter upon the benefits of
that Price paid: Besides, it is necessary he should be so qualified as to
Glorify both the Redeemer, and the free grace of that God that accepted a
Redeemer; and there are many of the greatest benefits of Redemption that would
signify nothing to the sinner if it were possible to imagine him invested with
them, without a previous change in his Nature, enabling him to enjoy them: But
yet it will be said, and is said by others of our Authors Judgment, who have
managed these things with a greater appearance of cunning than himself: That
however then, this Price should have been paid to God, which (say they) it was
not; but we are confident that it was, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6. There is one God, and
one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
price of Redemption for all. Now, if Christ gave himself as a price of
Redemption as Mediator between God and Man, he must either give it to God, or
Man, (for as Mediator he stands only between these two Parties.) How absurd it
is that he should pay it to Man, needs not many words to evince; it remains
therefore that he paid it to God himself: But the Apostle Peter puts that out
of dispute in the place under consideration: For he tells us, that we were
Redeemed by the blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without
spot; whence it appears, that Christ was the true Sacrifice chosen by God,
immaculate, to be the real sin-offering; and that he was Offered to God as the
Lamb was.

3. Sect. Our Author supposes, that all that the Gentiles were Redeemed from
was some gross sins; he instances only in Idolatry, but we favorably allow
him to include all Actual sins; and yet he comes not up to the design of Christ
in Redemption: The vain Conversation received by tradition from their Fathers,
(...); was that Corruption that they derived by propagation, being by Nature
the Children of wrath even as others: Jews and Gentiles being all equally under
the Curse and Condemnation of the Law.

4. Sect. He supposes that we are Redeemed by the Preaching of the Gospel: To
which I Answer; That we could never in any sense have been Redeemed by the
power of the Gospel Preached, if we had not first been Redeemed by the price of
the Blood of Christ paid to God in a proper sense.

5. Sect. He asserts that Deliverance by Preaching is called Redemption by
Christ's blood, because we owe this unspeakable blessing to his Death: But how
do we owe the Preaching of the Gospel to the Death of Christ? When our Author
himself was in such a Huff not long ago with any that should own a Doctrine as
Gospel that was not Preached by Christ in his Life. He admired the Sermons of
Christ beyond those of the Apostles, and will not allow that his Disciples
Believed his Death before he was Crucified; and yet now we owe it all to his
Death. As if Moses had not sufficiently confirmed the Truth of his Mission and
Doctrine by Miracles, though he never dyed himself to confirm them: And as if
Christ had not done the same abundantly, though he had never dyed; Christ sent
his Apostles to Preach the Gospel to the Jews, and Preached it in his own
Person before his Death, and yet of those Jews it is said, Ye were Redeemed not
with Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of
Christ. But this our Author thinks he has proved from Ephesians. 2. 15, 16, 17.
Having abolished in his Flesh (by his Death) the enmity, even the Law of
Commandments, etc. Came, and Preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to
them which were nigh. That which he would prove from hence is this: That the
Redemption of the Gentile World by the Death of Christ, signifies no more than
the Removing of the Ceremonial Law, and reclaiming them from Idolatry and
Profaneness by Preaching the Gospel, and then bringing them into one body or
Church with the Jews. To make the Text Serviceable to such a design, it was
necessary, 1. That he should lustily bind over our weaker imagination to his
own stronger fancy, that by [Flesh] is meant the Death of Christ: For my part,
I see no necessity that Flesh should signify any more than his Assumption of
our Nature; In which Nature he has answered and fulfilled all the Types and
Ceremonies of the Law, though in diverse ways, and at diverse times: (...) which
we render to Abolish, signifies not any formal positive Act, whereby a Law is
expressly repealed and disanulled; but the rendering a thing useless of course,
when it is end is attained: Thus were all the Ceremonies of the Law rendered
absolete and of none effect, when Christ in the Course of his Ministry had
answered their design; and particularly Sacrifices became useless, by the Death
of Christ, those Services, which were Mercies and no curses in their day, being
swallowed up of that greater mercy of the Death of Christ. 3. He must suppose,
and that is indeed a reaching supposition, that Christ's Preaching Peace, is the
same thing formally with his procuring peace by his Death, than which nothing
can be imagined more precarious; for he first procured Peace by his Blood; and
then Preached that Peace which he had procured to Men in his Person, and by his
Apostles; and therefore, though Christ Preached that peace to the Jews before
he Suffered, yet it was with reference to that peace he should procure by his
Sufferings. An eminent instance whereof we have in his Institution, and first
Celebration of his last Supper, Mat. 26. 28. This is my blood of the New
Testament, which is shed, (...), for the Remission of sins; for though his
blood was not yet shed Actually, yet in Gods regard, and the Faith of Believers
it was considered as shed Antecedently to the Remission of sins; for without
shedding of blood there is no Remission, Heb. 9. 22. And thus was the Blood of
Christ considered as shed from the first establishing of the New Covenant,
Christ being called The Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; even that
Lamb without spot, and blemish, by whose precious Blood Jews and Gentiles were
Redeemed. 4. He must suppose too, that the enmity here mentioned is nothing but
some bickering that had fallen out between Jew and Gentile about Ceremonies;
which the Gentiles that I can find were never very envious at: and then, when
he has made all those suppositions, and begged those Postulata's, he will be
ready for Demonstration.

A particular consideration of the Text will set that strait which he had made
crooked: And 1. The Apostle describes the state of the Gentiles by Nature to be
most wretched and miserable, ver. 12. They were Aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of promise, without Christ, having no
hope, without God in the World. They that are without Christ, are without God;
and they that are without a promise, are without Christ; and they that are
without Covenant, are without promise; and they that are without all these,
must needs be without hope. Their Case must needs be desperate, that have ^o
Christ to bring them to God; no promise to bring them to Christ; and if they
were Aliens from the Church, where the means of Grace were to be had, they must
needs be without all these. 2. The Apostle shows the true means whereby the
Gentiles were brought nigh to God; Ye who sometimes were afar off are made nigh
by the blood of Christ: It was Christ's blood alone, by which the great
impassable gulf was filled up that was between God and his Creature by sin;
for Christ is our Peace. 3. That the Gentiles might not Object, that there were
many Ceremonial Hedges and Fences that kept them off from enjoying the
Privileges of those who were reputed the only Children of God: He removes
that small Objection, telling them Christ had already removed them in his
Flesh, in his Person; he was the sum and substance of them: (...). Having
(already) in his Flesh (or Person) made void the Law of Ordinances, and
(already) dissolved that Partition Wall: He that has Reconciled you to one God,
has also brought you into one Church, which he repeats again, ver. 16. That he
might Reconcile both unto God, in one Body, by the Cross, having slain the
Enemy thereby, or in himself (...): Here are first, the Parties Reconciled,
Jews and Gentles; Secondly, to whom they are Reconciled; to God. Thirdly, the
Fruit of this Reconciliation to God. They are brought into one Church amongst
themselves. Fourthly, The Means whereby they are Reconciled to God, that so
they might be capable of being United into one Church, and that is by the Cross
of Christ, or by himself on the Cross, who bare our sins on the Tree. 4. The
Apostle shows the way, and means of promulgating this Peace which he had made
with God; and that was by the public Preaching of the Gospel, ver. 17. He
Preached Peace; he made Peace with God, and then Preached it to the Gentile
World: He that had procured good will toward men, Preaches Peace on Earth. How
little ground now had our Author to say, That we are said to be Redeemed by the
Preaching of the Gospel, when the Preaching of the Gospel is nothing but a
Declaration of that Redemption which Christ has made of Jew and Gentile with
God, and the way and Method to be partakers of the benefit of it?

And now to draw to a close of this Matter, let us re-view our Authors Doctrine
of Redemption: The Redemption of Jew and Gentile he makes to differ as much as
the Faith of Abraham, and that of Christians.

1. They differ in the matter of Redemption, that which they were Redeemed
from: The Jews they were Redeemed from the Ceremonial Law, the Gentiles they
were Redeemed from Idolatry, and impure practices.

2. They differ in the manner of procurement; for the Jews, Christ (says he) by
his Death put an end to that Legal Dispensation; and so their turn is served,
that little Redemption that they needed, which is all our Author can afford
them, was Actually accomplished by the Death of Christ, which was a proper and
immediate cause of their Redemption, (such a one as it was;) but then the
Gentiles they were Redeemed after another fashion, by the Preaching of the
Gospel, whereby they were turned from Idolatry, and impure practices. And this
shall be called Redemption, because it were dangerous to ascribe it to the
blood of Christ (for an Obvious Reason that he knows of;) but because the
Scripture says we are Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, and gives that Blood a
concernment therein; therefore to stop the ^uth of the Scripture, it shall be
said, we owe the Preaching of the Gospel to the blood of Christ.

[3.] There is one thing more, from whence our Author flatters himself with
hopes of great success; and that is by mis-representing the Analogy between the
Jewish Sacrifices, and the Sacrifices of Christ* Two things he attempts.

1. To show what it is under the Law, to which the Death of Christ, his
Ascension into Heaven, and presenting his Blood to God, does Answer.

2. What it is under the Law to which his Intercession Answers: Which project
of our Authors has been contrived, and managed with a great deal more subtilty
by those who would storm, or blush, to see their Arguments thus miserably
abased.

(1.) To the former of these, he expresses himself thus. Now as the Death of
Christ upon the Cross, and his Ascension into Heaven, and presenting his Blood
to God in that most Holy place did answer to the first sprinkling of the Blood
under the Law, which confirmed the Mosaical Covenant, as the Apostle
Discourses, in Heb. 9. etc. In which few words he has heaped up more
absurdities, and follies than another must hope to bring into twice as many.
For,

1. Here is a supposition of Christ's presenting his Blood to God in Heaven
distinct from his Intercession, which when he shall offer to prove, it may be
time to consider it.

2. He supposes that Christ's Ascension into Heaven answered the first
sprinkling of blood under the Law: A most ridiculous supposition! For what is
there in sprinkling that answers to Ascension, or bears the least Analogy to
it? Surely these Gentlemen that create such parallels, and fancy such uncouth
resemblances, must have some mad design in their Heads, which nothing will
subserve but such forced allusions: And I do not now wonder that he should so
tediously rail at the use of Allusions in others, for they will deserve the
most of scorn that can be thrown upon them, if they be all like his own.

3. That the Death of Christ upon the Cross did Answer the sprinkling of Blood
under the Law which confirmed the Covenant, is very true: but then, 1. It must
be remembered in what respect it confirmed the Covenant, not merely as a
witnessing to the Truth of what he has preached, but as Answering the demands,
and claims of the Governing Justice of God, as we have before showed. 2. It
must be remembered also that it was not such a Covenant as he has imposed upon
us, but the true Covenant of Grace, wherein God promises to give that which our
Author will not own; the New Heart, New Spirit, and New Obedience. 3. That to
confirm a Covenant, was not all the design of it is sprinkling, but diverting of
the wrath of God, procuring his favor, etc. So the Blood of Christ has greater
ends than confirming of the Truth he taught, viz. the appeasing Gods just
displeasure, procuring his Actual Love, pacifying of the Conscience, cleansing
the Soul. 4. He supposes also that the Apostle Discourses to this purpose, Romans
9. which is to make the Apostle accessory to his own groundless fopperies, who
is indeed perfectly innocent of these crimes. For, 1. The sprinkling of the
blood, which the Apostle mentions, Heb. 9. 9. in that mentioned Exodus 24. 6.
Now, there was another sprinkling of blood Antecedent to that, which we read
of, Exodus 12. to which the blood of Christ did Answer, and to which the Apostle
refers, as is evident from Heb. 11. 28. Heb. 12. 24. 2. The sprinkling of
Blood, Heb. 9. 19. being the same with that Exodus 24. 6. shows evidently that
as the whole concern of the blood sprinkled at that time, was not confirming a
Covenant, but Atoning God: So the whole concern of the blood of Christ, is not
taken up in confirming a Covenant, much less such a thing as he will mis-call a
Covenant, but in Reconciling God to Man, paying a price of Redemption to God,
etc. 3. That the Apostle carries another Argument is evident* For, 1. The
Typical Interest which those Sacrifices had in Redemption, were accomplished
before the Blood was carried in to the Holiest place, ver. 12. Neither by the
blood of Bulls and Goats, but by his own Blood he entered into the most Holy
place, having obtained eternal Redemption: Thus Christ had obtained eternal
Redemption, and perfected the whole work of it (as far as the paying of a price
to God goes in the Matter) before his Ascension; and that which remained, was
the application of the benefit of what he had procured with God, to us, by his
prevailing Intercession: And as to the blood of the Sacrifices mentioned, Exodus
24. 6. which the Apostle refers to, ver. 19. which our Author thinks had no
other use but the confirming of the Mosaical Covenant, it was never carried
into the most Holy place at all, nor the blood of any Propitiatory Sacrifice,
but only that upon the Feast of Expiation once a year. 2. The Apostle in this
Chapter, does not only refer to the sprinkling of the Blood of the Sacrifice,
Exodus 24. but to the sprinkling of the blood of the Red Heifer, Numb. 19. 4.
Eleazer shall take of her blood (the red Heifer without blemish, and without
spot, ver. 2.) and shall sprinkle it directly before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: To which the Apostle expressly refers, ibid. v. 12. If the blood
of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of a Heifer sprinkling the unclean
Sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh, how much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit Offered himself to God, purge your
Consciences from Dead works? And this blood was neither carried into the Holy
place, nor the Ministration of the Service performed by the High Priest, but by
Eleazar: which proves, 1. That the blood of Christ had all its atoning virtue
on this side his entrance into Heaven; and 2. That Christ was Typified by the
inferior Priests, and not by the High Priest alone: For here not Aaron, but
Eleazar performed the Service of the Day. 3. The Apostle clearly Disputes
against this Figment of Christ's presenting his blood to God in Heaven, (which
the Men of this leaven, will needs have to be all the Sacrifice that Christ
Offered to God) ver. 25, 26. Nor yet that he should Offer himself often, for
then he must often have Suffered. No Offering without Suffering: But Christ
Suffered but once, therefore he Offered but once. Nay, says the Apostle, Now
once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. That which Christ did once he does not do always; but if Christ's
appearing before God in Heaven, be the offering of himself in sacrifice, he
does it always to the end of his Mediatory Kingdom.

(2) But what was it under the Law, to which the Intercession of Christ
answers? To this he returns thus: As the Death, etc. so his continual
Intercession for us in virtue of his Blood once shed, and once offered to God,
answers those frequent Expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, especially to
that General Sacrifice on the great Day of Expiation, when the High Priest
entered into the Holy of Holies with the blood of Beasts: As the Death of
Christ, his Ascension, and presenting his Blood to God, answers that one, so
his Intercession answers the other. Yes indeed, just so, with so much Truth and
Regularity of Proportion; that is, with just none at all. What parallel he can
fancy between Expiation and Intercession, I cannot divine: This I know,

1. The Expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, were by Bloodshedding; It was
the Blood upon the Altar, as the Life of the Sacrifice, that made Expiation,
Lev. 17. 11. but in Christ's Intercession there is no shedding of Blood.

2. The Expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, were by the Death of the
Sacrifice, and so was the Expiation of Christ: And so says our Author too, p.
327. He has made a perfect Expiation for our sins, by dying once* p. 328. He
procures the Pardon of our sins by his Death: But in Heaven there is no Death;
and yet he says, The Intercession of Christ answers the Expiations by Sacrifice
under the Law; that is, just as much as Life answers Death: But how to make our
Author friends with the Apostle, will be difficult, who is so hard to be
reconciled to himself.

3. The Expiations which were made by the frequent Sacrifices, were all without
the Holiest, but the Intercession of Christ is in the most Holy place: And is
not this a famous correspondency? But how clear is all this, if we could be
reconciled to the Scriptures? Where the Death of Christ upon the Cross, answers
all the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, and the Intercession of Christ at
the right Hand of God, or his appearing continually in Heaven before his Father
for us, answers the Highpriests entering into the Holy of Holies, with that
Blood which had been before shed at the Altar. But whereas such was the
imperfection, such the poverty of the Types, that no one was able to Answer all
the Concerns of a Sinner, no one could express all the various respects that a
guilty Person had to God, and his Law; and therefore it was necessary that
various Sacrifices should be instituted, that they might represent those things
(...), which it was impossible they should perform (...), our Lord Jesus Christ
by one Offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.
For where Remission is, there is no more Offering for sin, v. 18. When
therefore our Author affirms, so secure of Contradiction, That Christ's
continual Intercession answers those frequent Expiations under the Law,
especially that on the great day of Expiation; he has said enough to determine
this Matter: For if there were frequent Expiations under the Law, besides that
of the Feast of Expiation, and that there be any thing in Christ's Sacrifice
answering to them; it follows, that Christ's Expiatory work was finished before
his entrance into Heaven; for the Blood of those other Sacrifices never came
within the Holy of Holies, which answers to the true Holy Place where Christ
makes continual Intercession for us.

All this while the Reader ought charitably to believe that our Author is
discoursing what influence the death of Christ has upon our Acceptance with
God; To which he has answered, that it Confirms a Covenant, it procures a
Covenant, though how it procures a Covenant he has not yet informed us;
Justification, Reconciliation, Redemption are not the proper and immediate
effects of his death; nor indeed is any thing so, but the abolishing
ceremonies, and conforming such a Covenant, as he has obtruded upon us, and for
confirming that which he calls the Covenant, there was the least need, and I
think no need at all; but he closes up the whole with a parcel of good words;
Christ (says he) procures the pardon of our sins by his death, and dispenses
this pardon to us by his Intercession: Is not this very Canonical, and
Orthodox? yes sure; but now mark his interpretation of himself: He sealed the
Covenant of Grace by his blood, and intercedes for us in the virtue of his
blood. So that he wheels about again, and Procuration is turned into
Confirmation: Christ's procuring the pardon of sin is no more than that he has
scaled this Doctrine, that whosoever believes and obeyes shall be pardoned;
Expiation that is owing to Christ's intercession in heaven, and reconciliation is
nothing but making the Jews and Gentiles friends, and preaching the Gospel to
reclaim men from their debaucheries.

Notwithstanding all this our Author will not be beaten out of it, but that he
and his principles are better friends to the blood of Christ, than those men
that pretend to magnify it: for they attribute no more to it than the
non-imputation of sin; that Christ by his death, bearing and undergoing the
punishment that was due to us, paying the ransom that was due for us, delivered
us from this condition (the wrath, and curse of God and his whole displeasure,
etc.) But now our Author ascribes much more than all this comes to; For (says
he) the Scripture gives us a different account of it, we are said to be
justified, and redeemed by the blood of Christ, nay we have boldness to enter
into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus; we have admission into Heaven it self,
but the Doctor (Owen) says, that the Blood of Christ makes us innocent, but
cannot give us a right to the Kingdom of Heaven. And now what comparison is
there between these two? The sum of the business is this: Our Author
attributes perhaps more to the Blood of Christ in wordy complement, but what
the Doctor ascribes to the Death of Christ, he does in reality: Our Author will
confess, that we are redeemed by the Blood of Christ; but when you come, (as
all that are not Children will come) to examine what he means by it, then it
shrinks into this: Christ by his Death confirmed the Promise of Pardon and Life
to them that Believe and Obey, and this Promise he has appointed to be declared
to the world, and when men believe it, and obey the Gospel themselves, they are
then Redeemed; Christ's death is no immediate, no proper Cause of Redemption, no
price paid to God, accepted by him for poor Captive Sinners: Nay our Author
will not stick to say, We are justified by the Blood of Christ too, but when
you come to sift his Notion, it is all bran; he confirmed the Promise, which
when we believe, and obey the Gospel Commands, we are justified; so that in my
weak Judgment, it had beeen commendable in our Author, to have been very sure
that he attributes any thing at all to the Death of Christ, as the proper Cause
of that Mercy, before he entered into Degrees of Comparison with others;
something I do perceive indeed he would attribute to Christ's Death, Viz. The
confirming of a certain Covenant, but so feebly asserted, so weakly proved,
that it needs the Candor of the Reader: But now what do these other men
attribute to the blood of Christ? Why Nothing but Non-Imputation of Sin,
bearing and undergoing the Punishment that was due to us, paying the Price that
was due for us; delivering us from this Condition, (The Wrath, Curse, and whole
displeasure of God,) and that by the Death of Christ, all Cause of Quarrel and
Rejection is taken away: And if this be Nothing in our Authors Arithmetic, we
desire he will ascribe more to it, if he can justify it when he has done: But
the truth is, our Author is most grievously gulled in this business; He reads
their Writings who are too crafty for him, and smile to see how little he
understands of them: Though these men attribute no more to the blood of Christ
as shed on the Cross, yet they are willing to let him know, that they attribute
more to the Blood of Christ than as it was shed on the Cross: The Blood of
Christ, and the Death of Christ, are not Expressions of equal latitude: All the
Concerns of Christ's Blood are not comprehended in his Death; for they consider
it as that in the virtue whereof he intercedes for them upon the Throne of
Grace; as that which gives them a holy and humble boldness to draw nigh to God,
the Quarrel being removed by his Death: And that our Author may see his own
delusion herein, I shall give him a short Collation from that person whom he
contends with: Exercit. on Heb. Vol. 2. p. 99. There are Two general Ends of
Christ's Interposition: 1. Averruncatio Mali, the turning away of all Evil,
hurt, damage, or punishment, on the Account of our sins, and Apostasy from
God: 2. Acquisitio Boni; or, the procuring and obtaining for us, every thing
that is good, with respect to our Reconciliation to him, Peace with him, and
Enjoyment of him; and these are intended in the general parts of his Office.
For, 1. His Oblation principally respects the making Atonement for sins, and
the turning away Gods wrath, which is due to Sinners, wherein he was Jesus the
Deliverer, who saves us from wrath to come. And this is all that is included in
the Nature of Oblation, as absolutely considered; but it had a farther
Prospect, for with respect to that Obedience which he yielded to God therein,
according to the Terms of that Covenant, betwixt the Father and Christ, it was
not only Satisfactory, but Meritorious; that is, by the Sacrifice of himself,
he not only turned away the wrath of God that was due to us, but also obtained
for us Eternal Redemption, with all the Grace and Glory thereto belonging. And
now if our Author will but ascribe any of all these things to the blood of
Christ, as its proper and immediate Cause; he may hope to persuade the world,
that he is willing to ascribe something to the Blood of Christ I know well he
will say, That the Blood of Christ is said to Redeem us, is said to Justify
us; these are Scripture Phrases indeed, the sound of words carries it thus; but
when he comes to open the Meaning of things, the Blood of Christ does neither
redeem, nor justify us, but after multitudes of Deductions, and great windings
of Inferences, and Conclusions, one upon the Neck of another; it does that,
which does another thing, which procures a third, which leads to a fourth,
which brings us to believe, that Belief may possibly bring us to Obedience, and
when all is done, it is our Obedience that justifies us: And we owe our
Acceptance with God to our own Obedience, and he is more inclined to think,
that nothing can justify us, rather than to own it due to the Righteousness of
Christ imputed, as he expresses himself, p. 272. And now at length he once more
casts up his Reckonings: Our Righteousness, and Acceptance with God, is wholly
owing to the Covenant which he has purchased, and sealed with his own blood.
What a rare sound does that word purchase carry with it? But, 1. He has
purchased no more, than that we shall be Pardoned and Saved, if we Believe and
Obey, without any Ability purchased to Believe and Obey. 2. Christ did not
purchase any one single, spiritual Benefit for us, as the Cause of it,
immediate and proper. 3. He purchased Nothing but that he may lose the whole
Benefit of his Purchase. 4. Obedience will as soon save us without the Blood of
Christ as with it: Lesser Obedience with that Blood, is not more acceptable to
God than Greater without it: But this he will call an Influence upon our
Acceptance with God. I confess, he is a Freeman, for ought I know, and may
call, or miscall Things, as he has done Persons at his pleasure, but surely no
man whose understanding is his own, would ever call this an Influence upon our
Acceptance with God; A contingent, uncertain Influence it may have upon our
Obedience, but none at all upon the Acceptance of our Obedience. An act of
Love to God, is as welcome and acceptable to God at this rate, without Christ
as with Him: But this is the Misery of it; when Men must say something, and yet
cannot tell well what to say, but either on the one hand they must fly in the
Face of the Scripture, which they hardly dare do; or else on the other hand
renounce their beloved Errors, which they are resolved never to do; then must
the Scriptures be wrested to their crooked Sentiments, instead of Rectifying
their crooked Notions by the straight Rule of the written Word.

[2] Having now Informed us what Influence the Death of Christ has upon our
acceptance with God, it remains that he Instruct us with equal Ingenuity, what
Influence the Righteousness of his Life has upon God, for the same end? But
here he will be to seek, for having assigned in words so much to the Death of
Christ, there is nothing left for his Life. No matter upon which it may work;
but seeing all the former was in pretense, there is Employment enough for it
left still.

Though the pardon of sin, and our justification, be attributed (says he) to
the blood of Christ, yet I could never persuade my self that this wholly
excludes the perfect obedience, and righteousness of his life: He cannot
persuade himself; very strange! what had he attempted to satisfy his judgment
about the exclusion of Christ's righteousness, and yet could he not be
persuaded? yes, persuaded he was to exclude it, but not wholly to exclude it,
there were some rubs, and little scruples in the way, that he could not get
over: but had he improved his own principles, and built upon his own
foundation, I could have shown him a way how he might wholly have excluded it,
for p. 243. he gives it us as a Note worth our observing that in the whole New
Testament there is no such expeession as the Righteousness of Christ; And p.
78. he lays it down as an infallible maxim; That we cannot draw any one
conclusion from the person of Christ, which his Gospel has not expressly
taught; seeing then we cannot safely draw any such conclusion from Christ's
Person, and the Scripture has not expressly taught it, what should hinder him
from a plerophory in this point, wholly to exclude that from his Creed, which
is not expressly taught in the Scripture, and therefore may not be drawn from
the consideration of his Person by consequence. And if his scruples had been
but as strong against the righteousness of Christ, (or he had been in the
scrupling mood) as against the justification of Abraham by the righteousness of
Christ, this matter had been put out of doubt with him wholly long before this.
In the mean time, The righteousness of Christ is mightily beholden to his good
Nature, that when by his principles he might, yet out of civility he would not,
and therefore could not wholly exclude it: Some Place, some Room it shall have,
some Remote and Improper causality, as the Death of Christ had in our
Acceptance with God: But what may be the Reason why he could not altogether,
as well as almost exclude it? O, he tells us, that the Apostle tells him,
Ephesians. 1. 6. That we are accepted in the Beloved. And is this the great
difficulty? Alas, one of his Wedges would make this little Knot fly at the
first stroke: May there not possibly be given another meaning of it? Must it
needs be Interpreted of Acceptance through the active Obedience of Christ?
This would have done the work. Or thus, Our acceptance is ascribed to the
Obedience of Christ's Life, because that has a great Influence upon us to make
us Obedient, which is that Righteousness for which we are accepted of God. The
Example of Christ has given us a Pattern of Obedience, which when we Imitate,
we are accepted of God; but what now if he had played one of his Omnipotent
Machines against the Text, he might have Battered down the Conclusion with
ease. By the Beloved, is meant Christ, by Christ, is meant the Gospel; by the
Gospel is meant Obedience, and then the sense is no more but this; We are
accepted in the Beloved, that is, We are accepted for our selves. And I must
needs say, this had been a far more Rational Course, than that he has taken
with the Death of Christ: Ay, but (says he) whatever rendered Christ beloved of
God, did contribute something to our Obedience: Something? That Is a huge
Kindness indeed; There Is a vast distance between something and nothing, and yet
it may be such a something, as is next to nothing. Well, we are glad of a
little till we can get more: For because he was beloved of God, we are accepted
for his sake: That Is high, and surprising. But still, What kind of Cause was
Christ's Obedience of our acceptance? One of the Poorest, Lowest causes in the
World, is one that they Nickname a Causa sine qua non; which yet is properly
no cause at all; And yet our Author when time was, could tell us, page 43. That
had Christ never appeared in the World, yet we have reason to believe God is
thus Wise, Good, and Merciful, to forgive us our sins, when we return to our
Duty: Such a Cause was the Death of Christ of our acceptance. Page 46. Gods
requiring such a Sacrifice as the Death of Christ for the Expiation of our
sins, was not because he could not do otherwise. If now we might have been
accepted without his Incarnation, I presume we might have been so without his
Obedience; and then it is not so much as that little nothing of a Causa sine
qua non: But this is pure Trifling; For the Question was, What Influence
Christ's Righteousness has upon our acceptance with God? He answers, That
because Christ was beloved, we are beloved for his sake. That is, Christ's
Obedience has an Influence upon our acceptance; but what that Influence is,
remains a Secret: Suppose the Question had been, Why are we accepted for
Christ's sake? The answer might have been, His Obedience has an Influence upon
our acceptance. Those two words, [Influence, and Sake,] are like two Rackets,
that Toss the Ball from one to another, to the end of the Game: However, Rebus
sic stantibus, under our present Circumstances; I would gladly know, What that
Influence is? Why, He thinks no man will deny that God was very highly pleased
with the perfect Obedience of our Saviors Life. Truly, I think so too, and
perhaps it may be the last time that we shall be both of a mind: But yet to put
it upon thinking, is a more cunning way of Tempting our unbelief to appear
against it. Had it been a truth wherein our Authors affections had been
bespoke, I doubt not but we should have had better Proof than his thinking, or
standing to the Courtesy of men's denial: But still, still the Difficulty
presses us: Why God should be ever the more pleased with our Obedience, because
He was pleased with Christ's? For if no consideration be had of Christ's
Obedience in the Justification of a sinner, as that which God accepts for our
Non-obedience, I do not see, but God had been as well pleased with our
Obedience without Christ's Obedience, as with it: The Obedience of Christ was a
Transient thing, it is past and gone long since, and how it should come in
remembrance before God, at this day, that for the sake of it, we should find
savor in his Eyes; is (without the Doctrine of Imputation) very unaccountable.
Why, that is the thing wherein our Author will at length Resolve us.

We know ( says he) how many Blessings God bestowed upon the Children of
Israel, for the sake of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were
great Examples of Faith and Obedience, which made them very dear to God; and
there is no doubt but God was more pleased with the Obedience of Christ, than
with the faith of Abraham, and therefore we ought not to think that we receive
no Benefit by the Righteousness of Christ, when Abraham's Posterity was so
blessed for his sake. I have several humble Propositions to make upon this
Discourse. 1. We ought not to think that we have no benefit: But how shall we
do to know what that Benefit is? Great or Small, Spiritual, or Temporal? Must
we content our selves with thinking? Surely, we have some benefit, if we could
but tell what it was: It may be, we may want that benefit; and may have it for
asking, for his sake, and yet still we must not know what it is; or it may be
some small benefit that cannot be seen without a Microscope; such it may be,
and yet answer all the necessary Import of his words. 2. We ought not to think
that we have no benefit: But have we the benefit of acceptance with God? For
that was the Question, if I have not forgotten, as well as our Author: So that
though we should be so charitably credulous as to take it upon one of our
Authors Say-soes, and Thinkings, that we have some benefit by it, yet if it be
not the very benefit under Dispute, it is monstrously Impertinent. 3. We ought
not to think: But what if we do think so? With what argument will he compel us
to alter our Judgments? For I see this is his Device, when he has no mind to a
Truth, to lay the Proof of it upon thinking, and a well fortified fancy. 4. Let
us now examine his Similitude: God (says he) bestowed many Blessings upon
Israel, for the sake of their Fathers. But, 1. Were they accepted of God,
Pardoned, Justified, for their Fathers sake? If not, How will it follow, that
we are Accepted, Pardoned, Justified, for the sake of Christ's Obedience,
because they received some common Favors for the sake of Abraham? 2. Would
God give them any blessings for their Fathers sake, unless they walked in their
steps? If not, then they were not accepted for their Fathers obedience-sake,
but for their own: For why should they need the sake of their Fathers
Obedience, to procure them Blessings for their Obedience, more than their
Fathers needed the sake of another to procure them Blessings for their
Obedience? But if so, that God did give them many blessings for their Fathers
sakes, though they walked not in the steps of their Faith, and Exemplary
Obedience: That is indeed to the purpose, but then it will be in danger of
proving that God may give us Gospel blessings for Christ's sake, though we walk
not in his steps. Indeed we read, that when Israel was most unworthy, and had
provoked God most, that God did remember his Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and God may have special Favors too for sinners, who personally
considered are unworthy of the least Mercy, which some will call the Imputation
of Christ's Obedience. 3. The true account of those Favors which God bestowed
upon Israel for Abraham's sake, is this: God had made a Promise to Abraham, that
in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed. That is, That in
the Messiah which should come of his Line by Isaac, there should be a
Blessedness or Happiness,) provided for the miserable undone World: This
Promise was afterward cleared up to Judah, that the Messiah should be conveyed
to the World by his Tribe; this being an absolute, irrevocable Promise, that
God would out of that People, that Tribe, deliver a Savior to the World: It
was necessary that God should preserve that Tribe, that People, out of which
the Messiah was to come; and as it was necessary for the truth of the Promise,
that that Tribe should be continued in being, so was it necessary for the
evidencing of the fulfilling of the Promise, that that Tribe should be
continued in some considerable state of Visibility in the World; that so the
Promise might not only be made good in it self, but that it might be made out
that it was made good, to the Conviction of Gainsayers. This was the Reason
why, when Judah had sinned, and God Corrected them, yet still He remembered this
Covenant; he left his People a Lamp for David's sake, on this account that
People escaped utter Extirpation, when they were upon the borders of
Desolation: To this Zachary imputes the giving of the Messiah, Luke 1. 72. To
perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember His holy Covenant.
The Oath which he Swear to our Father Abraham. 4. Perhaps this may be some
account of it: The Covenant which God made with Abraham, he made with his Seed
also, Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed. Abraham
therefore, and his Seed, were but one of the Parties to that Gracious Covenant;
and therefore God in his Providential Dispensations dealing with them as one
Body, the Obedience, Holiness of Abraham the Head, was considered as the
Obedience, and Holiness of the Body, so far at least as to turn away temporal
Evils, and procure temporal Mercies: And if this be so, we may consider Christ
and Believers as one Mystical Body, and God in Covenant with Christ their Head,
and in him with them, and then our Authors Argument will hold, though his Cause
break: If God for the sake of Abraham's imperfect Obedience, yet as he was the
Head of the League, gave so many temporal Mercy to Israel; surely then, God
for the sake of Christ, the Head of all that the Father has given him, will
bestow Spiritual and Eternal Mercies; for, the Head and Members making but one
Body, the Obedience of the Head, is reputed the Obedience of the Members: And
as the Blessings which God bestows for Christ's sake, are Transcendently
g^eater, than those bestowed on Israel for Abraham's sake; so is the Obedience
which Christ performed upon it is own account, and the Dignity of the Person,
infinitely beyond the imperfect Obedience of Abraham; and the Union which Faith
makes with Christ is a stricter Union, than any Natural, Civil, Political
Union, that could possibly be, between Abraham and his Posterity. Thus I have
endeavored to Vindicate our Authors Argument; but I am sure he had rather it
should perish, than be thus justified.

But is it not strange, our Author should tell us, That he knows how many
Blessings God bestowed upon the Children of Israel for their Fathers sakes, and
yet not acquaint us with one single Blessing that God bestows on us for Christ's
sake? For the sake of Christ's Personal Obedience? I wish I had so much Interest
in any Friend of his, that had that Interest in him to persuade him to acquaint
us freely, and open-heartedly, what those blessings are, and how procured? Why,
just now he comes to it: The Righteousness of his Life, and the Sacrifice of
his Death, both serve to the same end to establish, and confirm the
GospelCovenant: God was so well pleased with what Christ did and suffered, with
the obedience of his Life, and Death, that for his sake he entered into a
Covenant of Grace with Mankind. Very good, what needed all this Circumlocution,
and Periphrase? To beat about, and about the Bush? Had it not been more Civil
to have given us our doom in plain English, than to Tantalize us with sugared
hopes, and expectations of some great matter from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
Some would say, 1. That this ascribes more Influence to Abraham's Obedience than
thus to Christ's; for God for the sake of Abraham's Active Obedience entered into
a Covenant with Israel, and chose them to be his peculiar People, without the
Death of Abraham: but the Obedience of Christ's Life, and Death, must both
concur to procure this Covenant; and yet it is such a one, as I suppose God
would not refuse upon as small an account as the sake of Abraham. 2. Some will
say, this is not to Answer the Question, but perplex it: The Question at first
was, what influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his
Death have upon our acceptance with God? He Answers, They serve to establish
the Covenant; they confirm to us, that God will pardon, and save us if we
believe and Obey: but what if I Obey without such confirmation, shall my
Obedience be rejected without it be performed upon that Confirmation? Ay, but
God entered into this Covenant of Grace for Christ's sake: Still I say that is not
an answer, but the bandying the Question upon us again a hundred times over:
Why should his Life and Death have such an influence upon God to make that
Covenant? Why should they Operate that way? What connection is there between
Christ's active and passive Obedience, and such a Covenant? But sure we forget
our selves, for we are enquiring into the influence of Christ's Active
Obedience: And

(1.) For Confirming a Covenant; let any rational Man satisfy me how The
Obedience of a Person perfectly holy, pure, spotless, sinless, being accepted
of God should prove this promise, That therefore God will accept them whose
best Obedience is imperfect, and defective. This is so far from confirming it,
that God will accept me, who am a Sinner, that it leads to utter despair of
acceptance with him; seeing I came so infinitely short of my pattern: What hope
can a sinner have of acceptance, from a consideration that God has accepted
Christ, who was no sinner: If Faith was ready to believe that God would accept
him that believes and obeys; yet had it seen Christ's Faith and Obedience, and
his acceptance thereon, it might have staggered him that ever such pitiful
things as his Faith and Obedience should find favor with God. And if Faith was
so strong, as to overcome that difficulty, as to believe the Promise
notwithstanding this staggering Example; yet it is far enough from Truth, that a
sinner should believe the promise ever the more, that his imperfect Service
should be accepted and rewarded, because Christ's entire obedience was so. Nay,
without question it had been a greater confirmation of that promise, to have
had assurance that God had pardoned some heinous Offender, some flagitious
wretch, who deserved Condemnation, than to behold him accepting a Person not
obnoxious to Condemnation: So says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 16. Howbeit for this
cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them who hereafter should believe on him to
Life everlasting. The Pardon of a Blasphemer, one injurious, a Persecutor, is a
stronger confirmation that God will pardon a sinner, than the acceptance of Him
that had done no wrong, neither was guile found in his mouth.

(2.) But now for Gods making such a promise for Christ's sake, or entering into
a Covenant to pardon, accept for Christ's sake; this answers not the Question in
the least: for, 1. It only asserts, that God has declared openly, that he will
do it. Now, a Declaration of Pardon, is not a Pardon; a promise of acceptance,
is not acceptance; and therefore a Reason of, or Motive to such a Promise, such
a Declaration, is not a Reason of, or Motive to Pardon and acceptance: Christ's
Obedience was so well pleasing to God, that for his sake he made such a
Promise. Well; but if my Obedience be little, Christ's Obedience will not make
it accepted, as if it were great; if imperfect it will not render it accepted,
as if it were perfect. 2. That God has made such a promise for Christ's sake,
answers not the Question; for it s but turning the Question into an Assertion:
As if we should enquire, what Reason is there that God should accept me for
Christ's obedience? And he should Answer, there is a Reason, why God should
accept me for it, but never show the Reason: Or thus, What Cause is Christ's
Obedience, of the Acceptance of our Obedience? And he should say, it is a
Cause, but not show the Cause.

But then further, The Obedience and Righteousness of Christ's Life was one
thing which made his Sacrifice so Meritorious. I confess, I question the Truth
of the Proposition; had Christ Sacrificed himself as soon as he came into the
World, his Sacrifice had been as Meritorious, being the Sacrifice of him that
as Priest was God and Man; and as Sacrifice, was the Sacrifice of him that was
Personally United with God; but I am not concerned to insist upon that at
present: All I say, is, that it is no Answer to the Question; for to the best of
my remembrance, (and it is not a full Twelve-moneth since the Question came
before us) the Question was, What influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life
has upon our Acceptance? and now we have got an Answer to another Question:
What influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life has upon his own Acceptance
with God? As if we were at the Old Childish Game of cross Questions: It was
asked me, How many Miles it is to London? and it was answered me, Thirteen
shillings and a groat make a Noble. For what is this Meritoriousness of Christ's
Obedience? did he Merit for himself, or for us? If for himself only, then it is
out of the Olives; If for us, then that which he has Merited is ours. Merit
denotes a proportion between the Work done, and the Reward received; and it is
strict Justice in God to bestow upon us, that which another has Merited for us:
if then Christ has Merited our Acceptance, we cannot but be accepted; it is
Justice we should be so. Again, what is it, that Christ has Merited? Is it
acceptauce? Our Author will not say it; what then? Why, a promise of
acceptance; that is, that we shall be pardoned and saved upon Faith and
Obedience: And this is the bottom of the bag; when he has turned his discourse
into a thousand shapes and forms, and varied his expressions infinitely, yet
all amounts to no more than this, Christ has confirmed a promise, procured a
promise, merited a promise, that if we believe and obey, we shall be pardoned,
and saved; and yet the answer to the Question is to come: For, 1. There must be
a better Reason assigned than the Righteousness of Christ's Life, why the
Sacrifice of his Death should merit any thing; for if his active obedience was
due to Gods Law upon his own Personal account, it could merit nothing for
another: The payment of a Debt, will not merit a reward; and if the
Righteousness of Christ's Life did not merit any thing it self, it can never
make his Death meritorious. 2. To Merit for us a reward, upon a condition, and
never to merit for us that condition, is next to nothing, as the Case stands
with us: For both Christ and we shall lose that which he has Merited, if our
Obedience be left to the desultoriness of our own will, and the imbecility of
corrupt Nature: Upon the whole Matter I conclude, that according to his
Principles our Author cannot show any one thing in all the Life and Death of
Christ, that may render our Persons and Services more acceptable to God, than
they would otherwise have been, upon equal Holiness and Obedience; and
therefore we must make our Application to Persons of other apprehensions in
Religion, if we would have an honest satisfactory Answer to this Question: What
influence the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death,
have upon our Acceptance with God.

There is a Text, which some think will show us more of that True influence
that the Righteousness of Christ has upon our Acceptance with God, than all
this tedious rambling Discourse of our Authors; It is Romans 5. 18, 19. Therefore
as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation, even so,
by the Righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men to Justification
of Life: For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the
obedience of one shall many be made Righteous: From whence I have heard some
Argue; In the same sense that all are made sinners in the first Adam, all that
are righteous are made righteous in the second Adam; but in the first Adam, all
are made sinners by the imputation of his Disobedience, therefore all that are
righteous, are made so, in the second Adam, by the imputation of his Obedience.
Again, If it was the Active Disobedience of the first Adam, whereby many (even
all that were in him,) were made sinners; then it is the active obedience of
the second Adam, whereby Many (even all that are in him,) are made righteous;
but the former is true, therefore so is the latter. But (says our Author) This
is the most that can be made of that place: This? What? Why this something, or
this nothing, which he had said before; That God was so well pleased with the
Obedience of Christ's Life, that for his sake he entered into a Covenant of Grace
with Mankind: And if this be all that can be made of that Text, the Opposition
must run thus; As God was so ill pleased with the Disobedience of Adams Life,
that for the sake of it he entered into a Covenant of Works with Mankind; So he
was so well pleased with the Obedience of Christ's Life, that for the sake of
it, he entered into a Covenant of Grace with Mankind. Really it must be so,
Reader; take it, or leave it; for look what influence Adams Disobedience had
upon God to provoke him to condemn the World, the same influence had Christ's
obedience upon God to please him to save the World. And will not this be a rare
contrivance, to fancy a Covenant of Works, instituted after the Fall of Adam,
when we are certain it was established before his Disobedience? And so was the
Covenant of Grace before the Active, and Actual obedience of Christ: However
let us consider the most he can make of it. First (says he) there is no
necessity of expounding this (...) of the Righteousness of Christ's Life, or his
active obedience. This Answer of our Authors is like the Ariere banne, it is
never raised but in a case of extreme urgency: an Answer that will serve the
turn of all the Atheists, Heretics, and Miscreants upon Earth: If you tell
them that Eternal Salvation is promised in the Gospel, they have it at their
fingers ends, that there is no necessity that Eternal should signify a
duration beyond the Horizon of time: it is used in other places for the
lengthning out the existence of a thing to it is own allotted period. Thus the
Aaronical Priesthood was an everlasting Priesthood; it was to continue for the
Ever of the Jewish World. And as for that word Salvation, there is no necessity
it should signify a deliverance from Spiritual Evils; for besides that, there
were no promises of any such Salvation in the old Testament; the word is often
used in the New, for temporal deliverance: As when the Apostle said, Except
these abide in the Ship ye cannot be saved, Acts 27. But why is there no
necessity of it? It may well signify no more than his Death, because the
Apostle tells us, Phil. 2. 8. That Christ became obedient unto Death, (...);
but by his leave, the word (...) does indeed signify obedient in general, and
(...) obedience in it is common Nature, without determining it is signification
either to active or passive obedience; but do they argue from the Nature and
purport of the Word, that because Christ's obedience is called (...), therefore
it must needs be active obedience? No such matter; but they argue from another
hard word, Yeleped Antithesis, from the opposition that is there made between
Adams disobedience, and Christ's obedience. Thus the Dr. argued, if our Author
durst have read him; Com. p. 185. It Is opposed to the disobedience of Adam,
which was Active; The (...) is opposed (...), The Righteousness to the Fault:
The Fault was an active transgression of the Law, and the obedience opposed to
it, must be an active accomplishment of it: If the (...) of Adam was active,
then the (...) of Christ must be active. But our Author will have the other
bout with him. Christ's offering himself in Sacrifice is called doing the will
of God, Heb. 10. 9, 10. And whether this be properly said or not, I will leave
the Dr. to dispute it with the Apostle: But I do not perceive the Doctor has
any contraversie with, though he has maintained many for the Apostle: They are
very well agreed, for ought I perceive, nor shall they Quarrel if I can help
it: The Doctor will not contend, that Christ's assuming a body in order to the
offering a Sacrifice to God, was not doing his will; no, he pleads for it, to
the cost of somebody: But this is that which he disputes, that in Romans 5. 18,
19. The Opposition between Adams Disobedience, and Christ's Obedience, will
prove them both of the same kind; It Is acknowledged that Christ did actively
obey in suffering; his sufferings were Activo passiva: But yet the Obedience
mentioned in the place before us, was an Active Obedience, because Adams
Disobedience was so. One blow more, and then our Author will yield us the
Cause: There is no express mention ( says he) made in this Chapter of any other
Act of Obedience whereby we are reconciled to God, but only his dying for us,
which makes it more than probable, that by his Righteousness and Obedience, the
Apostle understands his Death and Sufferings. I assure you, I like it well when
Men argue from the Context, provided they do not destroy the Text; and had our
Author Religiously observed this Rule, he had not turned his Readers stomachs
so often with nauseous Interpretations, but yet I have a few things to offer to
him: 1. That though there be no other act of Obedience mentioned whereby we are
reconciled, yet there may be another act of Obedience mentioned whereby we may
be completely justified. 2. Though there be no other act of Obedience mentioned
in the foregoing verses, yet there may be one in this. No Laws of Cohaerence
or Contexture, ever obliged an Author that he might not pass to new matter; and
so has the Apostle done in this place, and Case, as the Opposition most
undeniably proves. 3. All that he says, makes it but more than probable: Now,
had there been any color for Truth of his Conceit, his confidence does not use
to dwindle away into probabilities, but he had fetched the Great Commander, and
knocked us all dead with irrefragable Demonstration; for do you understand the
Mystery of this [more than probable] when you hear him confess, that Matters
seem to be against him, and but probably, or a little more than probably for
him: You need not lay your Ear to listen in what quarter the wind ^its. But
then 4. -- Nay, hold; Our Author yields: Good Nature begins to work; But yet (
says he) these Expressions, his Righteousness, and Obedience, seem to take in
the whole compass of his Obedience in doing and Suffering the will of God. All
is well then, and Dr. Owen is a very honest Man again. And we will not vex our
selves how to reconcile, more than probable Con: with seeming Pro. I have made
some attempts formerly, and once more whilst our Author is in the tractable
vein, I le try whether the Doctor and he may not be made good Friends; for
since our Author is coming toward a willingness to take in Active Obedience,
it is but attempting however to prevail with the Doctor not to exclude the
Passive. Well, look once more: Com. p. 185. That the Passive Obedience of
Christ is here Only intended, is false; so that all that the Doctor contends
for, is, that the Passive Obedience is not solely intended to the exclusion of
the Active.

We are all agreed then in the meaning of the simple Terms, and it is well if we
do not fall out again about the Propositions that result from them: Let us now
hear his Comment upon the words. The meaning of the words ( says he) is this:
That as God was so highly displeased with Adams sin, that he entailed a great
many evils, and miseries, and death it self, upon his Posterity, for his sake:
So God was so well pleased with the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ's Life
and Death, that he bestows the Rewards of Righteousness on those who according
to the strictness and rigor of the Law are not Righteous; that for Christ's
sake he he has made a New Covenant of Grace, which pardons our past sins and
follies, and rewards a sincere, though imperfect Obedience.

There are two Questions which he here undertakes to Answer. First, What
Influence Adams sin has upon his Posterity? and Secondly, it is to be hoped
that from thence we may at last know, What Influence Christ's Righteousness and
Obedience have upon our acceptance with God?

1 Quest. What Influence has Adams sin upon his Posterity? To this he returns.
God was so highly displeased with Adams sin, that he entailed a great many
evils, and miseries, and death it self, upon his Posterity, for his sake: Now,
all this is true, very true; but whether it be the whole Truth, that which will
satisfy the design of the Text I shall examine by and by. At present I shall
only make some short Notes upon it.

1. God (says he) was so highly displeased with Adams sin, that for his sake he
entailed a great many evils. Now, had it not been fair to have shown the
Justice, as well as the Highness of Gods Displeasure in such a proceeding with
his Posterity? That God was justly, as well as highly displeased with Adams
Sin, never created a Doubt to any man; but that he should be so highly
displeased with the Sin of one single Man, to entail Evils upon Millions, upon
all his Posterity, this would invite us to examine the Righteousness of the
Entail. The Posterity of Adam knew nothing of Adams Sin, were not conscious nor
consenting to it, and yet God involves them in the Consequences of Adams Sin.

2. God (says he) entailed those Evils upon his Posterity for Adams sake: Now
here is the old Blind again: For to say, that God did it for Adams sake,
implies, that Adams sin had an influence, and it had this influence, but how it
could righteously or indeed possibly have that influence, is still a Question;
and till that be resolved, we shall never have the advantage from hence to
know, How the Righteousness of Christ could have an Influence upon God, to show
us any kindness for Christ's sake.

3. God (says he) entailed a great many Evils and miseries upon his Posterity,
for his sake. Now seeing there are but a Many (though a great many) evils
entailed upon them, and not all Evils, it is very much our Interest to
understand which are the Entailed evils, and which our own Personal evils;
which are hereditary, and which of our own procurement; that so having found
out which are entailed upon us, we may search if there be not a way found to
cut off the Entail, by the Recovery wrought out by Christ. And the rather,
because the Text mentions not only Evils, many Evils, but seems to include all
Evils; As Life and Absolution, comprehend all spiritual Mercies; so Death and
Condemnation comprehend all spiritual Curses: And by these comprehensive words,
the Apostle expresses those Evils which God upon the Account of Adam's Sin, has
entailed upon Posterity. I know how easily our Author presumes to dock the
Entail, by pleading, that Death signifies only Temporal Death; but the Apostle
has obviated that Cavil, v. 11. As by one Man Sin entered into the world, and
Death by S^n, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned. By
one man, by Adam, that Sin whose wages is Death, and that Death which is the
wages of Sin, entered into the world, even upon all his Posterity, for that all
have sinned. And what that Death is, which is the Wages of Sin, he assures, by
opposing it to Eternal Life, v. 21. As Sin reigned unto Death, so might Grace
reign through Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. So
again Chap. 6. v. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death, but the Gift of God is Eternal
Life.

2 Qu. What Influence has Christ's Righteousness and Obedience upon our
Acceptance with God? And had our Author answered the former question to
purpose, he had answered this in it, and saved himself a great deal of needless
pains in a New prosecution of it. But he answers: God was so well pleased with
the Righteousness of Christ Life and Death, that he bestows the Rewards of
Righteousness on those, who according to the strictness and rigor of the Law
are not righteous: That for Christ's sake, he has made a New Covenant of Grace,
which pardons our past sins and follies, and rewards a sincere though imperfect
Obedience. A few notes also I shall make upon this, and so dismiss it at
present.

And, First, here is certainly a great Iuggle in these words: God (says he) was
so well pleased with the Righteousness and Obedience of Christ's Life and Death,
that he bestows the rewards of Righteousness upon us. Now these rewards of
Righteousness (be they what they will or can) are either the proper and
immediate effects of the Life and Death of Christ, or not: If they be, then I
am sure he was tardy p. 323. The Apostles attribute such things to the Blood of
Christ, as are the proper and immediate Effects of the Gospel Covenant: And
what that is in his Dialect, I hope we are not to seek at this time of day. But
if they be not the proper and immediate Effects of the Life and Death of
Christ, then, 1. He has juggled here with his Reader, placing the rewards of
Righteousness as bestowed for Christ's sake, before any Consideration of the
Covenant. 2. If not, then he has not drawn a fair Parallel between the
Influence of Adams Sin, and that of Christ's Obedience: For he tells us, that
God for Adams sake entailed a great many Evils, Miseries, nay Death it self,
upon his Posterity; there are particular evils entailed upon Individuals for
the sake of Another, without any intervention of their own personal
Transgressions: Ay, but there our Author will perhaps tell me, That the truth
is, he means all this while, (by a secret reserve,) that Adams Posterity, when
they commit Adams sin, or and other, they then render themselves obnoxious to
those miseries, evils, and death it self: But then this is not to the purpose;
for then it is not for Adams sake, but for their own: Not for that One Man's
Offense, but for every man's own Offense, that judgment came upon them to
condemnation: Which is not to interpret the Apostle, but dictate to him, and
indite his Epistles for him. Miseries then, and a great many miseries, none
knows how many, are entailed upon Adams Posterity for his sake, without any
intervention of their own sin: But now here is no Blessing, not one single
Blessing, entailed upon such spiritual Posterity of Christ, that they shall
receive any one the least Favor, without the Intervention of their own
Obedience: And so things are where they were at first.

Secondly, I must note also, That he says, God bestows the rewards of
Righteousness on those who according to the strictness and rigor of the Law
are not righteous: That is, as he explains himself, they shall be justified or
treated like righteous Persons:

Now, 1. If God can treat them like Righteous Persons, who are not really so;
because he is so well pleased with Christ's Obedience, why may not God conceive
me to have done that which I have not done, as well as to be what I am not? Why
not to have obeyed in Christ, to have suffered in Christ's sufferings, as to be
a righteous Person in my self, when there is no such matter? Andthus our Author
has laid a block in our way, at which a well-meaning man, (though against our
Authors meaning) may stumble upon the Notion of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: It Is altogether unintelligible, how God should punish me for
Adams fault with Justice, if Adams fault were not some ways or other my own;
and fully as unaccouutable, How God should deal with me as righteous who am not
so, for the sake of Christ's Obedience, if Christ's Obedience some way or other
become not mine: I can easier satisfy my Reason how the Righteousness of the
second Adam may make me righteous, and accepted of God; than how the
unrighteousness of the first should make me a sinner; and yet Faith believes
both, though it conclude stronglier for Christ, Romans 5. 17. For if by one man's
Offense Death reigned by one, much more they, etc.

2. God (he says) bestows the rewards of Righteousness on those who in
strictness are not righteous, Let some enquire at his house, as they go by,
What he means by the Rewards of righteousness: Is it Inherent Righteousness?
Then it is Non sense* or worse: God gives them inherent righteousness who have
not inherent Righteousness, which in sensu composito is Nonsense, and in sensu
diviso not agreeable to our Authors Principles: But if he mean, the rewards of
Acceptance as righteous when they are not righteous, and this for Christ's
sake; then either there will be some immediate proper effect found ou^ for the
Obedience of Christ's Life and Death, or else all comes to no more than this,
That God will Accept us righteous or unrighteous, that is, right or wrong.

3. I would observe also, That he supposes God to have dispensed with the Moral
Law: Which is News to me, and I confess I do not believe it, nor shall I, till
I hear it confirmed: Some Errors though speculative are da^ble, and such may
this prove: For if we like Fools goggled in with the Rhetorical Divinity of
this Age, should Trust to Gods Abatements of his Law; and at last it should
prove, that God loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity as such, we were in a
most wretched, miserable, and undone Condition, merely by Trusting to
Indulgence. I demand therefore good Counter security of our Author, That God
will deal with me as righteous, though I be not so in the Account of his Law;
unless I be considered, as found in Christ, not having my own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is by the Faith of Christ, the
righteousness of God by Faith. The Moral Law is the Image of Gods Mind, his
Nature transcribed into his Law; and one jot nor tittle of this Law shall ever
pass away: How much of this Law God will dispense with, what part of it, or
what degrees of the violation of it, is to me unknown; and if with any, whether
he may not possibly dispense with the whole by the same Reason, is more than
our Authors Principles can inform me; he that may dispense with one part of it,
may with another, and so of the rest: For where to stop, or put bounds to such
a Dispensation as comes from the Grace of God, is very impossible to determine,
unless we knew the true bounds of Gods Grace. And whereas our Author talks of
the rigor of the Law, there is nothing of it rigorous in its own Nature, and
the least particle of it would be impossible to be observed according to its
exact demands, if it were made the Law of our Justification: He that breaks the
Law in one point, is guilty of all; and the Curse is denounced against him that
confirms not all that is written therein to do it.

4. The Difficulty remains to this day, Why God should be so pleased with the
Righteousness and Obedience of Christ, that he should allow the Disobedience of
Another. And it will remain for ever a Difficulty, both why God should inflict
Evils upon the Posterity of Adam for his sake, or deal with them as righteous,
who in the Account of his Holy Law are not righteous, for Christ's: till we
understand the true Nature of the Two Covenants, the one made with Adam and all
his Natural seed; the other with Christ, and all his spiritual seed; both which
Seeds were to stand or fall, according as their respective Heads and
Representatives, should acquit themselves in point of Obedience and
Disobedience toward God, and his most holy and righteous Law.

The same liberty that he has taken, I question not but he will give, and I
shall be very modest in a few Enquiries.

(1.) May we enquire, Whether what he allows of Influence to Adams Sin upon his
Posterity, will satisfy the Apostles Intendment? The Apostle asserts v. 18.
That by the offense of one, judgment came upon all to Condemnation: v. 19.
That by one man's Offense, many were made Sinners. And there are these things
considerable:

1. That Adams Sin had this Influence upon Posterity, that they were made
Sinners also, (...), Transgressors of a Law; for (...), is (...), to deviate
from a Rule, to come short of a Mark that is set us to aim at, as Suidas
observes.

2. That the Posterity of Adam were so made sinners, that they were liable to
condemnation; Judgment came upon them to Condemnation: This I Observe, because
some talk as if they were Sinners in jest; but God lets the Sons of men know,
that they are obnoxious to Condemnation for the Offense of that one Man.

3. The Apostle shows how they were made sinners, and how they were liable to
Condemnation; (...); they were so by a Constitution: God did not infuse sin
into them, and make them sinners Inherently; but they were made so by a
Law-constitution: And it was needful that the Apostle should clear that Point,
because the Vindication of Gods Justice called for it: For how could God deal
with them as sinners in respect of Condemnation, who were not first sinners in
respect of Guilt? Guilt and Condemnation do Reciprocally prove each other. To
assert them to be sinners, proves them liable to Condemnation; and to assert
them liable to Condemnation, presupposes them to be sinners; for what is
Condemnation but the evil of Punishment inflicted, for the evil of sin
committed. Nor can it consist with the Righteousness of the Judge of the whole
Earth, to treat them as sinners as to Punishment, who were not first so, as to
Guilt contracted: To clear therefore the Righteousness of God, that he may be
Just when he Condemns; we must understand, that the sin of Adam is one way or
other made the sin of his Posterity: Several ways there are Contrived to Salve
this Difficulty; some say (as was noted before) that Adams sin being Imitated
by his Posterity, they become sinners, and so liable to Condemnation. A dull
Contrivance, which our Author himself will not allow, who asserts, that God was
so displeased with Adams Disobedience, that for his sake he Entailed many Evils
upon his Posterity; but if there be nothing more but the Infection and
Contagion of his Example, then it is not for Adams Sin, Fault, or Offense, that
they are made sinners, but for their own: In Defiance of the Apostle, and his
way of Reasoning: the very truth is, God made a Covenant with Adam, and in him
with all his* Natural Posterity: Adam was not only the Natural Parent, but the
Moral Head and Representative of all his Seed, and therefore according to this
Righteous Law of God, his Offense was theirs; what he forfeited, they
forfeited; what he lost, they lost; he sinned, they sinned; he came under the
Condemnation, they came under it also: And this does fully satisfy the
Apostles Reasoning; By one Man's offense, many were made sinners; by one Man's
offense, Judgment came upon all to Condemnation. And God has given us pregnant
Instances of his Righteous procedure in Punishing the Members of Political
Bodies, for the Offenses of their Political Heads, 2 Samuel 24. Thus he Punished
David's sin in Numbering the People, upon the People, who were Innocent in his
Transgression personally; and to say (as some have ventured to say,) That the
People had sins of their own, for which God might Righteously punish them; is
to say a great Impertinent truth: For whatever sins they had of their own, for
which God might justly have dealt thus with them, yet God Declares that this
was the Impulsive cause of their Punishment, even the sin of David, with whom
the People having a Political Union (as our Author phrases it) they made but
one Body in the sight of Vengeance: And when others say, That this was but a
temporal Punishment, and therefore it will not hold, that God should punish the
Posterity of Adam spiritually for his Transgression, they say they know not
what: For God will not be Unrighteous and Unjust, in Punishing the Sons of Men
for that sin which is none of their own, in the smallest thing, from a Thread
to a Shooe-latchet; and the Rule of* Justice in this Case, is the Law; for if
the Law was backed by a Sanction of Spiritual and Eternal threatenings, then
it is Just with the Lawgiver to Inflict the Punishment upon all that are under
the Law; our Union with Adam was another, a stricter Union, than the Israelites
had with David; it was Spiritual, the other Civil, External only: And therefore
according to the Law of Union and Relation, though the Israelites could only
suffer for David's sin temporally, yet the Posterity of Adam may by Righteous
Judgment of God, for Adams sin suffer Eternally. And now let us briefly see,
whether our Author comes up to any thing of the Apostle, or no? God ( says he)
was so highly displeased with Adams sin, that for his sake he Entailed a great
many Evils, Miseries, nay Death it self, upon his Posterity. Nay, but says the
Apostle, they were constituted sinners, Judgment and Condemnation came upon
them, though they had not sinned after the Similitude of Adams transgression;
the same Judgment which in the Sanction of the Law, was threatened against Adams
sin; and now to Fob and Flam off this with Evils, Miseries, and never tell us
what they were, not how it could be Just with God to Entail the least Evil upon
them, or touch a Hair of their Heads for the sin of another, with whom they had
no privity of Interest; is to Reduce the sin of Adam as near to Nothing, as he
has Reduced Christ's Righteousness.

(2.) May we enquire also, Whether that Influence which he allows to Christ's
Obedience, reach the Mind of the Apostle? The Apostle affirms, that By the
Obedience of one, many were made Righteous; and that by the Righteousness of
one, the Freegift came upon all to Justification of Life, v. 18, 19. (...).
Many, or the many (of whom he Treats) shall be constituted Righteous. For as
all that were in the first Adam, all his Natural Seed, were by virtue of a
Legal Constitution, Ordinance, and Appointment of God, made sinners in the
Transgression of their common Head and Representative; so all the Spiritual
Seed and Posterity of Christ, (which the Father had promised to give him as the
Reward of his Death and Sufferings) are by virtue of a New, a better
Lawconstitution made Righteous, by the Righteousness of their spiritual Head,
and Representative: And therefore the Apostle, v. 14. tells us expressly, That
Adam was the Figure of Christ: He did exactly represent the Headship of Christ
toward all his spiritual Posterity, in that Headship which he bore toward his
own Posterity: But the Apostle has said enough in this Chapter, to stomach the
Pride and Restifness of humane Wisdom; nothing more grating upon the Spirit of
a Gallant, than that he should be made a sinner by the sin, or owe his
Righteousness to the Righteousness of another. This is the sum of the
Apostles Discourse: As the Posterity of Adam were made sinners, constituted
such by a Law, and dealt with as such by God; so are the Posterity of Christ
made Righteous, by such another way of Justification. But then I assume, The
Posterity of Adam could not be made sinners by* the sin of Adam, otherwise than
by the Imputation of Adams sin; therefore the Posterity of Christ could not be
made Righteous otherwise in the sight of God, than by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness: The Posterity of Adam could not possibly be made sinners by
Adams first sin, any other way than by charging it upon them, according to the
Terms of that Law under which he and they stood; nor are the Seed of Christ
capable of being made Righteous in Gods sight, by the Obedience of Christ,
otherwise than by Imputing it to them, according to that New
Covenant-constitution, called the Law of Faith and Righteousness, under which
Christ and Believers do now stand. But if the word Imputation do Disgust our
Authors delicate Ears, let him call it what he pleases, provided the Apostles
Argument be satisfied, and his main Design secured; let us now see how our
Author comes up to the Apostle. God ( says he) was so well pleased with the
Obedience and Righteousness of Christ's Life, and Death, that for his sake he
bestows the rewards of Righteousness on those, who according to the Rigor of
the Law are not Righteous: Wherein our Author and our Apostle come not near one
another by many Leagues. 1. Our Author says, God bestows the reward of
Righteousness on them that are not Righteous. But our Apostle says, we are made
Righteous by the Obedience of Christ, before we can be accounted Righteous by
God: The Holy God will not account half Righteousness for a whole one; sinners
may mock themselves, but they cannot mock God: That which the Law requires,
must be had; the Apostle tells us, it is to be had in Christ: By his Obedience,
through the Intervention of the Law-constitution of Faith and Righteousness,
Believers are made Righteous. 2. Whatever is Lurking under the darkness of
these Expressions, The Rewards of Righteousness; the Rigor of the Law; yet
this we may be sure of, that all come to this in the Up shot: That God for
Christ's sake has made a New Covenant of Grace, which Pardons our past Sins and
Follies, and rewards a Sincere, though Imperfect Obedience. I can compare our
Authors Copia Verborum, his Variegated Equipollent Phrases and Expressions, to
nothing so well as that of the Chemists, when they endeavor to bind Hermes, or
in plain English, their fixing of Quicksilver; they can Model it into many
accidental Forms and Shapes, and yet the Cunning versute Creature will be
Mercury again, do what they can; unless some will compare it to the Youngmans
Mistress in the Fable, that Brided it for a day, or so, but yet upon the sight
of her old Game, put off her Personated self, and reassumed her real self
again. Such Feats of Activity have we shown us, ever and anon by our Author, he
can turn his words into more Shapes than Proteus; tell us of this and that, but
when he comes to himself, All the Influence that Christ's Obedience has upon our
acceptance with God, is, that we owe such a Covenant to it as he has described
to us, and Contrived for us: Tells us, That God for Christ's sake has entered
into a Covenant, made a Covenant; his Righteousness and Obedience have procured
a Covenant; are the Meritorious cause of a Covenant; when the total Sum of
all is no more than this, That God has promised to Pardon and Save us if we
Believe, and Obey the Gospel, though we Obey not perfectly. So that at last,
it is our own Obedience that Recommends us to God, our own Righteousness for
which we are Justified: Whereas the Apostle is Peremptory, That by the
Obedience of Christ we are constituted Righteous.

His Conclusion is therefore this: That the Righteousness of Christ, is not the
formal Cause of our Justification; but the Meritorious cause of that Covenant
whereby we are declared Righteous, and rewarded as Righteous. I perceive the
Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Obedience of his Death, are like to
prove something ere long: One while they Confirm and Seal, another while they
Procure, and at last they Merit a Covenant: I cannot but Examine particulars,
though I have often done it. 1. The Righteousness of Christ, is not the Formal
cause of our Justification. Indeed, I think it is not: Never any Man in his
Wits affirmed it so: Give but us leave to call it the Material cause, or the
Meritorious cause immediately and properly of Justification* and he shall take
Formal cause, and deal with it at his pleasure. I think I have a Commission
from all the Systematical Divines of Germany, the Voluminous Tigurines, and
Bulky Low Dutch, with those few that are left in England, to make a Bargain
with him, Hard and Fast; That the Righteousness of Christ is not the Formal
cause of our Justification. 2. Says he, It is the Meritorious cause of that
Covenant whereby we are declared Righteous: A Meritorious cause sounds very
high, if it had an honest Meaning: But what has it Merited? Justification? By
no means: What then? Any particular Mercy, or Privilege, or Blessing? By no
means, for then it would be a proper cause of it; there is an Exact and Severe
proportion betwixt the Reward and the Work, in all Merit: What is it then the
Meritorious cause of? Why of a Covenant: But are we made Righteous by the
Covenant? Not at all; only we are declared Righteous: But how does the
Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Obedience of his Death, Merit such a
Covenant at Gods Hands? Nay, That he will not tell us. God was well pleased
with them, but why he should be so, is a Secret which must be reserved for the
coming of Elias.

(3.) The last thing I shall Exmine, is his Exceptions against our
Interpretation of the Apostle. 1. (...), Shall* be made Righteous (says he) is
the same with (...), Shall be Justified. Well, I agree to him: But then I say,
the former Expression explains the way of our being Justified; that it is by
Virtue of a Gospel-Law-Constitution, or Appointment of God; who considering all
Believers as one with their Redeemer, does Constitute them Just, and Righteous,
(there is the Formal Cause) in the Righteousness of Christ, (there is the
Material Cause of Justification) as all the Posterity of Adam are constituted
Sinners, and liable to Condemnation by the Constitution of the old Law, as
Represented by him their Common Head. 2. He excepts: That the Apostle tells us,
ver. 17. Who they are that are Justified by Christ, and shall Reign with him in
Life; not those who are Righteous by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
them. But I do not hear the Apostle telling me one such word, whatever he has
told our Author privately by way of Cabala: I hear him saying plainly, That as
by one Man's offense many were made sinners, so by one Man's Obedience many were
made Righteous: And because I cannot devise how possibly one Man should be made
a sinner, dealt with as a sinner, Condemned and Judged as, and for a sinner, by
another man's sin, unless he be some ways or other guilty of sin; and because it
is not the making of that one man's sin their own by Immitation and Example,
that the Apostle speaks of, but by a constitution of a Covenant or Law:
Therefore till I can find a better Term to express the Doctrine by, I shall
call, Gods charging Adams sin upon his Posterity to their Condemnation, his
Imputing it to them: And then because I cannot neither devise with my self, how
one man should possibly be made Righteous by the Obedience of another, but that
others Obedience must some way or other become his own; and because to say
Christ's Obedience is ours by Imitation of his Example, is to cross the Apostles
parallel, and to cross the Truth, for we Imitate it but in part and very
Imperfectly; therefore I shall take the Freedom also to call Gods constituting
Believers righteous by the Obedience of Christ, his Imputing that Obedience to
them for their Justification: provided always, that when more convenient and
expressive Terms shall be found out, to satisfy the Apostle, this of
Imputation be left indifferent: Well, but if not these, who are then? Why those
who have received the abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness;
these are justified by Christ, these shall Reign with him in Life: It Is very
true, the Apostle does tell us no less: And I cannot imagine how he should more
fitly describe a justified person, that others may know him, and he should know
himself, than by the Fruits and Effects of Justification, such as abundance of
Grace are: For whatever our Author thinks of the Apostle, he does not use to
describe a thing by it self, or something equally obscure, but by that which is
more known and Obvious than the thing described: and therefore the Apostle
seems not to describe Justification, but a justified Person by Sanctification:
They that have received abundance of Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness,
these are justified Persons; not that Justification is from any Inherent work,
but that the justified Person is only known to himself to be such, by an
Inherent work, and to others by the fruits of it.

This answer, I will deal truly with my Reader, came next to hand, I had it
from our Author, and I presumed he would accept a bad one of his own, before a
better of another man's: The Apostle (says he) tells who those are that are thus
justified by Christ; Nay then, thought I, that will kill no body; for a
justified Person may be described by his Qualifications, and yet his
Righteousness, wherein he stands accepted before God, not consist in those
Qualifications: But to deal plainly with him, I do humbly conceive, that the
Apostle describes an Imputed Righteousness by that expression; They which
receive the abundance of Grace, and the Gift of Righteousness: (...) It was the
overflowing and Redundancy of Divine Love, to accept a Surety to fulfill all
Righteousness, and Suffer for us; and abundance of Grace too, to let us in by
Faith into the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of Christ's
Death: God might have held us close, and tied us up to the Terms of the Old
Covenant, and righteously have exacted of us a Personal complete Obedience to
every jot and tittle of the Law, as the Condition of Justification; but though
he has not abated of his Law, yet he has admitted a Surety, called therefore
the Surety of the Covenant; not only because he has undertaken for God, but for
us also; for a Mediator is not of one, Gal. 3. 19. And our receiving this
abundance of Grace, is not the Receiving of inherent Grace into us, but our
accepting by Faith this New Gospel-Law or Constitution of God, with the whole
Man, closing with this gracious way of Justifying a Believer by Christ.

But here our Author unhappily crosses me the way with one of his id est's.
That is ( says he) Those who by the Gospel of Christ, which is called Grace,
the abundant Grace of God, are made Holy and Righteous. To which I say as I
have sometimes said, That the Gospel (as he describes it) is not the Grace of
God, but a real Doctrine of Justification by Works blanched a little to make it
vendible. 2. The Gospel as it is a Revelation of Grace, is not the whole of the
Grace of God; the Gospel reveals more Grace to be in God, in Christ, in the
Holy Spirit for us, than the Revelation of it: There is an Operation of Grace
upon us, a Constitution of Grace with us, as well as a Revelation of Grace to
us; but this he will grant us, That Righteousness is called a Gift: so far
good. But is it really a gift, or only called so; as Christ's is called a
Redeemer, called a High Priest, called a Sacrifice? I doubt this will prove
nothing but Phraseology at last: He answers, 1. Negatively: It Is called a gift,
because it is not owing solely to Humane Endeavors. Not solely? But then it
may be almost, and very near altogether owing to Humane Endeavors: The Grace
of God may come in for a share, though a poor pitiful share: as he would not
exclude the Righteousness of Christ wholly, totally, from having any
concernment in our Justification; so out of his generosity he will not shut out
Grace wholly, from interposing in our Sanctification. Haerebit in aliqua saltem
part: Well, commend me to the memory of honest I. G. who, though a high
trotting Arminian, would allow Free Grace ninety nine parts in the Conversion
of a sinner, provided always, and upon Condition nevertheless, that Free Will
might have one in a hundred: But what a Company of Rigid Bigots are these
Calvinists, that will not abate one ace, not forgo a single Unite in a Hundred?
but they pretend they have no Commission to compound between Freegrace, and
Free Will, and that God will not put his Right to arbitration: and indeed it
were hazardous, for what sad terms had our Author made for the Rich effectual
Grace of God, had the determination been put into his hands? Righteousness is
not owing solely to Humane endeavors: Natural strength, freewill, humane
ability, shall have ninety nine parts in the Dividend; and Grace that deserves
all, must be content with one single lot, and perhaps a smaller pittance. And
now what if this will not denominate it a gift? just so much as you add to
these Humane Endeavors, you substract from free grace; and whether that
little, that very little concern, that grace has in this work, shall denominate
it a Gift; or that much, that very much which Humane Endeavors have in it, No
gift; must stand to the Courtesy of the Critics, and great Masters of
Language. 2. Affirmatively: It is wrought in us (says he) by supernatural
means, by those powerful arguments and motives, and Divine assistances, which
God in infinite Love has afforded the World by Jesus Christ. I cannot express
the transport of my mind at the first sound of these words; supernatural means,
powerful arguments, Divine assistances; I began to suspect our Author was
turned Calvinist, as he suspected Dr. Owen was turned Arminian, and with equal
Reason; for I presently found my Error. The word Grace has a Considerable
Name, and carries a good repute in the Scriptures, and therefore our Author
will behave himself as decently toward it, as he can afford. But what is the
meaning of these supernatural means? Why, to speak liquidly, Means of
Supernatural Revelation at best, but of no supernatural Operation: Some
arguments suggested, which the light of Nature could not discover; and some
institutions, which depend merely on the will and pleasure of God: for his
powerful arguments, and Divine assistances, they are such Motives as being
given by God externally, are left to the self-determining power of that great
Idol, Free will: For when all is done, it is the man who Converts himself: but
this, and a great deal more, will not satisfy the claim of effectual Grace in
the Conversion of a Soul to God: Who by the same power whereby Christ was
raised from the dead, works Faith in the Soul, Ephesians. 1. 19; 20. Who works in us
both to will and to do, of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. Who gives us the
new Heart, and causes us to walk in his Statutes, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Who takes away
the resistibility of the Soul, the stony heart, and Circumcises the Hearts of
his People to Love the Lord their God with all their heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. But
with such Cantings did Pelagius cover his abominations, talking of ineffable
grace, wonderful grace, when all was but Revelation, or Grace the Name,
suborned to destroy Free and effectual Grace the thing it self.

After all these windings and turnings, our Author will give us a fair account,
How we may be said to b^ made Righteous by the Righteousness of Christ: I hope
it shall be an honest account, as well as a fair one, and then it is welcome;
but whose hopes could have been so vain as to flatter him, he should live to
see an account, and a fair account too, given by our Author, of such a Paradox?
But we attend; Not that his Actual Obedience is reckoned as done by us, which
is impossible. There Is the Negative: And this seems to go a great way in the
Account, How we may be said to be made Righteous by another Righteousness?
Because it is impossible we should be righteous by another righteousness: But
why is this so impossible? There Is no more impossibility in it, than that Adams
Disobedience should be reckoned as mine; which if it be not, let men shift, and
evade, with all their cunning, they shall never be able to justify Gods
procedure with his Posterity, in entailing evils, many evils, and Death it self
upon them, for Adams sake, if they be not guilty of the Crime. Suppose we had
been in Adams place, had committed his sin, eaten the forbidden Fruit, in his
stead, in our own Persons, what had the penalty been in our Authors Judgment,
but evils, a great many evils, Death it self? And what in the Apostles account
but Judgment unto Condemnation? If then the penalty of sin may be inflicted,
there is a necessity that the guilt of the sin be imputed: It Is impossible
indeed, that we should Personally have committed Adams sin, or performed that
very Obedience which Christ performed, but not impossible (according to the
Constitution of the Law of the two Covenants, made with the first and second
Adam) that the Disobedience of the one, or Obedience of the other, should be
^eckoned as committed, or performed by us: And when the Apostle shall
expressly tell us, That by one man's Offense we are made Sinners; Death is
passed upon us, judgment come upon all to condemnation; and therefore, and in
the same way, by the Obedience of one, many are made righteous; I shall see
very good Reason before I quit my Faith, and renounce the Apostle, upon an idle
Tale of I know not what impossibilities.

Secondly, Affirmatively: Because we are made righteous both in a proper, and a
Forensick sense, by the Gospel Covenant, which is wholly owing to the Grace of
God, and to the Merits and Righteousness of Christ. I see now how hard it is to
get our Authors Mind out of him: P. 320. The Covenant of Grace was then Owing
to the Sacrifice of Christ's Death, and the Righteousness of his Life: And p.
334. God for Christ's sake made a New Covenant of Grace: But now it is Wholly
owing to the Grace of God, and the Merits and Righteousness of Christ: So that,

1. If the Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ, be Con-causes of the
Covenant, and yet their proper concerns are not distinctly meted and bounded
out; he may allow as small a share to the Righteousness of Chhrist in procuring
the Covenant, as he allows the Power of God in Conversion: Righteousness is not
owing solely to Humane Endeavors; well, it may not be wholly and solely owing,
and yet within a very small trifle it may be wholly and solely owing to them;
so here: This Covenant is wholly owing to Gods Grace, and the Merits and
Righteousness of Christ, but how small a little singer Christ may have in it,
is a Secret, and till an admeasurement be made, will be so.

2. This Covenant is wholly owing to the Grace of God, etc. Now what he
understands by the Grace of God, he has often told us: Page 322. The Grace of
God is the Gospel: And page 334. The Gospel is the Grace, and abundant Grace of
God: And the sum of this Gospel in words at length, and not in Figures, is, A
Promise of Pardon and Life to them that believe, and obey the Gospel; and then
the short and long of this Business is, That the Covenant is owing to the
Covenant, or the Gospel is owing to the Gospel, or the Grace of God is owing to
the Grace of God.

3. The Grace of God, and the Merits of Christ are here assigned as Con-causes
of this Covenant; Now if it be of Merit, how is it of Grace? if of Grace, how
is it of Merit? I can easily understand how Christ should merit Pardon and Life
for me, and yet that this should be of mere Grace from God, to admit another
Merits to procure those Blessings for me, which I cannot procure to my self:
But I acknowledge my own weakness, I cannot understand, How this Covenant of
his should be owing both to Merit, and Free Grace; that is, How God should make
a Promise to pardon freely, without any Consideration of making the Promise,
and yet Christ should merit it at Gods hands, which implies a valuable
consideration. But thus it must be, when men to save the Lives of two or three
sorry Crotchets, will forsake the Conduct of the Scriptures, and lean to their
own Understandings; for the Scripture assures us, that Free Grace is the only
Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, and that Christ himself is the Gift of
God, Joh. 4. 10. who by the Righteousness of his Life, the Sacrifice of his
Death, the Power and Prevalency of his Intercession, admits us into all the
Grace, and Mercy, and Benefits of that Covenant, with Security to Gods Honor,
and the Repute of all his Attributes. But*

4. This is no fair or tolerable Account, How we may be said to be made
righteous by the righteousness of Christ, because the Covenant is owing to his
Righteousness, (if it had been owing to it;) for, as fair an Account may be
given, How we may be said to be made righteous by the Virgin Mary. If we may be
said to be made righteous by any thing, to which that thing is owing by which
we are really made righteous, then we may be said to be made righteous by the
Virgin Mary: We are properly made righteous (according to our Author) by our
own Obedience; that this Obedience makes us so, is owing to the Covenant; that
Covenant is owing to the Obedience of Christ; his Obedience is owing to his
Nativity; his Nativity to his Mother; and that may be run up in the
Genealogical Scale as high as Adam; and thus at this rate, we may be said to be
justified by Adam. And for this he has wisely made a reserve: A fair Account
how we may be said; that is All. Not that we are so, but that we may be said to
be so; and the Mystery of it lies here. The Scripture has said, that we are
made righteous by Christ's Obedience; and we take it for granted, that the
Scripture had not said it, unless it had been really true: but there are some,
who do not believe it to be really true; and therefore they must set their
wits awork, to find out how it may possibly be said to be true, and yet not
really be so; that so they may neither throw the Lie directly in the face of
the Apostles, nor yet be compelled to wave their own Unbelief.

But it seems there is a twofold sense in which we may be said to be made
righteous by the GospelCovenant.

1. Sect. A Proper Sense; which is this. The great Arguments, and Motives, and
powerful Assistances of the Gospel, form our Minds to the love and practice of
Holiness, and so make us inherently righteous. What needed all this pother and
stir to no purpose? The Righteousness of Christ contributes something, (though
he cannot tell what) to the Gospel Covenant; this Gospel Covenant contains,
Promises and Duties, or Motives, Arguments, Reasons to Obedience; now when
these Promises prevail with us to love and practice those Duties, to perform
that Obedience, then we become inherently righteous in a proper sense; and so
that none may take it ill, they shall have liberty to say, that we are made
righteous by the righteousness of Christ: His Righteousness or Obedience was an
excellent Pattern of, a strong Motive to our being righteous. Two things I
shall oppose to this.

(1.) That to be made inherently righteous, is not the proper sense of being
made righteous: This was indeed the proper sense of being Righteous under the
Covenant of Works; when a perfect, exact, complete inherent Holiness, was the
Matter of Justification before God; and when it was attainable; and it shall be
once more the proper sense of being made righteous in Heaven, where the spirits
of just men are made perfectly perfect; but to us, in the way, it is not the
proper sense of being made righteous, but a Figurative sense, as we may call an
Ethiopian white, because his teeth are so; and it must be a stretching
Synechdoche that will denominate a Christian Righteous by inherent
Righteousness, if he shall compare the Seize of a Pilgrim with the
perfect Law of God; but the proper sense of being made righteous, is that of
the Apostle, Romans 5. 20. By the Obedience of one Man many shall be made
righteous; made so perfectly and completely by the Constitution of the Law of
Righteousness and Faith: for thus we are complete in Christ, Coloss. 2. 10.
through whom we are presented to God, (...); unblameable, and unreproveable in
Gods sight: so pure, that there is not a spot or blemish to be found in a
Believer in the sight of God himself; which upon the Account of inherent
Righteousness, is impossible. Inherent Righteousness is properly Righteousness
(for so much as there is of it,) but it is so imperfect, that it will not
denominate any man properly righteous in the sight of God.

(2) There is another thing which mightily discomposes this kind of
Argumentation: We may be said to be made righteous by the Righteousness of
Christ in a proper sense. Why so? Oh! Because the Righteousness of Christ is
one of those great Arguments of the Gospel that forms our Minds to the Love and
practice of Holiness, and so makes us inherently righteous. Which is this; The
Righteousness of Christ, and our Righteousness, hang so loosely and
contingently together, that it seems very absurd, to ascribe the Effect of the
latter to the former: If indeed the Righteousness of Christ did properly,
necessarily, and infallibly produce an inherent Righteousness in us, it were
warrantable to say, we were made righteous by it; but when the Connection is so
accidental, so uncertain, that the Effect depends upon our own Free Will (as in
the New Theology it does) we cannot properly be said to be made righteous in
this sense by his Righteousness: For when all these Arguments and Motives have
done their best, That which does the work, is, Free Will and Humane Endeavor;
and therefore properly are we said to be made Righteous by them.

2. Sect. A Forensick sense; which is this. The Grace of the Gospel accepts and
rewards that sincere and Evangelical Obedience, which according to the Rigor
and Severity of the Law, could deserve no reward. This Forensick, is a hard
word; and if I might presume to soften it a little with Interpretation, it
should be thus: A Forensick sense of Justification, is a sense borrowed from
Courts of Judicature, where the Judge absolving or acquitting a Prisoner of
those Crimes wherewith he stood charged, does not do it by making him innocent
or honest, by infusing into him the Habits of Virtue; but only declares, That
according to the Evidence he is found Innocent, Righteous, Just, and therefore,
as the Law acquits him, so the Judge as the Minister of the Law declares him to
be acquitted. Now the Question is, Whether our Author has given us a true
Forensick sense of Justification, or no? His Sense is this: The Grace of the
Gospel accepts, and rewards that sincere and Evangelical Obedience, which
according to the Severity and Rigor of the Law, deserves no reward: which
seems to me so far from a Forensick sense, that it is the Forensick Nonsense of
Justification; for does a Judge pronounce and declare him righteous, whom the
Law says, is unrighteous? Can he justify him whom the Law condemns? The Judge
sits not there as a good Natured Man, with a Chancery of Charity in his own
breast, but as a Righteous Governor, to render to every man according to his
works, weighed in the Balance of that Law by which he is to judge: And shall
we dare to fancy, that the Grace of the Gospel will pronounce that Man
righteous, reward that Man as righteous, who is not righteous by the Law of
God, if that be the Law by which he must be Condemned or Acquitted? I will
grant, that in a Criminal Cause, which by the Law deserves Bodily Punishment,
if the Constitution of the Law will Allow it, the Judge may lay the Punishment
of the Guilty Person upon another who will freely undergo it, or that which is
equivalent in the eye of the Law to it; and acquit him, that in the first
Consideration of the Law was not innocent: Let us apply it. God is the
righteous Judge of all the World, and by his Eternal Holy Law he will Judge the
Sons of Men; so true is God to his own Law, that he will not acquit and
justify him whom the Law condemns, nor Condemn him whom his Law Acquits, nor
is it possible he should: To say the Sinner is righteous by the Verdict of his
Law, when by the Verdict of the Law he is not righteous, is not consistent with
the Veracity of that God who cannot lie: But there is another Law, the Law of
Righteousness and Faith, which Sovereign Grace has set up, and this admits the
satisfaction of Another, admits a Sacrifice, a Surety, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness, that he may be just, and the Iustifier of
him that believes in Jesus: If now according to the Terms of this New Law of
Grace, the Righteousness and Sufferings of this Jesus may be accepted for the
Delinquents, then will there a genuine sense of a Forensick Justification be
found out. Yet let us examine these things further:

[1] The Grace of the Gospel (says he) accepts and rewards that sincere
Obedience. Let it be supposed he means the Grace of God, declared in the
Gospel; yet this is so far from being Grace, that it is not good Moral Virtue:
Is that Grace, or something that deserves Another Name, to declare an Offender
to be righteous when he is not so? to pronounce he has kept the Law, when he
has broken it? and yet thus must the Grace of the Gospel speak, if it declares
him righteous in a Forensick sense, who is a Violator of the Law, and yet has
no Substitute to keep it for him: Here is some Provision made for an Imaginary
Grace, to the destruction of real Justice; whereas, in the true Covenant of
Grace there is a blessed Accord of all Gods Attributes, Mercy and Truth have
met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other.

[2] If it be the Grace of God, or the Gospel, that accepts this sincere
Obedience, then how do we owe this to the Righteousness of Christ? what
Influence has that upon God, to move him to accept and reward that sincere, yet
imperfect Obedience, which his Law will not accept? This is the thing that
remains in the Clouds still, and upon our Authors Hypothesis must lodge there
Eternally.

[3] Our Author fancies a Rigor and Severity in the Law; now what that should
be, is not easily conceivable: Is it any of the Ten Commandments which is so
rigorous above the rest? which is it? or how many are there of them? and where
has God dispensed with them, or it? or what part of the Law is it, the external
or the internal part, wherein the Rigor of the Law lies? or is it no certain
thing, but left to Discretion? such as has a latitude, in some greater, in
some less? or rather, is not this Rigor of the Law (as it is here applied) a
great Name of Blasphemy, and reproach against the Law, and therein the
Lawgiver, all whose Commands, and every part and parcel thereof, are holy,
just, and good? And in a word, if God can dispense with his Law, and indulge
the Violation of it, what Reason can be given, why he may not dispense with all
the rest? Why so he may, if our Author say true, p. 45. That part of Justice
which consists in Punishing Offenders, was always looked on as an Instrument
of Government, and therefore the exacting, or remitting Punishment, was
referred to the Wisdom of Governors, who might Spare or Punish as they saw
Reason, without being unjust in either. And therefore he concludes, There was
no Necessity for such a Sacrifice as the Death of Christ, for the Expiation of
Sin.

He is now drawing his Conclusion, and I hope will draw to a Conclusion. So
that our Righteousness is wholly owing to the Righteousness of Christ. I am in
hope it will be owing to something before he has done. A little before, it was
owing (not solely indeed, but almost) to humane Endeavors, and now the Debt is
transferred, wholly to the Righteousness of Christ. And yet he flies higher in
his Complements, to the Righteousness of Christ: Which (says he) in this sense
may be said to be Imputed to us, because without this Covenant which is founded
on the Righteousness of Christ, the best man Living could lay no claim to
Righteousness or future Glory. And is it come to this? Is there a sense,
wherein the Righteousness of Christ may be said to be Imputed to us? And must
all men be Reviled and Persecuted with Scurrility, because they cannot Jump
just into his Sense? And yet the sense of this way of Imputation is Invisible:
Was it not possible for God to pardon without respect to Christ? O yes! Could
he not reward sincere Obedience without regard to Christ? O yes! Could he not
accept him that walked uprightly before him, without any consideration had of
Christ's Righteousness? Oh yes! Could not God have promised to do all this, as
well as do it without a promise? No doubt of that: Why then might not the best
man Living lay claim to that which God promised, upon performance of the
condition of which he promised it? Yes, indeed he might, had God promised it;
but before the appearance of Christ in the Flesh, he made no such promise:
Well then, all we have got by the Bargain is a promise that God will do that
now, which he always would have done, and did do (though not promise that he
would do) before the appearance of Christ, and if he never had appeared. If
then this be the only sense in which Christ's Righteousness may be said to be
imputed to us; it may be said to be imputed in no sense at all; for it gives us
no right upon which we may make a claim, only an evidence of right, whereby we
may lay claim to Righteousness and future Glory: But why might not the best man
living lay claim to Righteousness and future Glory? Why, he supposes there was
no such Covenant in the World before the appearance of Christ; and he supposes
that this Covenant was founded upon the Obedience, and Sacrifice of Christ.
Here must needs be a great mistake.

1. Upon his own Principles. For page 252. he asserts, That Natural Religion is
founded upon Natural Demonstrations, that God is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: And that upon this Foundation, Abel and Enoch, proceeded
in their serving of God, page 253. And that they pleased God by their
Obedience, the Apostle assures us, Heb. 11. 4, 5. And that Abel obtained
witness that he was Righteous: And that Enoch before his Translation had this
Testimony, that he pleased God. Now that which God Spoke by Natural
Demonstration, to that, upon their diligent seeking of Him, they might lay
claim; but God Spoke by Natural Demonstration, that he was a Rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him, therefore to that Reward they might lay claim: Yes,
no doubt, a claim to that Reward, But what was that? A mere Temporal transitory
Reward. And was that all the Reward that righteous Abel was to have for his
Sacrifice, for his serving of God? Doubtless, for he was presently Murdered for
it. And was that all the reward that holy Enoch might claim? Doubtless, for
Good took him, Ttranslated him to a better Life, for before his Translation, he
received this Testimony that he pleased God.

2. There Is a mistake upon better Principles: That which God Spoke by
Revelation, to that they might lay claim; but God Spoke to Abraham by
Revelation, that upon his walking uprightly before him, He would be his God;
therefore Abraham upon his walking uprightly before God, might lay claim to it,
that God should be his God. Ay, (says our Author) Be his God: No doubt of
(...): But what does that signify? This was one of the great difficulties that
lay in his way, to believe that Abraham was justified by Christ. For then, We
must be well assured, that the Blessings promised to Abraham were Spiritual
Blessings, pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life: And therefore this is Ignoratio
Elenchi: But I profess my Name on the other side. And that the Promise that God
would be Abraham's God, comprehended all that ever God Promised, or could
promise to any of the Sons of Men: When God could Swear by no greater, he Swore
by Himself; and when he could promise no thing greater, he promised Himself: I
will be thy God, is the Abstract and Epitome of the whole Covenant of Grace:
It Is that Gold in the Lump, which was afterward beaten out into greater
breadth, but still of the same weight. Sum up all the particular Promises in
the Gospel, and the total Sum is no more than this, I will be thy God. And
therefore when the Apostle gives us the Covenant of Grace, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
He describes it thus, I will be their God, and they shall be my People: That he
will Write his Laws in their Hearts, that he will pardon their Iniquities, are
some of the particulars included in that comprehensive Promise, I will be their
God.

3. That which the Saints guided by the Infallible Spirit laid claim to, that
they might justly lay claim to; but the Saints guided by the Infallible Spirit,
laid claim to an Eternal Reward, therefore to that Reward they might justly lay
claim, Psalm. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, (here below in my
Passage and Pilgrimage) and afterward (when I have run my Race, and finished my
Course) receive me to Glory.

The Epilogue to the whole is this: The Righteousness of Christ is our
Righteousness, when we speak of the Foundation of the Covenant, by which we are
accepted; but if we speak of the Terms of the Covenant, then we must have a
Righteousness of our own: The Righteousness of Christ will not serve the turn;
Christ's Righteousness and our own are both necessary to Salvation: The first as
the Foundation of the Covenant, the other as the Condition of it.

Two things are here asserted: First, that Christ's Righteousness is the
Foundation of the Covenant: Secondly, that our Righteousness is the Condition
of the Covenant. A brief Examination of which things, shall ease the Reader of
any further attendance upon these Discourses.

[1.] The Righteousness of Christ is the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace:
Let us hear his Proofs; not a word: Peracta est haec Fabula Spectatores valete
and plaudite. We have heard of Procuring, Meriting, Founding a Covenant, but
not a syllable of Evidence: Methinks I see the Reader filled with shame and
wonder; wonder, that he who could so pleasantly scoff at the Scripture
Expressions of building upon Christ as on a Foundation, p. 105. and so merrily
inveigh against Dr. Owen for asserting Christ to be the only Foundation of our
Communion with God, should now so zealously talk for Christ's being the
Foundation of the Covenant; and shame, that after such expectations of Proof,
he should find himself bilk'd in the stock. That the Reader may not wholly
therefore lose his pains, I shall entertain him with my own apprehensions in
this matter.

The Covenant of Grace may be considered either in i^'s Constitution, or
Execution: The Constitution of the Covenant is Gods firm and unchangeable
purpose of saving his Elect, to the praise of his glorious Grace: For the word
Covenant, which in the English Notion has seduced our Understandings, in the
Hebrew (...) and the Greek (...), by which the Spirit of God expresses those
things to us, signify a disposition, appointment, or ordering of Matters;
whether there be restipulation or no: Thus the fixed purpose, the determinate
Counsel of God in Scripture is called a Covenant, though the things about which
that (...), or Counsel of God is conversant be not capable of re-promising any
thing, and have only an Obediental Capacity in them answering the absolute
extraordinary Power of God. Thus Ier. 33. 20. If you can break my Covenant of
the day, and my Covenant of the night, that there should not be day and night
in their Season, ver. 25. Thus says the Lord, If my Covenant be not with day
and night, and if I have not appointed the Ordinances of Heaven; where Gods
fixed Law concerning the Succession of Day and Night to the period of all time,
is called his Covenant; and which is still more to our purpose, by the
stability of this grand Law of Nature, he is pleased to instruct us in the
fixedness of his better Covenant, that of Grace, ver. 21. Then may also my
Covenant be broken with David my Servant, ver. 26. Then will I cast away the
Seed of Jacob, and David my Servant. This purpose of God, this disposition of
Grace is immutable, Romans 9. 11. That the purpose of God according to Election
might stand. The Execution of this fixed Constitution follows: which is Gods
wise and gracious managing of all things for the accomplishment of that
glorious design, which he had in the prospect of his Eternal Counsel, which he
steddily and regularly pursues through all the vicissitudes that his mutable
Creature was obnoxious to, whilst man stood, God pursued his Counsel in giving
him a Holy Law to guide him, Seconded and backed with promises and threatenings;
when Man with drew from God, yet God could not deny himself, but devolves this
great Affair into the hand of a Mediator, who with equal readiness and
satisfaction in that Seed that should be given him as the purchase of his
undertaking, addresses himself to this glorious work of Recovering them back
again to God; and when the fullness of time was come, took upon him our Nature,
partook of our Flesh and Blood, because the Children whom God had committed to
him were partakers of it: This Redeeming Mediator undertakes with God as a
Righteous Judge, that he may not lose the glory of any of his Attributes, and
unto God as a Father, that he shall not lose any of the Children that he had
given him; and therefore he becomes a Priest, a Sacrifice; a price of Ransom, a
Curse, to satisfy the Judge and his Law; and a Prophet and King to recover us
Actually in our state to God. Thus is he the only Foundation, 1 Cor. 3. 12.
The Foundation, not of the Constitution, but of the Execution of the Covenant.

1. On Gods part; whatever grace and mercy was in his eternal purpose, that is
given out to us by Jesus Christ: The Promises are made by free grace as their
Reason, but made good by Jesus Christ, as the means of procuring the promised
Mercy, which had been forfeited; for all the promises of God in him are yea,
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He accepts us in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Forgives us
through him, ver. 7. Iustifies us by Christ, Romans 3. 24. Sanctifies, and saves
us by Christ, Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. And, 2. On our part; through him we approach to
God, John 14. 6. Heb. 10. 19, 20. By him we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. He is
our hope of Glory, Col. 1. 27. He is the ground of our Faith, the Foundation
upon which our Souls are laid, 1 Pet. 2. 5. To whom coming as to a living
stone, we also as lively stones are built up a Spiritual house: Thus is he the
Foundation of conveying all the blessings of the Covenant to us, Ephesians. 1. God
blesses us with all Spiritual blessings in Christ: but that Christ is the
Foundation of the Covenant it self, that I crave leave to deny, and to render
the Reasons of my denial.


1. Sect. Christ cannot be the Foundation of the Covenant, because Christ
himself is promised in the Covenant, as the great Comprehensive Blessing of the
Covenant, Isa. 49. 8, 9. I will give thee for a Covenant, that thou may say
to the Prisoners, go forth, to them that are in darkness, show your selves.
Whence it is evident, first, that the free-love of the Father is the Reason of
his giving his Son to be our Deliverer; Secondly, that Christ is the great
undertaker to Execute that Counsel of God in our actual Deliverance, Luke 1.
68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has Visited, and Redeemed his
People, and has raised up a Horn of Salvation in the House of his Servant
David, as he spoke by the mouth of his Holy Prophets which have been since the
world began, -- ver. 72. To perform the Mercy promised to our Fathers, and to
remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear to our Father Abraham;
where the firm Oath and Covenant of God to Redeem his People is assigned as the
Reason of his giving Christ to be a Redeemer. The places are too many to be
insisted on that confirm this Truth. John 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9, 10.

2. Sect. Free grace is given as the true Reason of the Covenant of Grace, Heb.
8. 8. For finding fault with them, he says, behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, etc. They were
a faulty, an undeserving, an ill-deserving People, yet Free grace will make a
Covenant with them: Nor is there any opposition between Free Grace and Christ's
Merits in this Case: if we consider that Free Grace is the Original Reason of
Gods designation, and purpose to bestow the good things of the Covenant; and
the Righteousness of Christ's Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death the way of
recovering these Mercies, which by sin had been forfeited and lost.

3. Sect. The Scriptures give us no intimation that Christ is the Foundation of
Gods making this Covenant, or the Original Reason of Gods design to bestow the
Mercies of the Covenant, though it abounds with Testimonies that Christ is the
way of procuring for us, and conveying to us these intended mercies; and in
those things which depend upon mere good pleasure, Revelation must be our only
guide: In this case we may conclude Negatively, Non credimus quia non legimus:
And we may shrewdly conjecture that there is no pretense from Scripture for
this Figment of our Authors, because it is the Foundation of all his mistakes,
and yet he has not so much as attempted the perverting of one Scripture to give
color to it, which may be reckoned amongst the Admiranda Nili.

[2.] His other Assertion is this, Our own Righteousness is the condition of
the Covenant, which with his former Assertion is obtruded upon us without
proof, and therefore I suppose he intends they must both be maintained at the
Charges of the Parish: Now,

1, It is agreed, for ought I know, that an inherent righteousness is a
necessary condition of eternal Salvation, Heb. 12. 14. Without Holiness no man
shall see God. It is a Condition in the Covenant, though not of the Covenant;
such a Condition, as is due to every Person in a Covenant-state; it does
necessarily attend that state, though it be not allowed as antecedent to a
Covenant-state.

2. As to the Constitution of the Covenant in Gods purpose and Counsel, I know
no condition at all. They that talk of the right use of free will, future
Faith, or good works foreseen as the Reason of that purpose, talk without
book, and only intimate what a rare Covenant they would have made for us, had
they had the modelling, and Contrivance of it; like him that boasted, that if
he had stood by God when he formed Man, he could have told him, how to have
made him more commodiously, Romans 9. 11. The Children being not yet born,
neither having done any good, or evil. Where those words [neither having done
any good, or evil,] must necessarily exclude all respect to the future good or
evil they should do, (as the Reason of the purpose of God according to
Election:) because it is evident by the form of speech. That they deny something
more concerning the Children, than the former words, [being not yet born] and
yet even they exclude, Having done good or evil Actually.

3. The Question then is, whether An inherent Righteousness be the Condition
required of us and in us, antecedent to our first Covenant-state? And I durst
leave this Matter to be determined by the Church of England, if our Author
would do so too: Art. 17. Predestination to Life is the everlasting purpose of
God, whereby before the Foundation of the World was laid, he has constantly
decreed by his Counsel secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those
whom he has chosen out of Mankind in Christ, and to bring them by Christ to
everlasting Salvation; whence we are taught, 1. That Election is not of all
Mankind, but of some out of Mankind. 2. That this purpose of God was from
everlasting. 3. That it is a fixed constant decree. 4. That the Design of it is
to deliver those chosen out of Mankind, from the curse, under which Mankind was
fallen: and to bring them to everlasting Salvation. 5. That the Reason of this
eternal Election was his own counsel. 6. That the Execution of this Decree is
in and by Jesus Christ; and the manner of it follows. Wherefore they which be
endued with so excellent a benefit, be called according to the purpose of God;
working in due season by his Spirit. They through Grace obey the calling, they
be justified freely, they be made the Sons of God by Adoption, they be made
like the Image of his only begotten Son, they walk Religiously in good works,
and at length by Gods mercy, they attain everlasting felicity. Whence we are
Instructed, 1. That the calling of the Elect to a Covenantstate is from Grace
as the reason, and by Grace as it is efficient. 2. Their obeying that call of
God is by Grace. 3. Good works necessarily follow effectual calling: See also
Art. 10. 12, 13. 4. Religious walking with God in good works is a necessary
condition of eternal Felicity. 5. That there is such a firm connection in this
golden chain of Salvation, that no one linck can possibly be broken: They are
Elected freely, called effectually, justified freely, Adopted graciously,
Sanctified gradually, walk Religiously, and at length by the mercy of God are
saved eternally, which the Apostle gives us more concisely, Romans 8. 30.
Moreover whom he did Predestinate, them he a so called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also Glorified: I
conclude then that our own righteousness is not the condition of the Covenant
of Grace, neither of the designment of the Father, nor the procurement of the
Son, nor of the effectual Operation of the Holy Spirit, nor of our
Covenant-state, nor of our Covenant-right, nor of the first Covenant-mercy; but
of many after-mercies, and of Eternal Salvation it is the condition.



1. Sect. That is not the Condition of the Covenant required of us on our part,
which God promises to work in us on His part; but God has promised to work in
us Inherent-righteousness, both Root and Fruit, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. A new Heart
also will I give you, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments, and do them.

2. Sect. That which God in Covenant bestows, cannot be the Condition of a
Covenant-state, but God in Covenant bestows the new Heart, for new Obedience,
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise thy Heart, to love the Lord thy
God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul.

3. Sect. That which presupposes other Covenantmercies antecedent to it, cannot
be the condition of the first Covenant-Blessing, and therefore not the
condition of a Covenant-state: but our own righteousness presupposes other
Covenant-blessings antecedent to it; Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will take away the Heart
of stone out of your Flesh, and give you an Heart of Flesh: the Natural Heart
must be Circumcised, the hard heart removed, a soft heart bestowed before we
can perform new Obedience, out of which our own righteousness results. When
therefore our Author says, That Christ's righteousness and our own are both
necessary to Salvation: He says true, and (which is necessary to all Truth)
that which overthrows his main design. For if Christ's righteousness be
necessary to our Salvation, (not only to the promise of it) then no Salvation
can be had without that righteousness: but if it be only necessary to a
promise of that Salvation, then it is not necessary to Salvation; for Salvation
(according to his Principles) has been obtained without a promise of Salvation,
(otherwise the Patriarchs before Christ could not be eternally saved, whom he
supposes to have had no such promise) and so it may still; for Obedience
performed will save, though it want that great promise for it is encouragement.
And whereas he says, That Christ's Righteousness is the Foundation, but not the
Condition of the Covenant; what policy there may be in using the Metaphor of a
Foundation I cannot tell; but this I know: A Foundation is a necessary
Condition to the superstructure raised upon it.

I have now attended him through all the Labyrinths of this tedious Discourse,
whence the Reader will learn at least how impossible it is for Error to be
Consonant to it self: As the two Milstones grind one another, as well as the
grain; and as the extreme Vices oppose each other as well as the intermediate
virtue that lies between them: So have all Errors this fate (and it is the best
quality they are guilty of) that they Duel one another with the same heat that
they oppose the Truth. The Remainder of his Book is so full of falsehoods in
matter of fact, reproaches of the Truth, and immerited bitterness against the
Living, and the Dead, that I could not persuade my self to give the Reader any
further trouble with them at present; but a small invitation will draw out the
second Part: In the mean time I do solemnly protest, that as I have no Personal
Quarrel with this Gentleman, so I have not willingly wronged his Discourse in
the smallest instance: The worst I wish him is, that he may seasonably repent
of his injurious dealing with the Scriptures, and his unworthy treatment of
those Persons who have deserved well of Religion, and the Commonwealth of
Learning, and not ill of himself: I cannot deny but that his provoking way of
writing, his unjust censures of the Innocent, and above all, his Drolling
faculty, exercised upon sacred things, have sometimes tempted me to a return,
not so agreeable to my Natural inclinations. I hope the Reader will consider
not only how, but what I have written; nor only what, but upon what
provocations it has been written: Let Cause be compared with Cause, the moments
of Reasons with Reasons; let the little Vagaries, and impertinces be brusht
off; and then let the indifferent, and impartial Reader moderate between us:
And if he shall meet with any Truth of the Gospel cleared or vindicated, let
him give God the more praise, who by such improbable means, as Clay and
Spittle, can open his Eyes to the acknowledgment of the Truth; and secure him
against the Impostures and Apostasy of these latter times: and what ever of
Vanity and Folly he meets with in these Papers, let him be assured that is my
own; and that it may not prejudice the concerns of Christ, let him freely
trample it under his Feet.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed, and sold by Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in
Chancery* Lane near Fleetstreet.
First.

EXercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews; also concerning the Messiah:
Wherein the Promises concerning Him to be a Spiritual Redeemer of Mankind, are
explained and vindicated, etc. With an Exposition of, and Discourses on the two
first Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews. By John Owen, D. D. in Folio.

2. Exercitations on the Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning the Priesthood of
Christ; wherein the original Causes, Nature, Prefigurations and Discharge of
that holy Office are explained and vindicated. The Nature of the Covenant of
the Redeemer, with the Call of the Lord Christ unto his Office, are declared;
And the Opinions of the Socinians about it are fully examined, and their
Oppositions unto it refuted. With a Continuation of the Exposition on the
third, fourth and fifth Chapters of the said Epistle to the Hebrews, being the
second Volumn. By John Owen, D. D. in Folio.

3. (...): Or, A Discourse concerning the Holy Spirit. Wherein an Account is
given of his Name, Nature, Personality, Dispensation, Operations and Effects.
His whole Work in the Old and New Creation is explained; the Doctrine
concerning it vindicated from Oppositions and Reproaches. The Nature also, and
Necessity of Gospel-Holiness; the difference between Grace and Morality, or a
Spiritual Life unto God in Evangelical Obedience, and a course of Moral
Virtues, are stated and declared. By John Owen, D. D. in Folio.

4. A Practical Exposition on the 130 Psalm: wherein the Nature of the
Forgiveness of Sin is declared; the Truth and Reality of it asserted; and the
Case of a Soul distressed with the Guilt of Sin, and relieved by a Discovery of
Forgiveness with God, is at large discoursed. By Io. Owen, D. D. in Quarto.

5. Londons Lamentations; or, a sober, serious Discourse concerning the late
Fiery Dispensation. By Mr. Thomas Brooks, late Preacher of the Word at St.
Margarets NewFis^street, London, in Quarto.

6. Liberty of Conscience upon its true and proper grounds asserted and
vindicated, etc. To which is added the Second Part, viz. Liberty of Conscience
the Magistrates Interest. By a Protestant, a Lover of Truth, and the Peace and
Prosperity of the Nation; in Quarto. The second Edition.

Large Octavo's.
7. A Discourse of the Nature, Power, Deceit and Prevalency of the Remainders
of Indwelling-Sin in Believers. Together with the ways of its working, and
means of prevention. By John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

8. Truth and Innocence vindicated: in a Survey of a Discourse concerning
Ecclesiastical Polity, and the Authority of the Civil Magistrate over the
Consciences of Subjects in matters of Religion. By John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

9. Exercitations concerning the Name, Original, Nature, Use, and Continuance
of a Sacred Day of Rest; wherein the Original of the Sabbath from the
foundation of the World, the Morality of the fourth Commandment, with the
change of the Sabbath Day, are enquired into: Together with an Assertion of the
Divine Institution of the Lord's Day. By John Owen, D. D. in Octavo. The second
Impression.

10. Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity. By. Io. Owen, D. D.

11. The Unreasonableness of Atheism made manifest; in a Discourse to a Person
of Honor. By Sir Charles Wolselay, Baronet. Third Impression.

12. The Reasonableness of Scripture-Belief. A Discourse giving some Account of
those Rational Grounds upon which the Bible is received as the Word of God.
Written by Sir Charles Wolseley, Baronet.

13. The Rehearsal transpres'd, or Animadversions upon a late Book, entitled,
A Preface, showing what Grounds there are of fears and jealousies of Popery.
The first Part. By Andrew Marvel, Esquire.

14. The Rehearsal transprosed; the second Part. Occasioned by two Letters: the
first printed by a nameless Author, entitled, A Reproof, etc. the second, A
Letter left at a friends house, dated Nov. 3. 1673. subscribed I. G. and
concluding with these words, If thou dare to print or publish any Lie or
Libel against Dr. Parker, by the Eternal God I will cut thy throat. Answered by
Andrew Marvel.

15. Theopolis, or the City of God, New Jerusalem; in opposition to the City of
the Nations, Great Babylon. By Henry D'anvers, in Octavo.

16. A Guide for the Practical Gauger; with a Compendium of Decimal
Arithmetic. Showing briefly the whole Art of Gauging of Brewers Tuns, Coppers,
Backs, etc. also the Mash or Oyl-Cask; and Sybrant Hantz his Table of Area's of
Segments of a Circle; the Mensuration of all manner of Superficies. By William
Hunt, Student in the Mathematics, in Octavo.

17. Anti-Sozzo, sive Sherlocismus Enervatus: In Vindication of some Great
Truths Opposed, and Opposition to some Great Errors Maintained by Mr. William
Sherlock.

(...)

Hoc est Domus Mosaicae Clavis: sive Legis Sepimentum.

Authore Iosepho Cooper Anglo, in Octavo.

A Vindication of some Passages in a Discourse concerning Communion with God,
from the Exceptions of William Sherlock Rector of St. George Buttolph-Lane. By
John Owen, D. D. in Octavo.

A brief Declaration and Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity. By John
Owen, D. D. in 12.


