A Faithful Rebuke TO A False Report: LATELY Dispersed in a LETTER TO A Friend
in the Country. CONCERNING Certain Differences in Doctrinals, between some
Dissenting Ministers in London.

Exodus 23. 1. Thou shall not raise a False Report.

Jer. 20. 10. Report (say they) and we will Report it.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. M.DC.XCVII.

Dear Friend,
It Is grown of late the Mode with some to communicate their Sentiments, under
the Color and Cover of a Letter to a Friend in the Country. In compliance with
the Humor, I have given mine ^ same Inscription: But you shall excuse me if I
imi^e not the Disingenuity, the Prevarication, the Parti^ty of the Reporter,
though I comply with the Fashion general. Whoever makes a Report, ought to be
un^ the severe Law of Conscience, To speak the Truth, whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth; that is, who^r will Report, ought not to make his Report; for an
^^^torian must never be the Author of his History.

I can afford to pass by the Reporters assuming Spirit, ^o determines who are
the Most Learned of each Party, ^ause I know not by what Authority he ventures
upon (...) nor whether he be duly Qualified for such a Deter^ation; though he has
a Friend in the City, who has pro^med him all over the Town, A Learned Divine:
^ shall I concern my self at his Reflections on those or seven Presbyterians;
who, he says, are of the BigNames amongst them; hoping they can be content ^e
of no Name, when the Name of the Lord Jesus ^st, may be glorified in them:
Though perhaps they ^ not so tamely suffer their Names to be trampled in Dirt
by every insolent Scribler. I pass by also his temptuous Stuff, at those who
meet at Little St. Hel^ though you know it is the Body of the United Bre^ who
meet there; of which Number he himself one with others, however now absented
from the ^ and the Union too; and is now laudably employed in misrepresenting
them or some of them, Principal or Accessaries as inclining toward the
Unitarians: Nor will it be worth the while to take notice of his affected
Terms, Pursuances, Explosion, etc. for your great Wit^ fancy now and then to be
Pedantick, nor are they for little Fooleries to be accountable.

But it will deserve a serious Remark, that since these Persons are resolved
never to Unite with them, ye^ they might have suffered the poor Presbyterians
to live quietly by 'em. They might at least have let the Spark^ of Contention
silently die and be buried in their own Ashes, and not have blown them up into
this Flam^ in the Country, which they had kindled in the City Light indeed is
pleasant, but I like not the Sparks an^ Flames that come from a Forge.

That little Artifice which the Reporter may glory i^ is obvious, and needs not
my Observation, that his Paper came out at a Juncture when he knew the Unite
Ministers had Adjourned their Meetings, and so mig^ hope to poison the Country,
before they could prescrib^ and send down the proper Antidote; and that his
Fir^ balls might put you all in a Flame, before the Ministe^ could rally to
quench it.

But you expect to be entertained with more substanti^ Matters.

I. And therefore I present you with the Substance of the Gospel of Christ, as
he has presented it: We are all^ Nature under the Curse of the Law, and
destitute of Righteousness intituling to Eternal Life. This is our state a^
condition: This is the Place in which we are: in which, we dye, we are undone
eternally: For Vindicative Justice which is essential to God, makes it necessary
that the Wra^ be inflicted, and that there be no Right to Eternal Life, wit^
out a perfect Meritorious Righteousness. That all who believ^ might escape the
Wrath to come, and have Everlasting Life The Lord Jesus Christ undertakes for
us, by making Satisf^ction both to punitive and remunerative Justice: and that
might do so, he put himself into our Place, State and Condi^^on: So that
whereas we were Sin, and under a Curse, ^y this blessed Change Christ is made
Sin, and a Curse, and ^e delivered from Sin, and the Curse, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Gal.
3. 3. Page 5.

This he tells us is the Substance of the Gospel of Christ: which if it be, and
sound at the Bottom, is the worst ^rawn up of any I ever read.

(1.) Out of his Substance of the Gospel, he has left Regeneration, Conversion,
Repentance, Holiness, Sanctification a new Heart, and new Obedience, Good Works
etc. A Blessed Report for the Country! you are eased at least of one Moiety of
your Work, though I question whether your Consci^nces will take his Security
that this is the Substance of ^he Gospel which you are to Preach to the People.
Woe ^o that poor People, whether in City or Country, who ^t down under such
Preachers, who make this the Substance of their Preaching; for though they may
now and then, upon the by, hint a little at Repentance and so ^orth, yet that is
but Accidental to the Gospel; the Sub^ance lies in what Christ has suffered for
them; it is mere Accident what he is by the Spirit to work in them; much more
what is (if any thing be) to to be done by them.

(2.) But suppose this were intended only as the Substance of the Gospel so far
as we are to believe what Christ has done and suffered for Sinners without
them, and with God; yet there is something in this Draught that gives cause of
Suspicion to those who are of no ^ealous Inclinations: For whereas he informs
us, that Christ suffered and satisfied, that all who believe might ^cape Wrath
to come, and have Everlasting Life: Here Is ^o necessity of Faith in order to
Justification, no Be^eving necessary to Pardon of Sin, or Peace with God: No
Faith needful to Union with Christ, that we may ^ave an Interest in his
Righteousness, but only to escape ^rath to come, and the having Everlasting
Life. Well! give me my Bible again! I will subscribe without Equ^vocation to
the Apostle, Romans 5. 1. Being justified b^ faith we have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ.

(3.) Be pleased to observe. He instructs you: Tha^ we are all by Nature under
the Curse of the Law, and dest^tute of a Righteousness that may entitle us to
Eternal Life and that this was our Place, State and Condition: which we all own
and lament as too true: but then he instruct you also, that Christ put himself
into our Place, State and Condition: will you not, must you not conclude from
hence, that Christ also was destitute of a Righteousness t^ entitle him, and if
himself, us too, to Eternal Life?

(4.) Such an Inference is obvious; but it will requir^ more Application of
Mind to discern the Fallacy i^ these Words. So that whereas we were Sin, and
under a Curse, by this blessed Change Christ is made Sin, and under a Curse,
and we delivered from Sin and Curse; here beg your most critical Attention.

1. We are Sin; and under a Curse: can you with a^ your Penetration, divine the
Reason, why it is said, w^ are Sin? That we are Sinners by Nature, that we are
sinful is an acknowledged Truth; but how are we Sin we are altogether delighted
with Sin, we are under the Condemnation of the Law for Sin, but that is no
other than to be under the Curse: why must it be phrase^ thus, we are Sin? It
was Poetically and Satyrically said That Alexander the Sixth was Non tam
vitiosus quam vi^tium, non tam scelest us quam scelus: but we need to be taught
how man was Sin? Sin it self?

2. You shall now see the Mystery of his Phraseology it was to mis-lead you
into that Abomination; tha^ Christ was Sinful, that he was a Sinner: for if
Christ was Sin in the same Acceptance that we are, then he was sinful, he was
a Sinner, and the greatest Sinner tha^ ever was in the World: That Christ was
made Sin, Sacrifice for Sin, that he bore the Curse due to Sin, is so express
the Language of Scripture, that he that denies the former must disbelieve the
latter: but what needed he say that we were Sin, and then that Christ was made
Sin, unless he would insinuate that Christ was Sin in ^he same Sense that we
were Sin, that is sinful? but this is the Fruit of going to Cambridge to learn
to Quibble.

(5.) Will you observe with me the last Words of his ^cheme, and Substance of
the Gospel of Christ: By his blessed Change Christ is made Sin, and Curse, and
we delivered from Sin and Curse. Ipso facto! no doubt; But I humbly conceive,
without the usual Complement ^f submitting to better Judgments, That whatever
Christ suffered, however he was made Sin, and Curse, yet here is an Order settled
by the Divine Will in which ^e Application of the Sufferings of Christ, and
Satis^ction given thereon, shall be made: and that whoeer expects to partake of
the Benefits thereof, ^aust by ^race Believe, Repent, and Accept of Christ, as
God as offered him in the Gospel; and that the Elect are ^ot justified from
that Moment wherein Christ suffered and gave Satisfaction to Justice for their
Sins: This ^ght to have been more clearly worded before it had ^een proposed
to, or imposed upon our Faith as the substance of the Gospel of Christ.

(6.) You would be satisfied, and so would I, why ^is Gentleman could not be
contented to give us the Doctrine of Redemption and Satisfaction, as they are
^ady drawn up to our Hands in the Confession of Faith ^ the Church of England,
as in that of the Assembly at Westminster, or in that of the Savoy; but that we
must ^ve a super^oe^ation of Articles, new Schemes of Reli^on every New-Year,
spawning of Creeds, and equip^ng of Confessions every Campaign, when the Thing
^s been done so often already, and much better? for ^e that cannot allow him to
be a faithful Reporter in ^atter of Fact, can much less trust him to pen for us
^atter of Faith.

that he took on him the Person of Sinners: you must understand that he now
refers to a certain Paper drawn up by some private Ministers, whereof you will
hear more in due time; Now their Words run thus: We conceive that the Doctrine
of Justification, and of Christ's Satisfaction, on which it depends, cannot be
duly explained, and defended consistently with the denial of any Commutation of
Persons between Christ and Believers: So then according to this Paper there
must be some Commutation of Persons between Christ and Believers. But 1. He has
foisted in those Words taking on him the Person of Sinners: 2. That the
Commutation those Brethren speak of, is between Christ and Believers; and
therefore I am convinced that this Reporter will never be trusted in his
Arguings, or repeating of other Men's Words.

3. And to what end does he thus needlessly multiply Terms of Art without any
apparent necessity, that the Controversy has of 'em? All that the Case of
Sinners required for Satisfaction to Divine Justice, was a Substistute, or
Sacrifice to be offered for our Sins; for the Substitute to take on him the
Punishment due to them; but to take upon him the Person of Sinners; as the
Phrase is new and uncouth, so it is to me unintelligible, till they who have
invented it shall interpret it, and if ever they should be so ill advised as to
give it a fixed Sense, they must either make it signify no more than that
Christ died in our stead; or else enlarge it to such a Breadth as will admit
all the Extravagancies of Antinomianism.

4. For I will make a fair Motion, or propound a modest Question: This Phrase
of Christ's taking upon him the Person of Sinners; Does it signify more or
less, than Christ's taking on him our Sins, and suffering for them in our Place
and Stead; or does it signify neither more nor less, but is just adaequate and
commensurate to, and with it? If it signifies less, then it limits and narrows
the End of Christ's Sufferings, and will be a Sense only serving the turn of a
Socinian; If it signifies more than that, then it comes of evil and leads to
evil, even to the Dreggs of Antinomianism; but if it signifies neither more nor
less than Christ's standing and suffering in our Place and Stead, when he
offered himself to God; then I embrace it, subscribe it with my whole Soul. But
then what need is there to pester and vex the Christian Faith with a Word which
signifies neither more nor less than that old Term which has obtained so long
in the World, that we cannot be deceived in it: whereas this new Phrase, Christ
suffered in, or took upon him the Person of Sinners, is a Phrase to puzzle and
confound Men's Understandings.

5. I think therefore we ought in the first place to inquire what they mean by
the Person of Sinners? and then to inquire about Christ's taking it up. Does it
import that all Sinners are united, and are to be supposed, conceived,
considered as one Person? and so Christ died, suffered, satisfied for that one
Person? very good! then I perceive we are tackt about to the Tents of the
Arminians, and do suppose that Christ died for all equally: for if all Sinners
be one, or to be reputed as one Person, and Christ took upon him that one
Person, it will be difficult for all their divi^ing and prescinding Skill to
make it out how he died for one, and not for another, seeing all these Sinners,
as in Christ's Eye, are but one single Person. Now I do not once conceive that
this is their Sense, for they are too far gone the other way: but by this way
of expressing my self, I would provoke and tempt 'em to fix a tolerable meaning
upon the Phrase; though it were more reasonable that they should choose a sound
Phrase for a sound Meaning, than torture an incorrigible Phrase into an honest
Meaning against its Will.

The Purer Primitive Times were wisely concerned for the preserving the Truth,
that they decreed in the Sixth General Council; that it should not be lawful to
introduce (...), any unusual way of speaking, (...), any new invented Terms,
upon great Penalties; and a modest regard to this Canon had prevented a world
of Miscief, and all this Blunder and Confusion which (...) arbitrary Terms have
produced among (...)

6. I will shut up this Head of Discourse with this modest Proposal: Let this
Matter be thus worded: That Christ in his suffering and dying was considered by
God, and placed himself in the place and stead of all the Elect; so that he
made Satisfaction to the Divine Justice for all their Sins; the Benefits and
Advantages whereof, every individual Person shall partake of, in that Order and
Method, and upon those Terms, which the Wise and Holy God has prescribed in the
Gospel: Which Proposition you, and I, and all sober Persons in the City and
Country would readily subscribe, and leave these Gentlemen, who it seems are at
leisure to invent new Controversies, to their own imperious Humors.

II. The Reporter has miserably imposed upon you in Matter of Fact, nor has he
shown that due Regard to Truth, which he and all of us owe to so great a
Sovereign: A few Instances I will give you, that you may be convinced how
little Reason you have to take him or his Narrative upon their bare Words.

(1.) One Specimen of his Honesty, you shall meet with at the Entrance of his
Paper; and its ominous to stumble at the Threshold, lest he should break the
Neck of his whole Discourse.

And thus in a pompous Style he breaks into the Business: After sundry Attempts
made by the industrious Pacificators, an Instrument was pitched upon, which gave
Satisfaction to the most Learned of both Parties: This Paper was sent by Six or
Seven of the biggest Name among them, who do, or at least have gone under the
Denomination of Presbyterians, unto some Congregational Brethren, and gladly
embraced by them.

Now, Sir, do you not judge that this Instrument which gave such Satisfaction
to, and was so gladly embraced by the Congregational Men, had redintegrated the
violated Union, had reclaimed them who had deserted their former Station; that
all Distances were wholly removed, and Jealousies and Suspicions of Socinianism
on the one side, and Antinomianism on the other were cured, and that a
Coalition between the Two Parties had hereupon ensued; that they were all now
got together again at Little St. Hellens? I assure you, Sir, not one Word of
this was true; and that you shall truly learn from these Particulars:

1. Whereas he affirms This gave Satisfaction to the most Learned of each
Party: what does he then think of Mr. Tho. Cole, and Mr. Nath. Mather? are not
these to be reckoned in the Number of the most Learned of that Party? These
great Persons will hardly return him Thanks for expunging them the Catalogue,
unless they judge him no competent Judge of their Learning.

2. Whereas he tells us that it gave Satisfaction to the most Learned of each
Party: it appears it gave no Satisfaction at all: For they of the
Congregational Interest never intended to receive such Satisfaction, as to
return to a Reunion; and this was openly avowed by one of that Number, who was
not of the least Name, nor made the smallest Figure amongst them, That they
never designed to enter into an Union with the Presbyterians: and of this I can
produce incontestible Proof; this Rational Jealousy was the Reason why Mr. G.
Hammond refused his Hand to that Paper, yet declaring, (if the Reporter says
true) he would gladly have done it, if it might be a mean to restore Union;
which he had just Grounds to believe it never would, and therefore refused.

The Truth is, it was known from first to last through the whole Transaction of
that Affair, that this Expedient would never Retrieve the Union; only if they
could get any Advantage by it, to put a Slur upon Mr. D. Williams, this they
would gladly embrace, and then let the Union shift for it self.

3. But will you see with your own Eyes how these Gentlemen were satisfied, and
how gladly they embraced the first Paper? Thus it was; After all the Pains
taken; after much Attendance, great Courting of, and Waiting upon them, they
obtained this Little, this Nothing, or Nothing to the Purpose of Reunion: They
are glad to find so good an Agreement amongst us, as this Paper does express:
No doubt, a little is better than nothing, and so much Agreement as this comes
to, is better than going to Logerheads: But are there any Expressions that
intimate they are satisfied upon the Terms of this Paper to unite? do they
express any embracing of Communion with one another?

(2.) I come now to a Second Instance of the Reporters regard to Truth, where
you will easily observe how by a wretched Synecdoche, he has given you a part
for the whole of a just Narrative. This is called the Politics of the Pismire,
which nibbles off the Grain at both Ends, that it may never grow, but come to
nothing: Or rather, this Report is framed according to the Law of a Good
Heroic Poem, which, our Critics tell us, must always commence at the middle
of the Story; This is the Method of our Reporter, who enters upon his Report
about the Middle of his Matter, and therefore expect a pure Poetical Fiction.

He begins with the Mention of Pacification: I think he should have informed
his Country Friend; That there was once an Union; that this Union was broken;
and then who they were that made the Breach, and upon what Grounds; and how the
Breach was pieced up again; and then how it was without any visible Reason
broken again; and then he might seasonably have entered upon the Story of his
so celebrated Attempts for Pacification: Now, Sir, to supply the Deficiency of
his Story, I Will give you a full and faithful Account of the whole, wherein I
shall inform you of nothing but what you know already.

1. In the Year 1691. After many Meetings of Ministers of both Persuasions,
after frequent Applications to the Throne of Grace; certain Heads of Agreement
were drawn up, and assented to by about Eighty Ministers in and about the City
of London, and by some others in a little time. This Agreement was solemnly
transacted, and seriously concluded with this Protestation: As we Assent to the
forementioned Heads of Agreement, so we Unanimously Resolve, as the Lord shall
enable us, to Practice according to them.

Amongst those Heads assented to, the Eighth contains the Test and Standard of
Orthodoxy, and speaks thus: As to what appertains to Soundness of Judgment in
Matters of Faith, we esteem it sufficient that a Church acknowledge the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, the Perfect and only Rule of Faith and
Practice; and own either the Doctrinal Part of those commonly called the
Articles of the Church of England; or the Confession, or Catechisms shorter or
larger, compiled by the Assembly at Westminster; or the Confession agreed on at
the Savoy, to be agreeable to the said Rule.

This Agreement was the Honor and Strength of the Dissenters, and in the
Practice of which they made the greatest Figure in the Eyes of all wise Men:
They became the Rejoicing of their Friends, the Envy of their Enemies, to whom
they had formerly been a Scorn.

In the Practice of this Union they walked together ^eaceably, holding
Communion in Prayer, Preaching ^he Word, and Sacraments; mutually strengthening
the Hands of each other, consulting, counselling and advi^ng, and assisting one
another; and one of the great ^lessings of this Union was, that they
contributed to the Relief of their poorer Brethren in the Country, supporting
and encouraging them in the Work of the Lord.

2. But a little before this, 1690 a new Impression, of Dr. Crisp's Works, with
an Addition of some Sermons came into the World, which was judged by some to
contain diverse strange Doctrines, either evidently Erroneous, or of dubious
Construction, creating a suspicion in some tender Minds, lest some Doctrines
were openly vouched, or secretly couched in them which might disturb the
Harmony of the Confession they had signed, and without great Care and Caution,
might weaken, if not dissolve the Union.

3. This awakened some of the more Zealous among the United Brethren to
consider of some proper Expedient to obviate the growth of those Errors:
Amongst and before the rest, Mr. Williams, a Brother of the Union, composed a
Book styled, Gospel Truth Stated and Vindicated, wherein some of Dr. Crisp' s
Errors are considered, etc. A Book, to say no more, ingeniously Penned* exactly
Methodized, the Truths and Errors fairly Stated, and for ought I can see,
piously designed. To this Book upon its first Edition, several Ministers gave
their Judgment thus far; That he had (in all that was material) fully and
rightly stated the Truths and Errors, etc. and in (...) second Edition many
more gave their Judgment of it in the same Words.

4. But now, Sir, as if Aeolus had opened all the Treasures of his blustering
Winds; or a Flood-Gate had been drawn up to let in the Sea upon us; such a
Storm of Passion, such Indignation against the Author and his Book, broke out,
as had almost overset the United Brethren with their Union, if Providence had
not timously interposed by a powerful Word; Peace, be Still!

For upon the 17th of October, 1692. a Paper wa^ brought in to the Brethren at
Dr. Annesly's Meeting^ House, importing a heavy and high Charge against the
^uthor and his Work, subscribed by Six Brethren, Is^ancy, Geo. Griffith, Tho.
Cole, Nath. Mather, Rich. Tay^, Rob. Trayle. Accusing him, amongst other
things, fall in with the Antinomians, under Color of opposing ^em: for setting
up a way of Justification by Evangeli^ Works: That he denies the Covenant of
Grace to^ made with Christ, with some others, and a Reserve more Objections,
and Articles of Impeachment to ^ alleged in due time.

Now, Sir! Whilst its fresh upon my Memory, let ^e beg your Patience while I
make, and your Pardon ^at I do make some short Observations upon this ^aper.

1. I will observe to you, that among the many and ^ievous Crimes laid to his
Charge, they never objected ^at he denied a Change of Persons between Christ
and us: (...) that he denied Christ's taking upon him the Person of Sin^ers;
and yet now all the Quarrel centers in this one ^ing; that which I note it for
is, that you may employ our piercing Head in considering what should be the
^eason that all the Weight, all the Stress is said upon this?

2. Observe further, That the Phrase of Change of Per^ns between Christ and us,
and his taking upon him the ^erson of Sinners, are Terms wholly unknown to
those ^onfessions and Articles which were made the Test of ^oundness in the
Faith, by the united Ministers. Nay, ^ you have the Leisure, search the whole
Body of Con^essions of the Reformed Churches from Helvetia to Tran^ylvania,
thence to America, and you shall not find these Terms, Phrases or Expressions
in any one of them.

3. Hence you will infer that Mr. Williams cannot, upon that Account, be judged
erroneous by any of the Reformed Churches, seeing he has not (as it does not
appear that he has) contravened any of their Doctrinal Articles; nor can he, or
ought he to be censured by the ^ody of the United Ministers, because he never
subscribed to these Expressions, inasmuch as they are not to be found in any of
those Articles which made the Standa^^ of Soundness in the Faith.

4. And let me observe this further, that amongst (...) Six Persons that gave
in the Charge against Mr. William one Moiety of them never entered into the
Union; a^^ it is strange upon what Principles they should char^^ Mr. Williams as
breaking that Union, when they themselves had never entered into it.

After this short, but necessary Digression, I will no^ reassume my Narrative.

5. Matters standing in this dubious Posture, and v^sibly inclining to a
scandalous Rupture, some Brethren of a cooler Temper (and there were always
such amo^ the differing Parties) moved that an equal Number (...) the Brethren,
and of each side, might be chosen to a^vise and consider if any healing
Expedient might (...) found out to beget a right Understanding between the
litigant Parties: It was done, the Ministers convene^ and after many servent
Prayers for the Spirit of Lig^^ and Love, the Result was this; That Nine
Articl^ were drawn up and subscribed by the chosen Brethren by Mr. Williams and
Mr. Chauncy, and when brought (...) the Body of the united Brethren, it
received their Approbation.

6. Amongst the Nine Articles then agreed on, (...) shall only mention part of
the Third and the Fift^ Articles, because these relate to our present
Controversies.

3. Article, Of Christ the Mediator.

The Lord Jesus Christ by his perfect obedience, and Sacrifice of himself,
which he through the Eternal Spirit once offe^ed up to God, has fully
satisfied the Justice of his Father.

5. Article. Of Justification, etc.

Those whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies; (...) by
infusing Righteousness into them, but by pardoning their ^^ns, and by
accounting, and accepting their Persons as ^ighteous, not for any thing wrought
in them, but for ^^rist's Sake alone; nor by his imputing Faith it self, the
Act of ^elieving, or any other Evangelical Obedience to them, as ^^eir
Righteousness, but by imputing the Obedience and Satis^^ction of Christ unto
them, they receiving and resting on him and his Righteousness by Faith, which
Faith they have not of ^^emselves, it is the Gift of God.

7. These things thus settled, they proceed to a for^al and solemn Agreement.

16 December. 1692. This day the Brethren who endea^oured to accommodate the
Controversy, did with Mr. Wil^iams, Mr. Chauncy, and the other Five Brethren,
who with him objected against Mr. Williams his Book, subscribe (...) this
Agreement, and these Doctrinal Propositions.

Samuel Annesly. Daniel Williams, Isaac Chauncy. Matthew. Barker. Edw. Veal. John
James. Stephen Lobb. John How. Vinc. Alsop. Geo. Hammond. Rich. Mayo. Sam.
Slater. Geo. Griffith. Tho. Cole. Nath. Mather. Rob. Trayle. Rich. Tailor.
Dec. 19. 1692. This expedient was brought to a Meeting of the United
Ministers, who unanimously expressed their Approbation.

But for the Preface to these Articles, the Articles themselves, and the Words
of the Approbation, I must, to avoid tediousness refer you to the Printed Paper.

8. To proceed: The Two Sticks are once mo^ made One, and the broken Bone being
set by a skill Hand, we hope will be the stronger; not because it w^ luxated,
but because it was skilfully restored. The Matters are happily compromised,
Union and Peace covered, and the United Brethren cheerfully pursue t^ great
ends of their Union: A great Disappointment t^ gave to the Devil, who rejoiced
in their Divisions. A^ now, Dear Sir, what are your Thoughts? Can the ^ nemy
any more sow his Tares in the Field amongst t^ good Grain? Will not the
Brethren hereafter take mo^ care of taking and giving Offenses? Will they n^
henceforth watch lest any Root of Bitterness shou^ spring up, and give 'em
Trouble? I will noe to you few things:

1. Here was the result of what Understanding the all had, in drawing up these
Articles, and they thoug^ they had sufficiently fenced their Union against all
Inv^sions from Socinian, Arminian and Antinomian Op^nions.

2. All Objections then made against Mr. Williams h^ Book are accounted ^or:
All antecedent Quarrels a^ buried in the Grave of this Agreement: Whatever
Controversies might arise from any thing Mr. Williams ha^ then written, are
from the Day of the Date hereof, f^ever shut out of Doors.

3. Therefore any new started Debates about Chang^ of Persons, or Christ's
taking upon him the Person of Sinners, are void, and of none Effect; if Mr.
Williams shall hereafter write or preach any thing in Derogation of the
subscribed Articles, it will oblige him to make satisfaction; but for his Book,
that has received its com-pur^gation. As the Law will not permit Suits to be
immortal the Gospel forbids Controversies to be eternal. It Is only the Savage
Creature the Hyaena, that loves to dig up dead Bodies out of their Graves; and
none ought to be ambitious of the Woman of Endor's Excellency, that she would
not let Samuel sleep quietly among the ^ad.

9. Notwithstanding the late Reunion, the United Brethren soon found there was
some Dissatisfaction in (...) Breasts of the Reconciled Brethren, who gradually
^drew from their Assemblies and common Meetings, ^ not only so, but set up
another opposite Meeting, ^ Neighboring Place, at the very Hour, and on the ^e
Day that the United Brethren assembled at Dr. An^ey's: Some few of them would
now and then drop when they had occasion to serve themselves of the ^ion, and
commonly there was One or Two to spy (...) their Liberty, whether merely from
their own In^ations, or Ordered to that unworthy Employment their Principals;
and if they could pick up any thing ^y conceived might be grateful at
Pinners-Hall, they ^uld not fail to give Advice of it, while the poor incent
Presbyterians were seriously consulting the Ho^^ur of their Lord, and promoting
the Interest of Reli^^^n, without respect to Party or Faction.

Nevertheless the Brethren went on in the way of their ^ty, and though they had
but slender hopes of retrie^g their Brethren to Reason, were willing to call
them ^pes still, rather than to sit down and sink in utter ^espair: And
therefore not standing on Points of Ho^^ur, as if they who first departed
without cause, should ^st seek to return, they were willing rather to imitate
^eir gracious God, who first invites the Sinners to Re^nt, and Turn, though the
Sons of Adam were first in ^e Revolt. They thought it more Glorious to yield in
^der to Peace; than to be stiff, though in a just War. ^here being therefore a
Brother yet left of the other ^umber, who had not quite fallen off; one that
had ^ excellent Talent in dressing up Creeds and Articles, ^ was employed, or
employed himself to bring in rude ^raughts of new Articles; and they were rude
^^deed.

In May, 1695. Another Attempt was made for Peace^ If peradventure they might
recover the Dissenting Bre^thren into the Bosom of the Union, and Articles we^
framed of different Natures; by some of which they e^^deavoured to clear
themselves of the least Suspicion (...) Arminianism; by the others they were
desirous the Di^senters should purge themselves of all Suspicion of incl^^ning
to the Antinomians.

The Paper then sent to the other Party was as fo^^lows.

WE the United Ministers in and about London, considering of a way to preserve
the Union and preve^ any mistakes, and remove any Prejudices that may arise
amo^^ us to interrupt the said Union; Do declare, that we do st^^ adhere to the
Terms thereof; and do still submit our selves (...) the Holy Scriptures, as the
perfect and only Rule of Faith (...) Practice: And do own the Doctrinal Part of
those common called the Articles of the Church of England; or the Conf^^sion,
shorter and larger Catechisms compiled by the Assem^^ at Westminster, or the
Savoy Confession; and do Renou^^ and Testify against all Opinions and Doctrines
dissonant the^ from: As for Instance, amongst many others.

1. That there is no definite Number of Persons elected fr^ all Eternity, whom
God will by his appointed Means, certa^^ly Save and bring to eternal Life.
Leaving the rest, (...) fall under a just Condemnation for their Original and
Act^ Sins, especially for their Neglect and Contempt of the Me^ of Salvation.

2. That Christ dyed equally for all Men, not intending (...) final Salvation
of some more than others.

3. That Men have it in their own Power, by the use of the Natural Faculties of
Reason and Will, unassisted by the espe^^al Light and Grace of the Holy Ghost,
to perform all that necessary to Salvation; or that his special efficacious
Lig^ and Grace is not necessary to their Conversion, Perseveran^ and final
Salvation.

4. That any of them whom God has foreknown, predesti^ated, called effectually
according to the purpose of his Grace, ^all fall away either totally, or so as
not to be finally saved.

5. That Faith, Repentance, a Holy Conversation, or any Act or Work done by us,
or wrought by the Spirit of God in ^s, are any part of the Righteousness, for
the sake of which, (...) on the account whereof, God does justify any Man or
entitle ^im to Eternal Life.

10. The United Brethren when they had thus gi^en their Jealous Brethren this
over-abundant Satisfacti^n of their Innocence as to any Tincture of
Arminianism, ^y their subscribing Articles, turned into all possible ^hapes and
Forms, did think it Reasonable that the Dis^enting Brethren should a little
answer their Expectation ^lso, by a more express Renouncing some odd Notions
which savoured pretty strongly of the other Extreme. And it is an unquestionable
Truth that some of them had ^ented such strange Doctrines, that it gave Umbrage
to them that there might be found among them one or two ^r so, that had dipped
very deep in those Crispian Hetero^^xies: and therefore for a Trial, they
transmitted to them these Seven following Propositions.

On the other side [we renounce these Doctrines.]

(1.) THAT Men are under no Obligation to make use of their Natural Faculties,
with such external means of Salvation as God affords them; praying in hope, for
his gracious Assistance, in order to that blessed End.

(2.) That God has not made Offers of Grace by Christ, (...) all within the
Sound of the Gospel, testifying that whoever believes shall be saved, without
excluding any, and commanding them to believe accordingly.

(3.) That any are in the Sight of God Justified or entitled (...) Eternal
Life, before they are effectually Called, or while ^hey continue Unregenerate,
or in Unbelief.

(4.) That any may expect Pardon without Repentance.

(5.) That continued Repentance toward God, and Fai^ in our Lord Jesus, and
Holiness of Heart, and Life, are (...) in the Nature of the Thing, and by the
Gospel Constitution ^^cessary to Salvation.

(6.) That the Moral Law is not of use to unregener^ Men, to awaken their
Consciences to fly from the Wrath come, and drive them to Christ, or that it is
not a Rule Life to them that live under the Gospel as well as others.

(7.) That Believers falling into grievous Sins, do not i^ curr God's
displeasure thereby: or that they may expect ^^^surance otherwise, than by the
Evidence of those Graces which the Promises of Salvation are made, and by the
Test^^mony of the Spirit of Adoption witnessing with our Spir^ that we are the
Children of God.

We have thought it our Duty to bear our Testimony again all these erroneous
Opinions, or any other contrary to the pla^ Tenor of the Gospel of God: And we
do further protest ^^gainst all undermining one another in any matter of Church
Discipline and Government, and do heartily desire to mai^^tain Communion with
each other, according to the Heads Agreement which we have assented to. And if
any thi^ has been done or spoken by any of us, through mistake or
ina^^vertency that may cause any just Offense to the Prejudice the aforesaid
Union; we are ready upon better Informati^^ to rectify the same, still desiring
and resolving mutually, Brotherly Forbearance toward one another, in any less
Points wherein we may differ.

And now, Sir, do you, and let the impartial World judg^ whether these
Dissenting Brethren did not owe a Sati^^faction to the United Ministers, as
well as the Unite^ Brethren to them; and whether there were not mo^^ pregnant
Reasons to suspect some of them inclining (...) Antinomianism, than they could
pretend to Reasons (...) suspect any of these Veering toward Arminianis^ And
yet, to the Amazement of all considerate Person^ though the Five first Articles
were received; the Seve^ last were wholly rejected.

I say this further, It was not without cogent Reasons ^at the United Brethren
after they had given such fre^uent and incontestible Demonstrations of their
Sound^ess in the Faith, against all Arminian and Socinian Er^ors, and were
still ready to give all further reasonable ^roofs thereof, did try these
Dissenting Brethren, whether they were sound in the Faith, in Opposition to the
Antinomian Heresies; especially when some of the big^est Name amongst them,
from the Press and Pulpit had ^isseminated such horrid Opinions as filled all
intelligent ^ersons with equal Astonishment and Indignation; Now ^ir, because
most of you in the Country are innocent ^n these matters, and perhaps not many
of you have yet ^eard what abominable Doctrines the Wantonness of ^ome Men's
Fancy in this City does produce; I will give you a little Taste of some few of
them, with this Caution, that you would implore the special Grace of God to
fortify your Souls with that Antidote, least this ^ittle Taste should prove
your Bane and Poison.

1. To talk of a Gospel Threat is at best a Catachresis, and nothing else can
save it from being a Bull.

2. Pardon is rather the Condition of Faith, and much more having a causal
Influence thereunto, than Faith and Repentance are of Pardon.

3. It was Sin as to the (...) that Christ bore; the Fault of Sin was laid on
Christ; the Sin it self as opposed to Guilt; Christ was reputed a Criminal, not
only by Man, but by God.

4. As to the Elect there was never any Guilt upon them, in respect of the
Righteous Judgment of God, in foro Dei, but that which accompanied the Letter
of the Law, setting in with Conscience.

5. Union with Christ is before Faith, (at least Natura) and we partake of the
Spirit by Virtue of that Union.

6. Justification in regard of Application, must be before Believing.

7. The first Application, ordine naturae saltem, is to ungodly Man, eo Nomine,
that he may believe.

8. We believe that we may be justified Decla^^tively.

9. It is denied that God requires Faith as an indispe^^sable Qualification in
them, whom he will justify (...) Christ's Merits.

10. All that a Believer can pray for, is the furth^^ Manifestation of Pardon,
for he knows that all his S^^^ are pardoned.

11. A Believer is to work from Life, and not (...) Life.

12. It Is a great Truth, that God sees no Sin in a B^^liever.

13. Sin can do no real Hurt to a Believer.

14. God is not displeased with his People, and is (...) angry with the Persons
of Believers for their Sins.

15. Legal Convictions before saving Faith are no mo^^ than Sin; it is but the
filthy, Conscience polluting, Gu^^^ of Sin.

16. All imperfect Holiness is Sin.

17. Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die? is but the T^^umph of the Law over a
dead Sinner.

18. The Eternal Life in which the Angels were cr^ated and confirmed by Christ,
differs from that Etern^^ Life which Believers have in Christ: The one is
Creature Life, or a created Life; the other is the Ete^^nal Life of God
communicated in time.

19. Believers are as Righteous as Christ; I mean no^ in a way of Similitude,
but in a way of Equality.

20. Christ's Incarnation was no part of his Humiliation.

21. We Coalesce upon believing into one Mystical person with Christ, which is
distinguished from Legal Union which is before Faith.

I doubt not but by this time, you are abundantly sa^fied that the United
Brethren had Just Reasons to (...) and of the Dissenters, and might reasonably
expect ^om them, that they should clear themselves in these ^oints, when they
had given such Offense to the Uni^^d Brethren, who had over and over, given
them all ^anner of Satisfaction, in all points wherein they could ^etend any
Suspicion of them, to be leaning toward ^e Arminians: But alas! no Satisfaction
could be ob^ined, they were inflexible; and would not comply in ^y one of the
Seven Articles proposed to them; and ^us the Breach became beyond the United
Brethrens ^aking up.

III. In this Melancholic Posture of Affairs, pray ^ell me what could the
United Brethren do more than ^o sit down in a Sorrowful Silence, and commit
themselves and their Cause to God, whose Cause indeed it ^as; yet comforting
themselves that they had the Te^timony of their own Consciences that they had
pur^ued the things that made for Peace, though without ^uccess.

In this Juncture, there were some Brethren piously disposed, and with sincere
Intentions no doubt, who would be doing something, though they little knew what
that something should be, or what would be the Success of it; and that would
make another Attempt for Union; and these were they whom our Reporter calls,
and may they deserve to be so called, the industrious Pacificators.

Now these acting upon their personal Account, and without Instructions or
Directions from the Body of the United Ministers, held many Meetings, had many
Debates, the Product whereof was a Paper signed by Nine of those Brethren who
had put their Names to Mr. Williams his Book; some others who had not
subscribed that Book, only expressed themselves thus; We are glad to find so
good an Agreement amongst us, as the Paper does express.

But this poor Paper produced no real Effect, both because some of the leading
Men of the Dissenters, would not, or did not sign it; and because the Paper
grew into small Credit, when it was known, and it was soo^ known, that some of
those whose Names were affixt t^ it, disowned that they had put their Hands to
it, no^ had impow'red any to do it for them, and by what way or by whose means
their Names were put to the Paper they could give no Account.

After some considerable Time of Expectancy, finding no real Effects of this
Paper, no Approach made by the other Party toward Reunion, the Body of the
United Ministers judged themselves concerned to take the Matter into
Consideration; and appointed some of their own Number to prepare Matters, who
drew up somewhat, which being presented to them, after mature Deliberation,
they put their Thoughts into tha^ Form, which is now called the Third Paper; of
which I will give you some Entertainment, when I have first premised a few
Things.

(1.) The Body of the United Ministers did not, could not look on themselves as
concluded or bound up by the former Paper, because it was managed without their
Privity, and however without their Order.

(2.) Therefore they proceeded upon the whole matter as entire and clear in it
self, not prepossessed by, or prejudiced against it, but as free, and in their
own Power to resolve as God and their own Consciences should direct them.

(3.) And yet they carried it with a decent respect to those of their Brethren
who had engaged in the drawing up the former Paper, and accordingly retained as
much of that Paper as they safely could, and drew-up this other in Conformity
to the former, saving in some Expressions and Phrases, which were either judged
of dubi^s Sense, or dangerous Consequence.

(4.) They well knew that those Brethren who had a and in penning the first
Paper, labored under some conveniences in that whole Transaction, from which
^ey were now set free. For 1. Their own strong Pro^ensities to Peace, might
possibly lead them to swallow own some harsh Expressions, and to accept of
Peace ^on very hard Terms. 2. There were some Persons (...) the other side, who
being much given to the Poli^^cks, and great Intrieguers, might easily
overreach ^ch as proceeded with Plainness and Integrity of Heart, ^d suspected
not to be out witted by those, to whom ^ey were no ways inferior in Learning,
or any useful ^nowledge.

(5.) Those Brethren who had their Heads, and ^ands, and Hearts too, in
drawing, dressing and sign^g the former Paper, when they had heard the Reasons
^d Arguments of the whole Body, where all matters were ^anaged, not in a hasty
and Precipitate way, but with ^e greatest Calmness, by slow Paces, with great
Li^erty, and Freedom of Debate and being now dis-in^mbred from the Counterpoize
of Oppositions or In^uations; might, and did see just Reasons to alter the
^rase, and new model some Expressions, which had ^ept into the former.

(6.) And hereof you may be fully assured, inasmuch those individual Nine
Brethren, who for, and in ^pes of Peace, had signed the former Paper, had their
^ands, and Heads, and Hearts too, in the forming, ^ording, and assenting to
this Third: Nor did they ^rein alter their Judgments, or vary in the least from
^eir zealous Desires of Peace and Union, only they ^w saw, this last Paper was
the same in all Things ^ith the former, saving in some few Passages and
Expres^ns, which carried a Face of some dangerous Tenden^es; which, however
they might escape the Notice of private Brethren, could not pass the
Observation of many discerning Heads, who with utmost Applicati^ set themselves
to prevent any Inconvenience that mi^ arise to the Truths of the Gospel.

(7.) Lastly, the Controversy lying chiefly in so^ School Terms, or Jargons of
Art, and of very late (...) trivance; such as A Change of Persons between
Christ (...) us; which may possibly be capable of receiving a so^ Meaning, and
yet is more sounding toward a dan^^rous Sense; the Brethren did unanimously
agree to gr^ as much as the sound Sense could bear, and modes^ to wave and pass
by the other, which was liable to interpreted to a Sense and Sound of Malignity
to (...) whole of the Gospel; and they are now more fully (...) swaded that
they were in the Right by the Reporters ^^tions, and those of the Manuscript
exemplified in the (...) port, if that was not of the Reporters Invention, wh^
to me is not material.

IV. Proceed we at last to the Consideration, and (...) amination of the
Reporter's Objections, with those the Manuscript.

The present Controversy ( says the Reporter, p. 3.) is about Church Order, but
Doctrinals; and may be reduce^ Two general Heads, viz. Christ's Satisfaction,
and the Pe^ Sanction of the Law; though hitherto, the greatest Strug^ has been
about the First, unto which my Papers confine me^

Methinks I need not observe to you, that they rese^ more Heads of Contention
under Deck, to be cal^ above-board, when they have occasion for them: (...)
that if this impertinent Quarrel were at an end, ab^ the Change of Persons;
they have another ready, and (...) knows how many Legions more, to keep up the
Strug^ and that we shall never want either the Ball of Cont^ tion to keep us in
Breath, or the Bone of Content^ to set us together by the Ears. Hitherto (says
he) greatest Struggle has been about the former. Yes; Hith^ what shall be
hereafter, who can divine? Like ^se Pettyfoggers, Qui lites litibus serant
Mortalibus im^taliter: However it be, I am heartily glad that he reduced the
Controversy to Two Heads; if they ^ve not like those of the Hydra, that where
one was (...) off, Two more succeeded in their place and (...).

But he asserts, that hitherto the greatest Struggle has ^n about these Two:
whereof the First is about Christ's ^isfaction. But herein you will need better
Informa^^^, and a truer Report: for never, hitherto, have the ^ited Brethren,
nor any one of that Number, given least Occasion to any to struggle with them
about (...) Point; but they have clearly stated, vigorously ^intained that
great Fundamental; and for this they ^appeal to whatever of Impartiality and
Honesty is in this lower World. They appeal to the Thirty ^e Articles; to the
Assemblies Confession; that of Savoy; to the shorter and larger Catechisms, and
to ^ir own Papers published in 1692 to which they have ^reely subscribed, and
never yet in the least departed, (...) by the Grace of God, will they ever
depart, no not ^h their Lives.

^Nay, I will speak a great Word: None has ever more ^arly stated this Truth,
than Mr. Williams; for which ^fer you to his Gospel Truth, 2 Chap. Though our
Sins (...) imputed to Christ with respect to the Guilt thereof; so (...) he by
the Father's Appointment, and his own Consent, ^me obliged as Mediator to bear
the Punishment of our Ini^ies, and he did bear those Punishments, to the full
Satisfa^n of Justice, and to our actual Remission when we ^eve, etc.

Now, Sir, because you well understand the Socinian ^ntroversies in all Points,
and therefore in this, pray me if he has not in these Words obviated whatever
^asions the Socinians make use of, to avoid the Argu^nts brought to confirm
this Truth: 1. The Guilt of Sins imputed to Christ. 2. Christ bore the
Punishme^ of our Iniquities. 3. And this was according to his F^^thers
appointment and his own Consent. 4. This P^^nishment he bore to the full
Satisfaction of Justice. To our Actual Remission when we believe.

About what then is all this Struggle, or rather Squabbl^ why Sir, 'Twas lately
they objected to Mr. William that his Righteousness would not go; 'twas Clipped
within t^ Ring: Witty enough in all Conscience! but now su^^ceeds the Coining
Age, and they have Stamped or Cou^^terfeited some new Phrases, Terms,
Expressions, su^ as Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners, dying in t^
Person of Sinners; and raising a huge Dust about the^ they call it a Struggle
about Christ's Satisfaction, when i^ thing less: And I am afraid this False
Coin w^ not go.

Will you observe with me, as we go along, how u^ easy these Gentlemen sit
under all the Old Confessions Faith, all the Articles of Religion, drawn up to
be bo^ Instruments of Peace and Truth. I will for a Mome^ leave you to your
Meditations, and a little freely d^^course with them. Come, Gentlemen! Will the
A^^cle of Satisfaction as propounded by the Church of E^^land, please you? O,
no! we are weary of that: The were Episcopal! Will that content you which was
co^^piled by the Assembly at Westminster? Least of all! The were Presbyterians!
Will then that of the Brethren at (...) Savoy satisfy you? They were
Independent! No! (...) have had enough of that! Well! Will that Arti^ drawn up
by your own selves in 1692. make you eas^ No! We have occasion for some other
Phrases! W^ is it I beseech you? Will a Change of Person quiet yo^ Yes; in our
own Sense! Then again I beseech you t^ us what that is? Why that it be
interpreted to sign^ Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners; and that
died in the Person of Sinners. And how long will that c^^tent you? I can tell
you that! till the next Croc^ comes in your Heads to invent another, and then
the ^tress of Peace and Truth shall be laid upon that: I per^eive we may as
well bind Proteus, as fix your Desulto^y Humors, or as the Comaedian expresses
it, Canem ^ugitivum Agninis Lactibus alligare. For this has been our Method all
along; you draw up a Proposition, ^ou hope Mr. Williams will boggle at it, he
subscribes. ^hen study another; Invention is fertile: It Is done; and Mr.
Williams subscribes to that too! Then invent a ^hird, a Fourth, and so on till
he refuses, and then you ^ave gained your Point, and done your Business: Mr.
Williams shall be an obstinate Heretic.

It Is now high time to examine their Objections, whe^er against Mr. Williams
for the Papers sake, or against ^e Paper for Mr. Williams's sake, it is not very
clear; or whether against both, for Divisions sake, I am not con^ern'd; nor
will I promise to confine my Answers to the ^rguments against either; but yet I
think I shall chief^^ confine my self to those Levelled against him, and ^ot
wholly waving what they say against this Third Pa^er; though in Truth there is
but one Paper that the ^nited Brethren are concerned to own and justify: and
the Reason of my procedure is plainly this; I have ^o warrant to vindicate the
Brethren, they are more ^ble to answer for themselves, which if they think such
Report deserves it, they will certainly do; and for Mr. Williams, I need none
of his Leave or Allowance; ^r any Man may defend the common Cause of
Christi^nity, or answer any Arguments brought against it, without his
Permission or Commission. Mr. Williams as asserted and publicly owned that
Christ died in our ^ead [Vice nostra, loco nostro.] And more fully as I ^uoted
him, Gospel Truth, Chap. 2. Now the Manuscript (...) the Report answers:

(1) That our modern Innovators (does he mean them^lves?) have assumed to
themselves a Privilege of impo^g an heterodox Sense on sound Terms and
Phrases: And that these Words [in our place and stead] do not with many now a
days signify a Surrogation, or a proper Change of Persons in a legal sense, but
import no more than [for our good.]

To which disingenuous Objection I return thi^ Reply:

1. It is here then acknowledged, that these Word^ of Mr. Williams's are sound
and orthodox,; and wha^ would these unreasonable Men have him do? how shall he
speak to please them? must he use heterodox Term^ and Phrases? and then qualify
them with a sound Meaning? They that revile him for speaking soundly, because
others put an ugly Meaning upon his Words, how would they have reviled him had
he spoken heterodoxly, and then thought to salve all with a good Meaning? Let
Mr. Williams speak the Words of Truth and Soberness, and preach the Doctrine
which is according to Godliness, and let the Uncharitable judge what they
please.

2. But have these Modern Innovators usurped this Privilege, to impose an
heterodox Meaning upon sound Words? Then it will follow that these Men, who
without cause have put an evil Meaning upon Mr. Williams his Expressions, are
Modern Innovators; nay, malicious Slanderers: And they are guilty of a more
heinous Sin, that they usurp the Privilege of God to judge the Heart ^ Charity
thinks no evil; that is, where none appears; an^ where has it appeared that Mr.
Williams reserved any Heterodox Sense under those Holy and Wholesom^ Words.

And what if these Words [in our place and stead] do not with many now a days
signify a Surrogation? how can Mr. Williams help that? If Surrogation signifies
[in our place and stead] its very fair; for I would always have the more dark
Term explained by the more clear and familiar, and not that which is plain by
the more dubious and dark: I should think the Light should comment better upon
Darkness, than Darkness would inter^ret the Light.

Still he carries on the Charge! These Words do not sig^ifie a proper Change of
Persons in a legal sense. I answer: ^ho can tell that, till they shall tell us,
what a proper ^hange of Persons in a legal sense, does signify its own self? ^t
them agree, if they can, to fix what the meaning of proper Change of Persons in
a legal sense, does import, and ^en it may be judged whether [ in our place and
stead] ^oes signify as much as that comes to.

But the Caviller proceeds; in our place and stead (with ^me) signify no more
than for our Good: why it is impos^ble they should: That which Christ suffered
in our ^ead was for our good! to bear the Punishment of our ^ns, to satisfy
Divine Justice was certainly for our good! that by his Death and Sufferings, he
delivered us from ^e greatest Evils, Hell and Wrath; and that he pur^ased for
us the greatest Blessings, Heaven and Glory, ^as most certainly for our good:
So that he argues ^us; If for our good, then not in our stead! But I will inert
the Argument; If in our stead, undoubtedly for our ^od; and therefore for our
good because in our stead.

(2.) The Manuscript gives a Second Answer: The ^nglish Socinians declare that
the Hinge of the Controversy ^tween them and us, turns not on the Words [in our
stead] ^at the Men of the Racovian way consider our Savior as ^ffering for us,
and in our stead. Take this Reply.

1. It Is all the better! I had rather have them speak ^onestly, though with a
knavish meaning, than speak ^d mean both like Knaves.

2. But pray, Sir, (I direct my self to you, Mr. Ma^script) If the Socinians
will put an unsound Sense upon sound Words, will you quit the sound Phrase
because ^ey put a wretched Sense on it? What other Remedy ^ill you advise us to?
Why our wise Gentlemen have ^und out an Expedient that shall out-wit them; for
if ^ey think to evade [ in our place and stead] they have another ready, viz.
That in the Sufferings and Death of Christ there was a Commutation of Persons:
But this will not do the Feat! For Socinus and Crellius, will grant there was
such a Change of Persons; and what will they do now? Why here is a new Phrase
ready to put in it^ place, viz. That Christ died in the Person of Sinners; or
that he took on him the Person of Sinners. Not too fast that would have served
for next time. But assure your self, Sir, though your Invention be never so
fruitful i^ new Phrases, the Socinians are as pregnant in Equivocations, and
Interpretations to elude and evade the new Terms; and you must be put to the
needless trouble to make new Intrenchments as they distinguish you out o^ the
old, and so on till you have not one Foot of Ground to (...). See now to what a
wretched pickle you have reduced your self, and which is more, the Cause and
Truth of Christ. The Socinians have by a false Gloss driven you from that old
excellent Phrase [ in our place and stead] you retreat to [ a Change of Persons
between Christ and us.] They put a false Gloss upon that, and then you retire
to Christ's [ dying in the Person of Sinners.] Do you think they cannot give a
false Construction of that too? and so you must make and coin new Terms and
Phrases in infinitum.

3. I will therefore in Charity (if you are pleased to ^ccept it) recommend an
easy Expedient to you: I^ you suspect that any under a sound Expression
conceals an unsound Meaning, ask him, if he understands it properly in a legal
Sense, or no? ask him, if he means that Christ suffered in our stead as a
Sacrifice to satisfy God's Justice? and there you have driven him to the end of
his Equivocations, for which Mr. Williams has given you the only proper Draught
in the place I have already exemplified. And beyond this you cannot go, unless
you will have recourse to the Rack or Spanish Inquisition, which is a Remedy
worse than the Disease.

4. I add one thing more: If both these Phrases, Christ's suffering and dying
in our place and stead; and that other, A Change of Persons between Christ and
us, be liable to be thus practiced upon by Men of great Wit and little
Conscience; and that no Terms can be found out so plain, but crafty Heads will
suborn them into an evil Meaning, I would then a Thousand times sooner choose,
to adhere to this Phrase, Christ suffered and died in our stead and place,
[loco nostro, vice nostra] than to that other, In the Sufferings of Christ,
there was a Change of Persons between Christ and us: For the former has had its
Signification strongly fixed and settled, by long usage and prescription;
whereas this latter is but of Yesterday, and scarce Two Persons, no not the
Inventers, are agreed amongst themselves, what Sense to stamp upon it. Again,
the plainest Christians have a tolerable Understanding of the former; whereas
the other does but amuse and confound them: Nor is it so dangerous to the Main
of the Cause, to mistake in the one as in the other; for he that by Christ's
suffering in our stead intends he suffered for our good, speaks the Truth; but
he that mistakes in the Sense of Commutation of Persons, may err the whole
Heavens, and mis-lead himself and others into the Dreggs of Antinomianism.

In a Word therefore; The Socinians are Subtle, and have put a false Gloss upon
Christ's dying in our stead; shall we therefore discharge that Phrase? so have
they put a false one upon Commutation of Persons; shall we therefore by the
same Reason discharge that also? Why, they have put as absurd a Sense upon the
Term Satisfaction; which with them signifies no more than Satisfaction made to
the Will or Wisdom of God: must we therefore relinquish that too? Then we give
them up the whole Cause: How much more advisable would it be, to keep to the
old Land Marks, and adhere to what Mr. Williams with all that are sound in the
Faith, have asserted; That Christ suffered and died in our place and stead, as
a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice; and then let the Socinians, and whoever
have a wicked Mind, try their Skill in evading and eluding it.

(2.) A Second heavy Charge against Mr. Williams is, That he absolutely denies
a Change of Persons between Christ and the Elect: to which the united Brethren
in their Third Paper (as he calls it) give a clear Answer; That it could not be
intended as a denial of a Change of Person between Christ and us in a general
Sense, but only in Opposition to the Opinion of his Adversary, he wrote
against, for in that very Place he expressly affirms, That Christ suffered and
died in our stead: That is, Mr. Williams did not deny a Change of Person,
simpliciter, sed secundum quid; not universally, but restrictively; for the
most universal Terms are not always universally to be understood.

But the Manuscript will not acquiesce in this Answer.

1. He therefore says; That his denial of a Change of Persons between Christ
and the Elect, or between Christ and Believers, is so express and full, that he
leaves no room for a distinction, limitation or restriction, etc.

To which I return this; Mr. Williams has left room enough for all the
Distinctions that are proper to the Matter in hand; for thus he expresses
himself: Gosp. Truth. p. 33. 2 Edit. The difference lies in these Points: 1.
Whether there be a Change of Person between Christ and the Elect? yea, or
between Christ and Believers? This the Doctor affirms, and I deny: Whence I
argue; Mr. Williams denies nothing, was concerned to deny nothing, but what the
Doctor had affirmed; but the Doctor had affirmed a wild, monstrous Sense of
Change of Person between Christ and the Elect, or Believers; and therefore Mr.
Williams did not, could not deny any thing else, according to all the Rules and
Laws of pertinent Discourse.

Now then the Determination of what Mr. Williams denies, must depend on the
knowing what it was the Doctor affirmed: and for this see page 31. where he
cites Dr. Crisp, speaking thus; Mark it well! Christ himself is not so
completely Righteous, but we are as Righteous as he; nor we so completely
sinful, but Christ became, being made Sin, as completely sinful as we; Nay
more, we are the same Righteousness; for we are made the Righteousness of God;
That very sinfulness which we were, Christ is made the very sinfulness: So that
here is a direct Change; Christ takes our Person and Condition, and stands in
our stead; we take Christ's Person and Condition, and stand in his stead: So
that if you reckon well, you must always reckon your selves in another Person,
and that other in your Person. And now you have it, what is that Change of
Persons, which the Doctor affirms, and Mr. Williams denies; which had he not,
he had denied his Redeemer and betrayed the Gospel.

2. But the Manuscript comes upon Mr. Williams with his Logical Talent, p. 8.
The Negation of a Change is so general, that unless no Change signify a Change;
and a Negative is of the same import with an Affirmative, you will never be
able to find him allowing of a Change of Person between Christ and us, etc.
This case is very hard, I confess; for of all Morsels, I never loved to swallow
a Contradiction: But the Question is, where the Contradiction lies? They that
would find it between Mr. Williams and the United Brethren, must seek
elsewhere: They affirm the same things. If they will find it between Mr.
Williams and Dr. Crisp, they need not look far, the Doctor affirms, Mr.
Williams denies: but now to find Mr. Williams contradicting himself, that would
be sweet! Why does not he own a Change, and yet deny a Change? he does so! yet
without any Contradiction to himself or the Truth.

There is nothing more nauseous to an understanding Reader than to see a Man
Paratragaediate in Trifles, and to raise a mighty Storm in a sorry Bucket of
Water. A Change and no Change! Yea, and Nay! Did this Gentleman in good earnest
never hear or read, that single Terms or Propositions, which are really
contradictory, must be spoken or intended, Ad idem, eodem modo, eodem respectu,
eodem Tempore: Suppose I should tell him, Lazarus was dead, and Lazarus was not
dead; he will cry out perhaps, O horrid Contradiction! O barbarous Nonsense. But
be not so fierce, both are true: he was dead before Christ raised him, and not
dead when Christ said loose him and let him go: To what purpose then do they
fill our Ears with the Din of an imaginary Contradiction, which has no Ground
but in the Fansy and Wind of their own Heads.

To conclude, there may be an (...) where there is not (...) a seeming, where
there is no real Contradiction: Ay, but our Manuscript thinks he has nickt it:
p. 9. He should have told us the sense in which his Adversary affirmed a
Change. But to what purpose should he tell you it, when you stop your Ears; or
to what end show you it, when you are blinded with Prejudice, or Wink very hard
and will not see? He has told it to all the World besides; every one else can
hear it, see it, or read it: only he has not told it you, because you do, male
audire, i. e. are thick of hearing. But what would they have this poor Man do?
will they allow him to hold his Liberty of Writing by no other Tenure than than
that of Villanage? what are the Conditions of his (...) he has written for a
whole Page together, in what Sense his Adversary takes it; and I have here
given you enough, you may have more if you please to open your Eyes, and yet he
has not told you one Word of it.

But this reminds me of a Passage I once heard from a Reverend and Learned
Divine in the Pulpit; who discoursing upon the Words of the Apostle Paul, Rom
3. 28. Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law: and comparing them with those of Jam. 2. 24. Ye see then how
that by works a man ^ justified, and not by faith only. Here as that Learned
^erson observed, is a seeming Contradiction, not by works, and yet by works; by
faith only, and not by faith only: for ^e clearing of which, he prudently waved
all the com^on Solutions, and upon the whole thus determined; that if God
should reveal contradictory Propositions to our Faith, we were obliged to
believe them both to be true. This would be a compendious way, I confess, in
salving Contradictions; only it has an odd Inconvenience in it; for ^hen God
must give us other Faculties than these we now have; for according to those
poor ones we are at pre^ent Masters of, whatever God may oblige us to, I am
certain it is simply impossible that both the Propositions ^an be true; and I
think too, it is as certain, God can never reveal or oblige us to believe a Lie.

(3.) But the Reporter, in my Opinion, has discharged more formidable Argument
against the Third Paper and Mr. Williams too; p. 6. For whereas the Third Pa^er
had said (or the Cover to it) That on our so happy ^stablishing the Doctrine of
Justification, we need say but little to the point of Commutation of Persons.
And to speak a ^lain Truth, That little they said, was enough, because ^hey had
established the Doctrine of Justification upon its ^roper Basis, namely, Divine
Revelation, upon which bot^om God himself had established it, and then it stands
unmovable, and the Gates, the Power and Policy of Hell ^all not prevail
against it. Now hearken to the Report of ^is Canon, a great Report without Ball.

It Is impossible to establish the Doctrine of Justification on its ^ue and
proper Basis, any otherwise than by clearing the point of Commutation of
Persons.

Impossible! what a huge Opinion have these Men of ^he vast extent of their
Intellectuals? They can admea^ure it to a Hairs Breadth, just where the
possible ends; and where the impossible begins: It had been more modest to have
qualified the Word with [for ought I know, or (...) apprehend] but if that
great Doctrine cannot possib^^ be established upon its Basis without clearing
the Poi^^ of Commutation of Persons? why do they not, why have they not long
since cleared it? Dr. Crisp has cleared i^ and to say Truth, though he be
erroneous, yet he spea^ clearly, we see his Sense; but these Gentlemen spea^
dubiously, darkly, at best but in the Twilight, an^ whether there be a sound
Sense under those obscur^ Phrases, we know not, nor perhaps they neither.

This Doctrine had need be well settled, and in ord^^ thereto the Basis of it
well cleared; for I have ever taken it to be Articulus stantis, out cadentis
ecclesiae: If the Article fails, the Church fails and falls with it; and (...)
were better the whole World should fall than either Give me leave to offer a
few things to his high Con^^dence.

1. He that will build a Castle in the Air, must b^ content with a Foundation
of Air to support it; and (...) that will form an Imaginary Notion of
Justification, mu^^ provide a Basis in his own Imagination, for it to rest u^
on. If indeed Justification admits no Faith, as Dr. Cri^^ has contrived it,
then we must admit his Pedestal to se ^e it upon; To reckon our selves in
Christ's Person, an^ Christ in ours, which is his Commutation of Persons, but
(...) the Holy Ghost unites the Soul to Christ by Faith, i^ no such impossible
thing to conceive how both our Si^^ may be imputed to Christ, and his
Righteousness to the be lieving Sinner.

2. This great Doctrine of Justification is already se^^led upon Divine
Revelation, there it has stood from the Beginning, there it shall stand to the
end of Time, an^ Things, and needs not the presumptuous Fancies (...) towering
Wits to place it on a more from Bottom. Bu^ are we not brought to a sine pass?
we must trust Go^ no farther than we can see him; believe no more tha^ we can
understand a Reason for; that is, we must whee^ about to the main Principle of
the Socinians, to admit no more into our Creed than we can comprehend: He that
will settle the great revealed Doctrines of Religion on a humane Foundation
overthrows it. The Scripture has sufficiently revealed the Doctrine of
Justification, to be through Christ's Righteousness accepted of God, received
by Faith; and for this Commutation of Persons in their Sense, it knows nothing
of it.

Let not therefore this Gentleman be so over-officious ^o erect a Basis for
Justification of his own Head, or of wiser Heads than his; the Holy Spirit has
done that already, left putting forth his daring Hand to stay the Ark, which he
dreams begins to totter, he should meet with the fate of presumptuous Uzzah.

3. I would ask this modest Question: Where has this Doctrine of Justification
been settled all this while, since the Reformation? since the purest
Primo-Primitive Times? What! has it hung, like Mahomet's Tomb, in ^he Air? or
floated, like the Ark, upon the Water? No! It has stood firm and unmovable
upon Scriptural Foun^ations, against all the Assaults of Papists, Socinians,
Ar^inians, and Antinomians: It has stood visible in the Ar^icles of the Church
of England; in the Confessions of the Assembly at Westminster; in that of the
Savoy, in the Ca^echisms shorter and larger, and yet this uncouth Phrase never
yet heard of: It is strange to me, that Councils General, and Provincial
Synods, Assemblies of Holy Learned Men, should so often, so strenuously assert,
and confirm by the Word of God, this great Truth, and yet never once dream of
Dr. Crisp's Commutation of Persons, upon which to superstruct the Doctrine of
Justification. Nay, I would entreat these Gentlemen to look at home and inquire
whether any particular Congregation of that denomination soever, did ever
insert any of these Terms amongst their Credenda, even that to which he ^ay
belong, or over which he may preside, and yet I will presume they have the
Doctrine of Justification Orthodoxly propounded, judiciously explained, and
solidly confirmed without these Innovations and strange Term of Commutation of
Persons, Christ's taking on him the Person of Sinners, or dying in the Person
of Sinners.

4. This Phrase, the Change of the Person of Christ; may have, and truly has,
an honest and sound Sense; in which it may be of some good use to explain the
Doctrines of Satisfaction and Justification; and it is that which the Right
Reverend the Bishop of Worcester, with Grotius against Crellius do put upon it.
Reason of Christ's Suffer. Edit. 1. p. 144. viz. the Substitution of one Person
in the room of another, and page 143. A proper Redemption may be obtained by
the Punishment of one in the Room of another; which is neither more nor less,
than that Christ suffered and died in our room and stead. And this is it, which
the former and latter Papers, which Mr. Williams, and all others do freely own,
and that which is denied, is only such a Sense of the Phrase as his Antagonist
asserts; (...) therefore Christ's dying, by way of Change or Exchange be all
they would have, it is no more than what is granted in that other Expression, he
died in our place and stead but if they must have a further Sense, we are
afraid o^ Nonsense; if they must have a higher Reach, we are afraid of an
Overreach; and therefore let them tell us how much larger a Sense they have
some secret Services for, and when we know, it will be told them whether we
judge it Orthodox, or otherwise.

(4.) Casting my Eye upon the Manuscript I meet with a small Cavil against
Commutation of Persons as i^ stands either in the Third Paper, or in Mr.
Williams and if it be indifferent to him whether of them be misrepresented or
reproached, it shall be as indifferent to me, if either of them be set right or
vindicated. Now the Words he cavils at (as he quotes them) run thus It is
apparent, that Commutation of Persons is to be understoo^ in a legal or
judicial Sense (as we may call it): He by Agreement between the Father and him,
came into our room and stead, to answer for our Violation of the Law of Works.
At which he cavils thus: [ As we may call it] not that it is really so in a
legal or judicial Sense, only we may so call it. To which I reply. 1. As we may
call it, is not opposed to Reality, and the Critics do commonly observe that
there is a sicut veritatis, as well as similitudinis; and we must expect when
the Humor takes him to cavil at the Apostle, who Heb. 7. 9. uses a like
Phrase; And as I may so say, Levi also, who received Tithes, paid Tithes to
Abraham: The Phrase there does not deny the Truth of the thing; but is a Form
of Speech wherewith we usually mollify an Expression, which to tender Ears may
seem a little harsh and strange: such as these Terms, Legal and Judicial, might
do to vulgar Understandings. He that will answer another Man's Words ought
faithful^y to quote them, and oblige himself to a syllabical Exactness: But I
perceive this Answerer wears not such a ^crupulous Conscience: Not that it is
really so, only we may so call it: Now his not and his only, are either his own
Text or his own Comment, and let him see to it to ^econcile them to Truth, for
the Words may carry this Sense: As we may call it, i. e. As we may lawfully
call ^t; and not as his Gloss bears, only we may so call it, which ^s either a
gross perverting of the Meaning, or a bold ^alsification of the Words.

But I have an answer worth Two of this; and will produce their Great Master in
this very Case, thus qualifying his own Words, Gosp. Truth, p. 31. 2 Edit.
Thus, ^ays Dr. Crisp, in giving Christ, God is pleased (as it were) ^o make a
Change; and yet none questions but that Do^tor thought the Change as proper, as
literal as they can ^esire, or Words can be found to express. But will they
^ive us the liberty to interpret the Doctor's, as he does Mr. Williams's Words;
God is pleased as it were to make a Change: yea, not really or properly to make
a Change; ^ut only as it were: and so we shall have glost away the ^eloved
Phrase of Change of Persons.

But still the Manuscript proceeds in his objecting Faculty; A Commutation in a
Legal Sense, is the same with (...) proper Surrogation; and what is a proper
Surrogation, but a placing one Person in the room and place of another And thus
God placed his Son, and the Son so placed him self in our room and stead, and
he was a Sacrifice to satisfy Divine Justice: Are they not all agreed? One
would think so! Ay, but there is more at the Bottom what is that? why, where
the surety puts on the Person and stands in the Quality, State and Condition of
the Debtor, and lies under the same Obligation to answer for him.

I wish I were worthy to advise this confident Man not to insist so strictly
upon that Notion, of Debt and Debtor: For if he supposes Sin to be only a
Pecuniary Debt and that the Sinner stands only obliged as such a Debtor he has
betrayed the Cause he seems so zealous to defend and yielded it up
irrecoverably to the Socinians! And this is that which the Learned Author of
the Reasons of Christ's Sufferings, p. 269. has warned him of long since: The
true state of the Controversy (says he) has been rendered more obscure by the
Mistakes of some, who have managed it with greater Zeal than Judgment, (he had
never seen the Report nor Manuscript) and by this means have shot over their
Adversaries Heads, and laid their own more open to Assaults. It Is easy to
observe that most of the Socinians Arguments are levelled against an Opinion,
which few who have considered these things do maintain, and none need think
themselves obliged to do it. That Christ paid a rigid and proper Satisfaction
for the Sins of Men, under the Notion of a Debt, etc. The Sinner therefore is
to be considered as a Malefactor, who has forfeited his Life to Justice, and
here the Surrogation and Substitution of Christ intervenes, who has by
Agreement between his Father and him, offered himself as a Sacrifice to Satisfy
Divine Justice.

But still says the Manuscript, in this Paper, (the ^hird) Christ's putting on
the Person of Sinners, and his undertaking for them the Obligations of the Law
of Works is ^ft out.

To which I will return these things: 1. If Christ's ^tting on the Person of
Sinners be left out: It Is better out ^an put in, till it be known what it
signifies.

2. And for the other Expression; Christ's undertaking answer for them the
Obligations of the Law of Works: Is at left out too? and not a Word put in
their Place, that peculiar to a proper Satisfaction? Pray then let us read the
^ords as he has quoted them, p. 6. Christ, by Agreement^ ^ween the Father and
him, came into our room and stead, answer for our Violation of the Law of
Works. What is ^e nice difference then between Christ's answering for (...)
Violation of the Law, and answering for us the Viola^on? or what the critical
difference between Christ's ^^swering for them the Violation, and answering for
their ^^iolation of the Law of Works: He that answers for (...) the Violation
of the Law, answers for my Violation the (...) Law; but this it is to be
Hypnewcriticks in The^gy, when it is often ridiculous even in Philology.

But the Eye that sees all other things, sees not it self; ^d this
Manuscripturist, that could discern the More the Eye of the Third Paper, could
not see the Beam at was in his own: Let the Impartial judge! The First ^^per
expresses it self thus: Christ putting on the Person, ^^d coming into the room
and stead of Sinners to answer for ^m the Obligations of the violated Law of
Works: The ^hird Paper thus: -- To answer for our Violations of the ^^w of
Works: But this faithful Person repeats it thus: answer for them the
Obligations of the Law of Works. The ^bligations of a Law, as it stands entire,
is one thing, and (...) Obligations of a Law as violated, is clearly another,
(...) where Passion prevails we must not expect Imparti^ty, especially if any
thing of Mr. Williams falls under ^onsideration.

I will close this Head with this short Note: It is freely granted that Christ
suffered and died for the Persons (...) Sinners; that he suffered and died for
the Sins of the Persons; that he suffered and died in the room and stea^ of
their Persons; that he suffered and died to make Satisfaction to the Justice.
to the vindictive Justice of God: Nay he lives in their Persons by Faith; and
lives for ever (...) plead for their Persons on the Throne; and yet all the is
nothing, unless it be granted that Christ died in the Person of Sinners too:
which they are resolved he sha^^ do, whether he or the Scriptures will or no.

(6.) I had almost forgot a Passage in the Manuscrip^ for which I ought to have
begged Pardon, because (...) contains so much Learning: In p. 7. What more
comm^ amongst the Learned than Subrogatum and suffectum in locu^alterius, ejus
Naturam sortiri: Here is Learning enoug^ in all Conscience! the Mischief is,
it is but a scrap bo^rowed out of Calvin's Lexicon Iuridicum; and will never do
the Business of him that quotes it: for that Term (...) Surrogate, he might
have fetched it nearer hand from D^ctors Commons; and for his suffectus in locum
alterius, yo^ have it interpreted, Consul suffectus, est qui pro alio
substtuitur; sic enim appellabatur qui in demortui Consulis locu^
sufficiebatur: Ab ordinari is autem consulibus non autem suff^ctis, Anni
computabantur; and id circo minor eos honor, m^nor Laus sequebatur. Now what is
their parallel betwee^ this Suffect^s Consul; and our blessed Lord Jesus, as
surrgated and placed in the room of Sinners? This Substitute not in Being, till
the former be dead: This Substitu^^ was of less Honor than the Former; nothing
was re^koned in his Name, but in the others; and therefore though he might
Sortiri Officium, yet not Naturam; (...) supplied the Office, but acted not in
his Person; he w^^ substituted in locum alterius, non in Personam alterius.

I have observed all along, and shall now once for al^ give you my Observation:
That this Reporter, began at first to hint a Change: In a while, he smoothly
slid^ into a Change of Persons between Christ and us: Then insensibly he steals
into Christ's taking upon him the Person of Sinners: And at last he silently
comes to, Christ's dying in the Person of Sinners; And I note it for no greater
end, but that I may requite his Civility, with a little Thread of the Civil Law;
as I find it, Tit. digestorum, de verb. signif. No. 177. Natura Cavillationis
haec est, ut ab evi^denter veris per brevissimas mutationes disputatio ad ea,
quae videnter falsa sunt pr^ducatur. This is the Nature of Cavilling, when from
some things evidently true, the Disputation is lead by short Changes to those
as evidently false.

Sir, It Is time, high time that I ease you and my self of this trouble, and I
will effectually discharge you, when I have left with you a few Queries, which
you may consider at your Leisure.

1. Do you understand the true Reason why these Gentlemen in the City will not
be persuaded to settle the true Notion of Christ's taking on him the Person of
Sinners? dying in the Person of Sinners? For I find that the true Reason why
some do not subscribe it, is because they do not understand it: and yet on the
other side, there are some who say, they understand it too well to subscribe
it; there are yet some who affirm, that the Words have only this honest plain
Meaning, that Christ suffered and died in the place and stead of Sinners, to
make Satisfaction to Divine Justice, for them, and for their Obligations to his
violated Law: but then, should they declare as much, all the Design would be
defeated and utterly blown up, for then Mr. Williams would certainly subscribe
it.

2. Pray, Sir, inform me Quo Warranto? By what Right do these Gentlemen impose
such hard Terms of Union and Communion? Why must all the World be Hereticated
that dare not subscribe to these Apocryphal Phrases, which neither Scripture
nor Ancient Fathers, nor General, nor Particular Councils, nor Synods, nor
Assemblies, nor Nation reformed, nor single Churches ever brought into their
Creeds, Confessions, or Articles of Faith, to be the Standard, or Test of
Orthodoxy, or the Terms of Communion? And I am the more earnest in this Query,
because the Dissenters formerly have complained heavily, That some things were
imposed on them as necessary to Communion, which were n^ ways necessary to
Salvation.

3. And I would be satisfied how it comes to pass that if these Terms insisted
on, be necessary to support the Doctrines of Satisfaction and Justification;
they themselves never once mentioned or moved, or insisted on them, that they
might be inserted into the Heads of Agreement, upon which they united in 1691.
nor into those Articles debated, agitated at Great Pinners-Hall, and afterward
agreed to, at Little St. Hellens, where yet the highest, hottest, and greatest
Names of the Contender^ did subscribe to the Articles of the Person of the
Mediator and of Justification, when yet not a Word or Syllable o^ Christ's
taking on him the Person of Sinners, dying in the Person of Sinners, etc. was
once spoke of, and therefore conclude were never then thought of; 1692.

4. I wish you could inform me, whether they have received any new Revelations,
or made any new Discoveries of these great Secrets, and the indispensible
necessity of these new Notions? Whether they are become (...), the Adepts in
the Rosacrucian Mysteries, (...) have found out the Philosopher's Stone, to
turn all Antinomianism into pure Gold; or whether the true Reason of all this
Pother be not, that they are resolved to beat their Brains till they have found
out some terrible Term that shall check Mr. Williams his Faith, and gravel his
Conscience, that so he may be discarded, for Non-subscriber. Though I am pretty
confident, if (...) understand him, he is both wiser than to be bubled and made
a Cully, and honester than to be hectored out of his Understanding.

5. I would propound it as a Moot Point, whether ^e Socinians, who have
blasphemously degarded the ^erson of Christ, into a God by Office, though a
mere Man by Nature: or the Antinomians, who own him a God by Nature, yet affirm
him to have been a Sinner, ^he greatest of Sinners; nay, sinfulness it self, do
more ^erogate from the Honor of our Redeemer? he that ^enies me to be a Man,
does less reproach me than he ^at affirms me to be the greatest Villain. And it
might ^rther be queried, whether it was not the absurdest ^ing in the Heathens
to confess that their Gods were ^oly, Dan. 4. 8. the Spirit of the Holy Gods,
and yet to ^ll such Stories of their Rapes, Adulteries, and Thefts, ^at bear
the greatest contrariety to Holiness?

6. Whether therefore it be not equally a Duty to ^oviate the De^estable
Doctrines of the one as well as ^e other? If this be a Day (as the Reporter, p.
4. assures (...) it is) wherein Socinianism is Rampant; it is a Day too, ^herein
Antinominism is no less Triumphant. And there^^re the United Brethren, like
wise men, have provied against both, whereas some, like Foolish Mariners,
^ontent themselves to stop one leak in the Ship, though will as certainly be
sunk by the other: If therefore ^word was so wise as to set a Hedge, a Bar, a
(...), about (...) Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; why should not Pru^ence
advise to set a Hedge about the others, And First would have a Hedge, a Thorn
Hedge set about the ^octrine of God's Holiness; that he be not made the ^uthor
of Sin, as some Men's Principles inevitably do: and I would have a Bar, a
Barriere (stronger than that Flanders against the French) set about the Divine
Ju^ice, that Men may not dare to represent him as a Ty^nt, in making so many
Millions to Damn them Eter^lly, to Damn them without respect had to their
De^erits: Especially I would have a strong (...) pla^d about the Doctrine of
Justification; and that Faith made indispensably necessary to it, in all the
Adult: And I am the more urgent in this Matter; for if Faith be not necessary
to Justification, perhaps it may not b^ so to Salvation: because if God can
delight and tak^ Complacency in an unbelieving Sinner, an impeniten Wretch that
hates Him, his Son and Spirit, and all hi^ Ways, and Laws, for one Minute,
there is nothing i^ the Nature of the thing that hinders, but he may tak^
Complacency in him to Eternity.

But if this Gentleman will hedge about this Doctrine as I take him to be a
good Hedger; if I were worthy to advise him, he should never set a Hedge of
Human Invention, about a Doctrine of Divine Revelation. Le^ the Garden and the
Hedge be both of a Piece, and le^ him never think that the Doctrine of the
Gospel will eve^ be secured by his own ^ond Contrivances.

7. Whereas this Reporter with his Brother Manuscript have pretended such a
mavelous Kindness, if no^ Foundness, and to be so desperately enamoured of
the First Paper, they are grieved and afflicted, and I know not what, that it
was rejected; and yet that Paper expresses a Bearing with one another
Infirmities, and different Sentiments about Logical or Philosophical Terms, or
merely. Humane Forms of Speech: why they should make such a hideous Outcry and
Hubbub about Christ's taking o^ him the Person, dying in the Person of Sinners;
when these are mere Humane Forms of Speech, at best; as Humane denotes Infirm,
though not as it signifies Rational.

I would be satisfied further, why that first Paper did not think it reasonable
or just to charge upon any Brother such Consequences of any Expression or
Opinion of his, which he himself shall disown; and yet Mr. Williams shall no^
have the Benefit of the Clergy to explain his own Words, and such Consequences
must be forced on him and them, as the Words do not admit, and the Author does
abhor.

8. Seeing the great struggle has been not about the Satisfaction of Christ, as
the Report misrepresents it, but about some odd Phrases and Expressions, in
which it is clothed, especially these of Christ's suffering in the Person of
Sinners, etc. whether if this be a sound and safe Way of expressing that great
Doctrine, it will not endure to show its naked Face, in some other of the
learned Languages? and if you please, make an Experiment how well it will look
in Latin; Christus passus ^est in Persona Peccatorum, seu peccantium: How do
you like it? what do you think of it? again we are told, p. 7. of Christ's
sustaining the Person of Sinners: Now, good Sir, what is sustinere Personam
alterius? What then can these Expressions signify, but that Christ wore the
Mask, the Vizor, the Disguise of Sinners? That he was Personatus Histrio? Like
a Stage Player, that puts on the Person of a King, when indeed he is but some
sorry Fellow; now what a wretched blasphemous Representation of all the Love
and Goodness of our glorious Redeemer is this? which yet shone forth in his
Cross though much eclipsed by his dreadful Sufferings.

You may possibly have read Salmasius his Defensio Regia; which he enters upon,
with the News, De parricidio apud Anglos in persona Regis, etc. To which, I.
Milton, who wrote and understood Latin, as well as the great Critic, makes
this Return: Quid quaeso, est parricidium in persona Regis admitter? Quid in
Persona Regis? Quae unquam Latinitas sic Locuta est? nisi nobis aliquem forte
Pseudo-Philippum, narras, qui Personam Regis indutus, nescio quid Parricidii
apud Anglos patraverit. Whatever excuse they can make for the English Phrase, I
know not; but this I know, it is pretty hard to damn all the World for an
Anglicism.

9. Tell me freely, what do you think of that strange Spirit that runs through
the whole of the Report, and Manuscript? They would both make us believe how
grieved, how afflicted they are that this Third Paper was sent, and the former
rejected, by the Body of the United Brethren, p. 5. this is one thing that
grieves the Offended Brethren: and another Passage increases their Sorrow,
etc. And p. 7. we cannot but be grieved to observe, etc. and p. 11. they have
added to the Grief of the offended Brethren: Now do not you in the Country
fancy from these Expressions, that they have been melted and drowned in Floods
of Grief and Sorrow? And why then did they not grieve to make the Breach in the
Union, to break it again, when it seemed to be closed up; in all which they
were certainly the Aggressors: And why did not they advance one single Step
toward the Reunion, upon the signing of the First Paper? They had time enough
between that and the sending of the other: which may remember you of what you
read in some Naturalists, that the Crocodile weeps over his Prey and then
devoures it.

Of the same Temper you will interpret the Reporter's strange Transport of
Passion, with which he concludes: To the All Wise God, be rendered Honor, and
Glory, that the indefatigable pains of the Pacificators have issued out in so
happy an Agreement of the most Godly, Learned, and Judicious Ministers in and
about this City, etc. To which he should have added; -- Et quorum pars ego
Magna fui. Yea, no doubt, an indefatigable Pacificator, who was first employed
to Lowze Mr. Williams his Book, that he might pick Quarrels with it; and as
little question of his Godliness, Learning and Iudiciousness; but these Tears,
these Praises are all Mo^kery. And these Doxologies are like the Modern Te
Deums, which take Pay on both Sides, and are calculated for any Elevation; and
will serve indifferently Paris and Vienna.

I have much more to observe to you, and Paper would sooner fail me than
Matter; but I will spare you, and indeed my self; If you blame me for Writing,
thank your self, from whom I received the first News and Sight that there was
such a Creature as the Report, to your self therefore justly belongs the
Answer. Now I am aware they will say, that you are no real Person, but like
Letters which they use in Law-Cases, for which any in the Alphabet will serve
the turn, but because I know you well, as you me, I recommend you to the
Protection of the Almighty, and with you, I. and B. etc.

Yours in all Faithfulness.

A POSTSCRIPT.
READER!
THOU may possibly wonder that the Report and Manuscript should bear so hard
upon the Third Paper, and yet so graciously smile upon the First: and what
sufficient Causes there can be conceived, to justify their height of Passion
against the One, and yet the most endeared Affection toward the Other. But the
Secret will manifest it self, when thou shall consider, that all this is
nothing but a Trial of Skill between the Apocryphal Story of Tobias, and the
Canonical History of Daniel.

Now that I may deliver thee from this uneasy posture of Soul, I will set
before thee the Mystery in a clear Light, that so thou may be capable of
using thy Eyes; and therefore know:

I. That the true Reason of their severe Displeasure conceived against the
Third Paper is, that it has so clearly and fully born its Testimony against the
Antinomians in the Fundamental Article of Justification: And thus it speaks: We
further declare, as to to the special matters in difference concerning
Justification: That although the express Word of God does assert, the necessity
of Regeneration to our entering into the Kingdom of God: and requires Repentance
that our Sins may be blotted out; and Faith in Christ, that we may be
justified; and Holiness of Heart and Life, without which we cannot see God: Yet
that none of these, or any Work done by Man, or wrought by the Spirit of God in
them, is under any Denomination whatsoever, any part of that Righteousness, for
the sake, or on the account of which, God does pardon, justify or accept
Sinners; or entitle them to Eternal Life: That being only the Righteousness of
Christ without them, imputed to them, and received by Faith alone.

From hence it is most evident, that the Brethren have secured the Doctrine of
Justification against the Socinian, Papal, and Arminian Errors; and themselves
too, from all, even the least Suspicion of any Inclination that way, with all
impartial, reasonable and indifferent Persons, by the latter Clause: Yet the
former, by which they were willing to give a fair Opportunity to the opposite
Party, to vindicate themselves from all Jealousy of leaning toward
Antinomianism, is the unpardonable Sin against Dr. Crisp; which shall never be
forgiven by the Reporter, and his Brother Manuscript; if they may carry the
Keys of Admission and Exclusion, Absolution and Condemnation at their Girdles.

II. As I have now given the secret Reason of their immortal Pike against the
Third Paper, so will I gratify the Reader with the (...), or secret Reason of
their over-passionate Fondness to the former, and that must be wholly ascribed
to its Severity upon Mr. Williams. And let it be observed that a few hard Words
and Censures upon him, shall at any time, even in their most morose Hours,
purchase their Good Will and Friendship: And this Paper having honored them
herein to the utmost, could not fail of insinuating it self into their Favors.
Mark therefore the Conditions of his Peace, and the Terms of being restored to
some small degree of Acceptance: If therefore, Mr. Williams shall concur with
us in what we have declared, touching the Doctrine of Justification; and in the
sense we have given of a Change of Persons between Christ and Believers; and of
Christ's undertaking the Displeasure of his Father for our Sins; and shall give
Satisfaction about any thing else, that any Brother excepts against in the rest
of his Writings, agreeably to the abovesaid Articles and Confessions, we shall
so far acquiesee therein, as not to make them the Matter of further public
Contest or Altercation amongst our selves. Was ever a poor Creature thus tied
to a Stake to be baited by the English Molossi, and every whaffing Whelp that
could bark, though not bite? Must a Man stand in the Pillory all his Days,
there to be palted with rotten Eggs, till they can find no more to throw at
him? how much more merciful were the Terms put upon the Men of Iabesh-Gilead by
Nahash, 1 Samuel 11. 2. he would only thrust out their right Eyes; but these
would cut off his right Hand too: And now because the Brethren in their Third
Paper, expressed more Humanity, durst not be so unreasonably cruel, but proposed
more moderate Terms, the Former Paper must be cried up above the Skies, and the
Latter thrown down to Hell.

Reader, thou shall pardon me if I exercise thy Patience in making some Remarks
upon the Conditions of Mr. Williams his Absolution; the rather, because they
are wiser than to allow any for their own: And first I will observe the
Conditions required, and then the Grace promised upon fulfilling the Conditions.

1. And for the Conditions required. The Three former Conditions, I will not
mention to save time and Paper, but the last Condition, which is a Complex of
many, I will a little, though gently examine: If he shall give Satisfaction
about any thing else, that any Brother excepts against, in the rest of his
Writings. Now here we have what he must give, and then to whom he must give,
it, and then, how far he must give Satisfaction.

(1.) What is it they expect Mr. Williams should give? Satisfaction. But what
will satisfy? he has given already ^ust and reasonable Satisfaction; he has
subscribed the Assemblies Confession of Faith; he has subscribed the Article of
Justification drawn up by themselves, 1692. he has subscribed the Article of
Justification in the Third Paper, which satisfies all but Socinians, Arminians,
Papists and Antinomians: And must he satisfy them that are resolved nothing
shall satisfy? These Terms savor too much of Empire over Souls, and Dominion
over the Consciences and Faith of Men: Let them tell him explicitly and plainly
what will content them, and not vex Men with indefinite, unlimited Satisfaction.

(2.) But to whom must he give this Satisfaction? why truly to any Brother? I
wish they had confined their Number to -- About Twenty Thousand; That had given
some Possibility, at least some little Hope that he might at last have given
Satisfaction. But to any Brother is really hard: For in what Sense must he
interpret Brother? In a general Sense, it may reach all Mankind; in a much
narrower it may include all Protestants, Reformed at least: But suppose it
extends to none but Independents, where there are no Clergy-Brethren, nor
Lay-Brothers, it would find him picking Work for one Ten Years at least: But
what if these any Brothers, should prove weak and injudicious? What if
cavilling and captious? What if proud and imperious, Their Character as well as
Number, would render it next to impossible to satisfy them: and what if one
will be satisfied and another dissatisfied? this will suspend the Performance
of the Promise for his Life; and I know no way for him to satisfy all, but by
leaving the World; to which I will never advise him, least some other should be
set up in his Place and Stead, with whom to quarrel, and of whom to demand
Satisfaction; and I am not sure but I may be the Man.

(3.) How far must this Satisfaction extend? To any thing else, excepted
against in the rest of his Writings? I am glad however this allows no
Exceptions against his Thoughts; though the Manuscript has adventured upon that
too: Here Is a wide Field for Exceptions; for Mr. Williams has written a pretty
many things, and it were hard, if Ten Thousand Men, having Ten Thousand
Sentences to except against, could not make Earnings of it for three Lives, and
the longest Liver of them, and so they have entailed the fibble frabble to
succeeding Generations. You have heard the hard Terms required, will you

2. Now hear the Favors promised upon his fulfilling the Conditions: We shall
so far acquiesce therein as not to make them the Matter of farther public
Contest or Altercation amongst our selves. O quantum oh quantillum! What a
World of Work must he do for such sorry Wages! what severe Penance for this
hungry Absolution! Will they acquiesce? O no! but so far only! How far? pray,
that he may know the worst on it! they will make no further Contest: Well, but
if they make no further, they may keep the old or the present Contests a foot
still; but will they promise to make no further Contest; not to raise new
Objections, pick new Quarrels; but be content with the old ones? I mistake;
They will make no further Public Contests; but Private Whisperings and evil
Surmises, and insinuated Slanders, and clan^estine Reproaches may be
multiplied, whilst Mr. Williams lives, and it is to be feared, will feed upon
his Carcass, and survive his Dust and Ashes.

To shut up this ungrateful Subject; those very Brethren, who from amongst the
Presbyterians had some, concern in this First Paper, after having heard the
Debates and Reasonings of the United Brethren, being satisfied that they had
gone beyond the Bounds of Moderation, did ingenuously (to say no more) join
with their brethren of a more benign Temper, in the Third Paper, which is that
Crime, amongst some others, which these Bigotts will never forgive.

III. Give me leave, Reader, to bestow one thought more, upon the Manuscriptors
tragical Harangue, upon Mr. Williams's pretended Contradiction: A Change and no
Change! what, a Negative of the same import with an Affirmative! Yea and Nay,
Words of the same Signification! Crimen inauditum Cai Caesar! But did he never
hear or read of (...); a Gift and no Gift? I make no question but he had heard
of (...); a Marriage and no Marriage: and though there might be some Solaecism
in it Theotogically, yet it was no Grammatical or Logical Contradiction: and if
the one of these does not offend his tender Ears, nor the other grate upon his
tender Conscience, he might have spared his pompous Rhetoric upon a Change and
no Change! Nor indeed in this Case; does a Change signify no Change: Nor is a
Negative of the same import with an Affirmative: Nor yet are Yea and Nay, Words
of the same Signification (as he childishly Fancies) but that there may be a
Change (in a certain Sense) which is well consistent with no Change in another
Sense, without the mortal Hazard of a Contradiction; even as he that may be
said to be Married and yet not Married, may be said also with equal Truth, to
have Changed, and yet not Changed his Condition: Of which some may have heard
on both sides of their Ears.

IV. Reader, Thou have heard much noise about that Book, Gospel Truth stated
and vindicated, etc. and of the Subscription to it by some Ministers; I could
wish thou would be so true to thy self, and just to the Subscribers, as to
view with thine own Eyes how far the Subscription extended; for this is the
pretended and assigned Reason of their Fire and Faggot, with which they have
presented it and them: It was no more than this: They judged that he had in all
that was material, fully and rightly stated the Truths and Errors therein
mentioned. Now if the things be not rightly and fully stated, in all that is
material, why have not these Gentlemen, with all their Acuteness and Exactness,
stated them better?

The same Quarrel they had formerly raised against the Book and the
Subscriptions, or rather against the Author and Subscribers, which most Men
thought had been composed, and full Satisfaction given, and in which the
opposite Party did acquiesce; as appears from the printed Transactions of Dec.
16. 1692. But it seems they reserved some Seeds of further and future Quarrels
in their own Breasts, and had smothered some secret sparks of Contention under
the Ashes of their Compliance, which now after some Years they have blown up
into a greater Flame: But if they were then satisfied, why are they now
dissatisfied? And whence is it, that in the First Paper, they have changed the
former Declaration into this other: That the Generality had given their Names
only to a short Abstract of Truths, and Errors which they had seen (and since
is much enlarged) and not to the Book it self, which they had not seem.

Reader! Mr. Williams, and the Generality of the Subscribers do hereby demand
Justice of the Authors of this Assertion; and they doubt not thou will do 'em
Right, upon this Evidence:

1. The Author does protest there was never yet any Abstract, short or long, of
the Truths and Errors, since they were first stated.

2. That the State of the Truths and Errors was seen by all that Subscribed,
and Printed before any one Subscribed.

3. Whereas there were Sixteen who Suscribed the First Impression, and Three
and Thirty who gave their Names to the Second; there were three or Four of the
First Sixteen who had read, not only the State of the Truths and Errors, but
the Book it self: And therefore ^he Author and Subscribers do humbly and
modestly ask, ^y what Construction, by what Interpretation it can be ^id, that
the Generality gave their Names, etc. unless Twelve Ministers could be the
Generality of Nine and Forty? which we must leave to be adjudged by those of
^hese Gentlemen who are so versed and skilled in Mer^hants Accounts.

I will conclude with this; If these Contenders will go on to exact so much,
and yield so little for the Sake of Union; they sell their own Innocence and
the Churches Peace for nothing.

ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 27. for Stuff, read Huff. p. 6. l. 23. for delighted read defiled.
p. 24. l. ult. for wholly, read for the most part. p. 27. l. 11. for any one
read most. p. 47. l. ult. read Hypercriticks. p. 48. l. 26. for their, read
shere.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for John Lawrence at the Angel in the Poultrey.
THE Life of the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter. Published by Mr. Matthew
Sylvester. Folio.

Mr. Pool's English Annotations; with the Additions of Content to each Chapter:
And a Concordance written by Mr. Sam. Clark The Third Edition: In Two Volumes.
Folio.

Mr. Giles Firmin's Review of Mr. Richard Davis his Vindication giving no
Satisfaction. 4to.

Mr. Lorimer's Apology for the Ministers, who Subscribed only unto the stating
of the Truths and Errors in Mr. William's Book Showing that the Gospel which
they Preach, is the Old, Everlasting Gospel of Christ: And vindicating them
from the Calumnies, wherewith they (especially the younger sort of them) have
been unjustly aspersed by Mr. Trail's Letter to a Minister in the Country. 4to.

Mr. Lorimer's Remarks on Mr. Goodwnin's Discourse of the Gospel: Proving that
the Gospel Covenant is a Law of Grace; answering his Objections to the
contrary, and rescuing the Texts of Holy Scripture and many Passages of
Ecclesiastical Writers both Ancient and Modern, from the false Glosses be
forces upon them 4to.

Sir Robert Heward's Free Discourse, wherein the Doctrines that make for
Tyranny are displayed; the Title of our Rightful and Lawful King William
vindicated; and the unreasonableness and miscievous Tendency of the odious
Distinction of a King de Facto and de Iure, discovered. 8vo.

Remarks on a late Discourse of William Lord Bishop of Derry, concerning the
Inventions of Men in the Worship of God. Also a Defense of the said Remarks
against his Lordship's Admonition. By I. Borse. 8vo.

Mr. Samuel Slater's Earnest Call to Family Religion; beiing the substance of
18 Sermons. 8vo.

Mr. George Hammond's, and Mr. Matthew Barker's Discourses of Family Worship.
Written at the Request of the United Ministers of London. 12ves.

An Account of the Life and Death of Mr. Philip Henry, Minister of the Gospel
near Whitchurch in Shropshire. Who died June 24. 1696. in the Sixty Fifth Year
of his Age. 12 ves.


