CHILLINGWORTH'S Safe Way, p. 180. When we shall come tio the Question of
Schism, I persuade my self, that I shall plainly show, that the most vehement
Accusers, are the greatest Offenders; and that they are indeed at this time the
greatest Schismatics, who make the way to Salvation narrower, the Yoke of
Christ heavier, the difference of Faith greater, the Conditions of
Ecclesiastical Government harder and straiter, than they were made at the
beginning by Christ and his Apostles: they who talk of Unity, but aim at
Tyranny, and will have Peace with none but with their Slaves and Vassals.

Dr. STILLINGFLEET'S Iren. p. 110. LEt Men turn and wind themselves which way
they will, by the very same Arguments that any will prove Separation from the
Church of Rome lawful, because she required unlawful things, as Conditions of
her Communion, it will be proved lawful not to conform to any suspected or
unlawful Practice required by any Church Governors upon the same Terms, of the
things so required be, after serious and sober Enquiry, judged unwarrantable by
a Man's own Conscience.

A REPLY To the Reverend Dean of St. PAULS's Reflections ON THE RECTOR OF
SUTTON, etc.

WHEREIN The Principles and Practices of the Non-conformists are not only
vindicated by Scripture, but by Dr. Stilling fleet's Rational Account, as well
as his Irenicum; as also by the Writings of the Lord Faulkland, Mr. Hales, Mr.
Chillingworth, etc.

By the same Hand.

To which is added, St. Paul's Work Promoted; OR, Proper Materials drawn from
The true and only way of Concord, and Pleas for Peace, and other late Writings
of Mr. Richard Baxter, for uniting Protestant Dissenters, and repairing a
Divided Church.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. to be Sold by Richard Ianeway, in Queens-Head Alley
in Paternoster Row, 1681.

A REPLY To the Reverend DEAN of St. PAULS's REFLECTIONS ON THE RECTOR OF
SUTTON, etc.
NOw thanks (Sir) for your Token; I would have said New-Years-Gift, had it come
about a Fortnight sooner. Some told me lately an Answer was coming forth to my
Notes upon the Doctor's Sermon; but I could not imagine how I should have a fair
and just Answer from him, without his putting forth another Edition of his
Irenicum, (and it must be Another indeed, quite different from the former;) or
else giving us an Index Expurgatorius to the former, that we may know what he
would have expunged; or (which would have been most satisfactory, and not
unreasonable) his publishing a Book of Retractations, showing in what
Particulars, and upon what Grounds and Reasons his Mind is since changed.

Upon the perusal of this Voluminous Writing of his, which must pass for a
Confutation of his Five Answerers; I can find so little or nothing said to me,
that were it not for Three Conclusions he lays down in his Preface, (p. 72,
73.) and Three Letters, which for my sake, upon account of what I had said (as
it seems Preface page 76.) he annexeth as an Appendix, at the End of his Book,
I should not have thought my self concerned to make any Reply.

I cannot find, that ever he vouchsafes to take notice of so much as one of my
Twelve Queries, which (though I remember they were written in great haste, yet)
some of them (I think) are pinching.

My First Query (to name no more) wise, impartial Men think it would have been
an Act of Justice and Honesty, as well as of Charity, Ingenuity, Self-denial,
for him to have well considered, and to have given a serious and satisfactory
Answer unto. How knows he, but some, yea, many may have that to say to him,
Si Error est quod credo, a te deceptus sum, If I be in an Error, you have led
me into it, or have helped to conhrm me in it.

I thought I had demonstrated to the Doctor, that he was besides his Text That
the Word, the Scripture-Rule is that same Rule the Apostle would have
Christians walk by ( Phil 3. 16.) And that the Established Rule, the Doctor
would have it applied to, is such a Rule, as he himself has told the World the
Apostles and Primo-Primitive Christians had not. And if they had no such Rule,
nor would ever have established such a Rule, then it certainly follows, the
Apostle should not be supposed there to press Chri^ians to walk by such a Rule,
(which was no Rule with him) [viz. Rector of Sutton, p. 10, 11, 17, f. 18.] Yet
I observe, where he pretends to lear the Text from all Objections, ( page 163
to 176.) he says not one word to this Material Objection. And so he waves what
Mr. Baxter says, (Answer page 29.) What he replieth to others, I suppose they
will consider. Here (I conceive) he cannot well say, as page 333. I decline
nothing that looks like Argument. And page 393. I have not concealed the Force
and Strength I saw in any of them.

There I thought it sufficient to argue from the Doctor's former Concessions,
or rather his plain Assertions, taking the Matter to be so clear and evident,
that no sober Man, and much less he, would deny. But if he had put me to prove,
that the Apostles did not, neither would ever establish such a Rule, nor could
have established it, (as Apostles as commissionated by Christ, as infallible
Guides and Governors of the Church) I should have counted it an easy Task,
especially when he has done it so well to my hand, from Act. 15. 28, etc. This
one hint may suffice at present, the Apos^le Peter was to be blamed for that by
his Example, only he would have drawn the Gentile-Believers at Antioch to
Conformity to the Jewish Ceremonies, Gal. 2. 11, 14. Why compellest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? The Apostle Paul, who thus reproved him, yet
says himself, 1 Cor. 9. 20. Unto the Jews, I became as a Jew. -- And those
Ceremonies he conformed to among the Jews, (as at Jerusalem) were in
themselves as lawful and innocent, as the Ceremonies imposed among us. But he
would not have the Gentiles compelled to more than was necessary. He that was
so moved, and offended, to see but an Example leading that way, how much more
would he have withstood any (one, or more) that were for establishing such a
Rule? Yet the Doctor tells us, he is certain, he did not mistake the sense of
his Text, Preface page 63.

But let such things pass, as the Doctor has pleased to do. And if he had let
all pass that has been said, that the Controversies he has raised, might have
been laid asleep, or had used other Methods and Measures than he has taken, I
should have been better satisfied, than I can be with his present Answer. I am
sorry we did not all put him in mind of that, Praestat motos componere fluctus.
However (Sir) I must acknowledge your Kindness, in sending me this [ Impartial
Account, etc.] (as it is called) and that you have since furnished me with his
[ Rational Account] also, wherein you have greatly pleasured me. Many Years
since I looked into it, and doubted not, (when I was writing those former
Papers) but I could have made some use of it; but I could not then meet with
the Book, for want of which I looked on those Collections as incomplete.

Truly (Sir) I was in hope the learned Doctor had retained that same Spirit of
Moderation toward his dissenting Brethren, which those sober moderate
Principles he has published, and commended unto others heretofore, spoke him
to have. How strange is it, that the Reverend Doctor, should ever forget the
Rector of Sutton? And is it not as strange, that he should be for silencing
such a one (as of Scismatical Principles?) Or to speak more plainly, should be
ashamed to own him in that worthy Work, so full of Learning and Judgment,
meriting Praise, rather than Censure: But it is too plain here, he has
deserted the Rector of Sutton, and that in a Matter wherein he was in the
right, and had the strongest Reason on his side, and has given up the Cause to
such an imposing Party, as before e had condemned. And what is the matter that
the Reverend Doctor is so highly offended at me, for desiring he would renew
his old Acquaintance with one so near him, and be friends again? None in the
World being nearer to him, if that be true, Proximus sum egomet mihi; unless he
will say, and make that good (in none of the best sense) Ego non sum ego. Now I
am heartily sorry, if we may see Reason to change our Opinion of him, as he
says we may, of some Persons, as well as Things, in twenty Years time, (Preface
page 76.)

Sure I am, it either does, or ought to grieve me at heart, to see his Hand at
such dividing Work, who of all the dignified Persons in England, I had thought,
was specially engaged, and hoped also, was as well inclined, to promote Union
what in him lay; but not to widen Differences, by pressing and pleading so hard
for Dividing-Terms. When certain Bishops were met, that sought nothing more,
than that poor Athanasius. might be oppressed, Doli^, C^lumniis, and malis
Artibus; Paphnutius seeing it, rose up, and took Maximus (who, as I remember,
had been a Confessor) by the hand, saying, Neque te decet una inter istos
sedere. So I thought it least became the Reverend Doctor to appear with the
forwardest in condemning his dissenting Brethren, whose Cause he had so well
pleaded in time past. He begins his Preface with a Story of the learned and
excellent Bishop Jewel, (which I leave to others to examine) But here I call
to mind the Story of Bishop Lindsey, a Scotish-Bishop, who before he came to
his Dignity, had given this Question at St. Andrew's, Whether things
indifferent once abused, and for their Abuse abolished? etc. Negatur. Where he
could bid Defiance to those that were for retaining such Ceremonies. Yet
afterward he was a zealous Contender for them, turning Disce pati, into
Dissipate. And the great complaint of him was, that in dealing with his
Brethren, he remembered not what he was once himself, that he pitied not his
former Case (as some of them said) in their Persons, as Augustine did the
Manichees, greater Heretics than he took them to be, Let them be fierce
(rigorous) against you, who never were deceived with the like Error, as they
see you. But as for me, I can use no such Rigor against you, with whom I ought
to bear now, as I did at that time with my self, etc. Thus I could wish the
Doctor would be as favorable as it becomes him to be, in his Censures of his
Brethren, who are very much of the same mind, he was of once

And therefore I shall once again apply my self to him.

Reverend Sir;

I do not very well know, whether that Title [ The Rector of Sutton committed
with the Dean of St. Paul's] makes you more angry, or merry. This I know, those
Papers of mine went out of my hands, without any Title: who put that to it I
know not.

The Title, you say, ( Preface p. 71.) Was enough to make the common People
imagine this was some busy Justice of Peace, who had taken them both at a
Conventicle. And I confess the word [ Committed] might puzzle those that could
not English bonos inter sese committere (there p. 7.) But sure you had no
thought of my being a Justice of Peace, any more than I should suspect the Dean
of St. Paul's (since I have heard of and seen what he has both preached, and
written against them) would frequent Conventicles. However you rub up my Memory
here, that I have one thing to put you in mind of, though perhaps you will call me
a busy Informer for it, in your Next. And yet call me at your pleasure, so
that it may incline you to more favorable Thoughts of truly Religious
Assemblies, such as you have condemned, as Conventicles, and separate Meetings.
In the former times of England's Distractions and Confusions, I being
unsatisfied of the Lawfulness of keeping (in public) either those days of
Thanksgiving for Victories, or of Fasting and Prayer for a Blessing on those
Counsels, and Forces that then were, (as appointed) it happened that Mr. S.
preached in my place upon one of these Fast-days (I suppose at the Request of
some, but unknown to me) The Text in Deuteronomy. For this is your Wisdom etc. which
some remember still, though it is about twenty Years since, when I (at the same
time) had a private Meeting at St. Lawrence's, as one called it. This I confess
may look something like a personal Reflection; but my end here is, that you
would be pleased to resolve me these Queries, viz.

Whether ever you accounted this Act Schismatical, preaching without the
Consent of the Rector of the Parish? Or the Assembly that joined, at that time,
Schismatics? Yet was here no breach of Order. Or were there no Churches in
England then, or till your established Rule came in? And yet, Sir, I had never
the less Esteem of Mr. S. at that time, or of others, who were satisfied to go
farther than I durst.

Again, Whether was our private Meeting at that time a sinful Conventicle, when
the far greater part of the Parish was with him at Church? I hope you will
grant it was a lawful, because a Loyal Conventicle.

But so much to your Reflection on the Title of my former Papers. Now Sir,
consider whether we have not more just Exceptions against this of yours.

(1.) The unreasonableness of Separation.] Here 1. Consider whether you do not
condemn that as Separation, which is not. And is that reasonable? all
Assemblies, distinct from yours, are not separate Meetings, as the World is
used in an evil sense; no, though they differ in some unnecessary Mode, or
Circumstances of Worship, many that ordinarily join with you in the substantial
parts of Worship, and meet not in Opposition; yet I cannot discern, but their
Meetings fall under your Censure, as much as others, because they keep not to
your established Rule, when ( Preface page 40.) you speak of an unaccountable
Separation, without regard to the greatness or smalness of Parishes, etc. does
not that imply, that there may be some Account given for assembling to worship
God, where there is a regard to this, to the Abilities and Piety of Ministers,
and to the Peace and Order of the Church? And therefore the thing is not so
unreasonable as you would make it. (2.) What if I prove (in examining your
Three Conclusions) from the Principles you lay down in your Irenicum, and
Rational Account too, that many are necessitated to separate from your
Communion; Is Separation unreasonable, when necessary? Or will you allow others
to say, that there you have pleaded for unreasonable Separation?

(2.) An Impartial Account, etc. you call it. Here I might say, I was glad to
see you promising Impartiality in this Work, having found so little of it in
your Sermon: but upon search Quanta de spe decidi? The Partiality you have
discovered is so great, and in so many Particulars, that if I should ransack
every Corner of your Book (as you speak) to collect all such Passages, I fear I
should be very tedious and irksome to you and other Readers. But

1. May not some of the common People, who have read either what Mr. Baxter
says of it, or Mr. Newcomen (in Sermon. on Nov. 5. 1642.) take you to be partial
in setting down the Jesuit Contzens Directions for reducing Popery ( Preface
page 19, 20.) In that you take no notice of putting out of Honors, Dignities,
and public Offices such as are most adverse to Popery, or of the outing of
Ministers, as unpeaceable, proud, obstinate, disobedient to Magistrates: And
forbidding them privately, or publicly to assemble? And take no notice of
that, How easy is it (as he says) in England to bring the Puritans into Order,
if they be forced to approve of Bishops? etc. Here I think of your Words, page
10. I do not say, such Men are set on by Jesuits, but I say, they do their work
as effectually. -- So it would be considered, whether such Methods do not
effectually promote the Jesuits design of reducing Popery. You may give us to
understand ( Preface page 22.) that the Declaration of Indulgence 167 was of
the Papists procuring; but we must not say, that the turning out of many
zealous Protestant Justices, and Ministers, was any way by their means.

2. Are you impartial in the Account you give of the Reformation in King Edward
6 and Q. Elizabeth's Reign? Did the Reformation lie in those things wherein
Dissenters differ from you? Then you must say, that those Churches which aimed
at an exact Conformity with the Apostolic Times, and (as Chillingworth says)
took their Direction only from Scripture, were yet so far unreformed, as they
wanted our Ceremonies. Though it sounds very harshly, to say that those
Churches who were more conformed to the Scripture Rule, were less reformed. But
you spoke more impartially, and more to the honor of our First Reformers,
Irenic. page 124. which you was minded of, ( Rector of Sutton p. 6.) Certainly
those holy Men, who did seek by any means to draw in others, etc. And by that
Rubric, which left it at the discretion of the Minister, what, and how much to
read, when there was a Sermon, it is evident, others since have sought to bear
up their Authority by their Names, who have been far from their Moderation.

I cannot but wonder at your Harangue (Book page 6.) Is it credible, that Men
of so great Integrity, such indefatigable Industry, such profound Judgment, as
Cranmer and Ridley, who were the Heads of the Reform^tion, should discern no
Sinfulness in these things. -- Could not Latimer, or Bradford, or such holy,
mortified Men as they, discern so much as a Mote of Vnlawlawfulness? etc.

It is granted, they were Learned, Pious, Excellent Men; yet it need not seem
strange, much less incredible, that such worthy Men should in some things
mistake. Does not A. B. Laud tell you, Reformation is so difficult a Work, and
subject to so many Pretentions, that it is almost impossible but the Reformers
should step too far, or fall too short in some smaller things or other? I
suppose you may have Bishop Cranmer's Manuscript still by you; and are you of
his Judgment in all things? I do not find it so, comparing what you published,
as his Judgment in your Irenicum, and what you have published in this Book, as
your own. And Latimer, that Zealous and Faithful Martyr, (as I remember) at the
end of his Sermons, used to ex^ite the Hearers to Prayer, and therein to
remember such as were departed this Life. Now must we therefore conclude, there
is not a Mote of Unlawfulness in praying for the Dead, that otherwise such an
holy Man as Latimer, would not have been for it? Most true it is, considering
the Times they lived in, and the Temper of the Persons they had to deal with,
it was the great Work of God to carry on Reformation so far by them. But I
cannot say, but their Hearts were to have carried it on further, if the Times
would have born it. (More Shame it is to others, that have had fairer
Opportunities since, and yet have not minded the Work.) History of the Troubles
at Franksford (printed 1575, reprinted 164^. p. 42.) tells of one that said,
Bishop Cranmer had drawn up a Book of Prayer, an hundred times more perfect,
but the Clergy and Convocation with other Enemies would not let it pass. And
there follows something further worth your noting ( page 43.) that B^llinger
told Whittingham, Mr. H. and Mr. C. asked his Judgment concerning certain
Points of that (our) Book, as Surplice, private Baptism, Churching Women, the
Ring in Marriage, with such like, which (as he said) he allowed not, and that
he neither could if he would, neitherwould if he might use the same in his
Church, whatsoever had been reported. Therefore (say I) such a Man as Bullinger
would not have been for imposing the same on others.

As to the Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's time, it was not brought in, nor
brought on with a rigorous Imposition of those things in Controversy; as Ball*
against Can, Part 2. p. 13. In the first ten Years of Q. Elizabeth, there was
sweet consent among Brethren. -- I think there was not a Man that thought of
Separation. The pressing of Subscription and Conformity in the tenth year of Q.
Elizabeth' s Reign, was that which brough^ in all the (...) and Contentions
following. Josias Nichol's (Plea of the Innocent, p. 210, 217, printed 1602,)
thus: Some five Years together, before that unhappy time that Subscription was
so generally offered, (which is now some 18 Years past) there was such Unity
between the Ministers, and they joined in all places so lovingly, and
diligently in Labor; that not only did the unpreaching Minister and
Nonresident quake, and prepare themselves in measure to take pains in the
Church; but also many thousands were converted from Atheism and Popery, etc.
But when Subscription came abroad, how did it shake the Heavens, and darken the
Skies? (O Lord my Heart trembles to think upon it) how many godly, and worthy
learned Preachers were silenced, deprived, and greatly disgraced! How were the
holy Ministers divided and distracted! How were the Christian Subjects grieved
and offended, and the Papists and wicked Men encouraged and emboldened! What a
damp brought it to all Godliness and Religion? and since that time what
horrible Wickedness, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and all shameless Filthiness, and
what grievous Plagues of God, one succeeding another, have followed, evey good
Christian Subject must needs see and lament? So he who was no Separatist. And I
hope Sir, you and I are agreed, that these things last spoken of, were no part
of England' s Reformation. And now Sir, give me leave to tell you (in some of
your own Words, Preface p. 47.) We were in a lamentable case as to the Defense
of the Reformation, if we had no more to plead for it, (than we have indeed to
plead for such mischievous Impositions.) And this seems to have been the sense
of the Queen's Council in that Letter, which the modest Enquiry (p. 16, 17.)
lays before you.

Therefore Sir, I beseech you, as you would not blast the Credit, and Honor of
the Reformation, place it not in such things, as rather brought a Deformation
on us.

Here I know not well how to reconcile you to your self. For, p. 365. You say,
It was the great Wisdom of our Church not to make more things necessary (as to
Practice) than were made so at the Settlement of our Reformation; but whether
there be sufficient Reason to alter those Terms of Communion which were then
settled, for the sake of such whose Scruples are groundless and endless, I do
not take upon me here to determine. And Preface p. 53 Although the Arguments
are very plausible one way, yet the Objections are very strong another. The
Union of Protestants, the Ease of scrupulous Consciences, the providing for so
many poor Families of ejected Ministers (but not a word of providing for so
many poor Congregations, and dark corners of the Land, that have need of them)
Are great Motives on one side. But the weighty Considerations on the other
side, page 54. And double in number too, as you reckon. So here I see your
Mind, as you hold the Scales, you might, and would determine that there is no
sufficient Reason to alter those Terms of Communion, which (in the great Wisdom
of our Church) were settled, for the sake of such, whose Scruples are groundless
and endless. For certainly those Arguments that are only plausible with you,
would not weigh down such as are strong and cogent, nor a few Motives weigh
down more weighty Consid^rations. But then, what did you think of, when you put
that Question, Preface, p. 81. Is there nothing to be done for Dissenting
Protestants? -- Do we value a few indifferent Ceremonies, and some late
Declarations, and doubtful Expressions, beyond the satisfaction of Men's
Consciences, and the Peace and Stability of this Church? And how happy had
England been, if such things had not been so over-valued! As to this material
Question, you deliver your Opinion (you say) freely and impartially. How Sir!
what? Are you for altering what was settled in so great Wisdom, by Men of so
great Integrity, such indefatigable Industry, such profound Judgment? Is this
for the Honor of our Reformation? Is not this to blast the Credit of the
Reformation?

I shall not take upon me, to animadvert upon the whole of your Answer to this
material Question, presuming it will be scanned by some of better Judgment.
Only one or two things I cannot but take notice of. So I heartily thank you for
that, P. 82. (3.) Notwithstanding, because the use of Sacraments in a Christian
Church ought to be the most free from all Exceptions, and they ought to be so
administered, as rather to invite than discourage scrupulous Persons from
joining in them; I do think, it would be a part of Christian Wisdom and
Condescension ( only here I would say, Duty) in the Governors of our Church,
to remove those Bars from a Freedom in joining in a full Communion. Now thanks
for thus much: and hold to it, Sir. Tho I have two great and learned Men of the
Church of England (worthy of Note with you) just at hand, that grant as much of
other parts of God's Worship, as you do of Sacraments; scil. that they should
be free from all Exceptions. See Hales of Schism, (in Miscel. p. 216, 217,
218.) And you were once of his Mind, Irenic. p. 120. And Chillingworth, p. 180.
If all Men would believe the Scripture, and freeing themselves from Prejudice
and Passion, would sincerely endeavor to find the true Sense of it, and live
according to it, and require no more of others, but to do so; nor denying their
Communion to any that do so, would so order their public Service of God, that
all which do so, may without Scruple, or Hypocrisy, or protetestation against
any part of it, join with them in it: who does not see that, etc.

Again, I cast my Eye on that, p. 87. where you would have indulged Persons to
pay Twelve pence a Sunday for their absence from the Parochial Churches, which
(you say) cannot be complained of as any heavy Burden. Which such will not
thank you for. You would have them indulged, and not indulged. And is Twelve
Pence a Week no burden to those, that with hard Labor have much ado to
maintain their Families, can scarce clear Twelve Pence per Week? See what it is
to be rich in this World, that makes some insensible of the low Estate others
live in. And would you have Servants the pol^^d too? tho their Wages may not
amount to so much.

But now at last I come to that, which I said, makes you hardly reconcilable
to your (...). Preface, p. 92. Such a Review made by wise and pe^^^able M^n,
not given to Wrath, and Disputing, may be so far from being a Dis^on^ur to this
Church, that it may add to the Glory of it. And the lik^ you (...) say, of
removing those Bars to Communion in Sa^^^ments bec^^^ it would be a part of
Christian Wisdom. Now lay things together, Dr. Stilling* says, Preface, p. 53,
54. T^ere are strong Objections and weighty Considerati^^^ against the
Alteration of the established Laws, And p. 364. would not take upon him to
determine, Whether there be sufficient Reason to (...) terms of Communi^^
settled. And yet Dr. S^lling. says, Preface, p, 82, 92. That an Alteration
would be a part of Christian Wisdom, and so far from being a (...) to this
Church, that it would add to the Glo^^ of it. And (...) on I put this Query,
Whether Man are justly charged, as bl^sting the Honor of the Reformation, for
dissenting in such things, which it would be the Churches Glory to alter?

3. Are you Imp^rtial in the Account you give of the old-Non-Conformists, as if
it was their general Sense, that Ministers were to forbear all Preaching, when
(...)? In the Contents of your Book, Part. 1 17. it is thus, [ The ^ld
Non-(...) Judgment of the unlawfulness of Men's preaching here, when forbidden
by ^aws, full^ cleared from some late Objections.] Which you undertake, p. 78.
etc. That their Judgment and Practice was to forbear ^rea^hing in their Parish
Churches, while they were under Suspension, I grant. And did not the present
Non-conformists follow them herein? Did they not generally quit the Temp^es, as
well as their Tithes, and Pr^^ts, from Aug. 24. 62. yielding these to be at the
Magisnates dispose? They would not that you, or others, should call their
Preaching (as you do) preaching i^ ^pposition to established Laws, whereunto
they yielded, as far as they could be satisfied it was lawful for them. But do
you your self be^^^ve, that the old Non-conformists thought it unlawful for
them to preach at a^, when silenced? Then you cannot take them to have been
very hone^^, upr^ght Men, who did so ordinarily (...) from their own
Principles. Were not some of them glad of an opportunity of Preaching in
another Diocese, when they might not be suffered to preach where they lived?
And were not many of them for the exercise of their Ministry in private, when
they were denied liberty in public. Fr. Johnson speaks of their suf^ering
themselves to be deposed from their (stated) public Ministy, which you seem to
overlook. And so I think Bez^ may well be understood of quitting their former
public Employments (with whose Testimony you make so great a Flourish, p. 21,
22.) What! is Beza for silencing, and stopping the Mouths of such a number of
faithful and able Ministers? -- Would Beza, even Beza, at such a time as that,
be for silencing so many Preachers? -- It appears that Beza was not of the Mind
of our Adversaries -- That he expresses no such terrible apprehensions at
their quitting their Places, as he does at their Preaching in opposition to the
Laws. To which I return, Were not the Non-conformists generally, both at that
time, and since, for quitting their Places, rather than holding on in public,
to the defiance of the Laws? They have desired, as far as they could, to avoid
the exasperating of Rulers. They were not for opposing Sword to Sword, as
Bradshaw has it; they were not movers of Sedition, nor have been to this day.
And would Mr. Baxter, even Mr. Baxter, be for their silencing, yet he says, (in
his Search for the English Schismatic. p. 37.) It is not their Judgment
(speaking of the mere Non-conformists) that they are bound to Preach, when by
opposing violence, or the offending of Rulers, it is likely to do more hurt
than good, and once preaching to deprive them of all the usefulness of their
Lives, etc.

But I doubt not, there are many Christians yet alive, who can remember some of
the old Non-conformists, and their preaching in private Houses, when suspended
from Preaching in Churches. One writes me word, that Mr. Hildersam used to
preach in his own House, when silenced; and two or three Families came to hear
him. Another special Friend, helping me to a sight of some Papers of Mr. E.
Reyner (formerly) of Lincoln, I meet with this considerable Passage: For me to
preach in this Place, and at this Time, is no way necessary, since others may
do it, and I my self (tho put by here) may do it as well and freely elsewhere,
as in New England, Ireland, Scotland, Holland; yea, happily in some remote
out-wing of the Kingdom. And thus God (in his ordinary Providence) does order
it, that his Church gains much by this course of removing Ministers, and
transplanting the Gospel to such Places, as never heard the sound thereof
before; and in the mean while they may have time to do much good in private,
etc. And I think this was the general Sense of the Non-conformists, that they
did not look on the censure of Suspension, (if unjust) as a sufficient
discharge from the exercise of their Ministry. Had they thought themselves
bound to cease Preaching, whenever they were prohibited by Men, they were
honester Men, than to act so contrary to their Judgment; as they used
frequently to preach, (tho more privately, or in Places where they were not
known) when suspended by the Bishops. But these things were not to be publicly
talked of then, when the High Commission-Court was up, and there was such
Inquisition after their Meetings.

I have this Account of Mr. Simeon Ash, from one (whose Father's House was as
his home sometimes) that when he was sought after by Pursevants, coming to
them, they had Meetings in the Nightime. Another, (a Minister) tells me he
has heard from Ancient Christians in Ringly Congregation, that Mr. John
Angier, sometimes Minister there, being silenced, and having his Chapel
suspended by the Bishop of Chester, used to preach to diverse in his own House,
till such times as he was removed to Denton. I suppose, there are some in those
Parts (yet alive) that can testify so much; Mr. Westowbye I well knew. His
Bible was his License. The Courts could not take him off, but he would be at
his Work, in one place or other. Once after my preaching for him, (when he was
scarce able to get into the Pulpit for Age, and Weakness accompanying it) he
entertained me with a Discourse of much of his Life past, the Troubles and
Opposition he had met with in the World, and the great Experience he had of the
most encouraging Success of his Ministry under his greatest Troubles, that in
his Travels he could write to his Wife, (as he said) that God bad given him
many Children she knew not of.

But to enquire after the Practice of particular Persons would be a tedious and
endless Work. You have the Judgment of the Assembly, under that Head of
Ordination, where they would have the Person to be ordained, declare his
sincere Intentions and Ends in entering into this Calling: And his Resolution to
continue against all Trouble and Persecution. If that Assembly were
Non-conformists, then you see there the Judgment of the Non-conformists. But if
they were generally Conformists, then you see, we have the Judgment of a
Learned Synod of Conformists for us.

4. Are you not too partial in allowing Protestants to be occasionally present
at some parts of Worship in the Roman Church, and that frequently too, to hear
Sermons, etc. (how far your et caetera may reach, others cannot tell, till you
better inform them) while you do not allow them to be present at the Worship
performed in the Assemblies of Dissenters? The former you are for, page 108. To
your Question there, does this make a Man to have Communion with the Church of
Rome? I answer, yea, so far as he joins in their Worship, so far he has
Communion with them. Sure you will not deny a Man to have any Communion with
you in hearing the Word preached, who comes for that End, and that frequently
too. So here you must be supposed to grant Occasional Communion with the Roman
Church in hearing of Sermons, etc, and that frequently too, to be lawful. Now
this is more than you allow to Dissenters, page 98. No Man denies, that more
places for Worship are desirable, and would be very useful, where they may be
had, and the same way of Worship, and Order observed in them, as in our
Parochial Churches; where they may be under the same Inspection, and
Ecclesiastical Government. -- But, is it possible that Mr. B. should think the
Case alike, where the Orders of our Church are constantly neglected, the
Authority of the Bishops is slighted and contemned; and such Meetings are kept
up in Affront to them, and the Laws? Here you say in Effect, that let Parishes
be never so large, and the Necessities of Souls never so urgent, the Assemblies
of Dissenters are not desirable, nor to be encouraged, because not under you
established Rule. But either you must grant, it may be lawful to join
occasionally, and that frequently too, with the Non-conformists, or you must
judge them worse than Popish Teachers, and say that it was better for Men to
hear these, than such as Mr. B. etc. I know not whether you might fear the
least countenancing of occasional Communion with Non-conformists, lest any
should thence argue from your own Words, that constant Communion with them is a
Duty. I am thinking however, that the Papists may thank you for so much
Kindness to them, that you grant it lawful for Protestants to be occasionally
present in some parts of their Worship. And let them alone to make their best
of what you say, you are sure will follow, p. 176. and p. 77. As far as Men
judge Communion lawful, it becomes a Duty, and Separation a Sin; under what
Denomination soever the Persons pass. -- Because then Separation appears most
unreasonable, when occasional Communion is confessed to be lawful. If they can
get Protestants to join with them ordinarily, though but in some parts of their
Worship at first, its possible, they would gain far more Proselites by it, than
Non-conformists have drawn or would draw into Separation.

You seem to suppose great Force and Virtue in that Salvo, p. 156. A Man is not
said to separate from every Church, where he forbears or ceases to have
Communion; but only from that Church, with which he is obliged to hold
Communion. As if a Christian was only obliged to Communion with some one
particular Church. Yet you will look upon your self, not only as a Member of
the Church of England, but as a Member of the Catholic Church. And as you are
a Member of the Catholic Church, it may possibly sometimes fall out, that you
may be obliged to have Communion occasionally with a Dutch Church, or a French
Church. And if Non-conformists, with their Assemblies may be proved as sound
parts of the Church Catholic, as others you can freely have Communion with,
and while they differ from you in nothing, but if the same was removed, your
Churches might be every jot as sound and pure, I can see no sufficient Reason
why you might not as lawfully have Occasional Communion with them; and then for
ought I know, you may be obliged thereunto, it may be a Duty. Because you
wholly overlook this, I thought fit to take notice of it. And further I would
put you in mind of your own Arguments, page 157. viz.

1. The general Obligation upon Christians to use all lawful Means for
preserving the Peace and Unity of the Church. And here I ask, If there be not
as great an Obligation at least, upon Christians to preserve Peace, or promote
it with all Christians, as with all Men: And they are bound to that, as far as
possible, and as much as lies in them, Romans 12. 18. And if you supposed the
present Dissenters to be as bad as the Donati^^, (which you cannot in reason
suppose) yet your Learned and Excellent Hales says, ( Miscel. of Schism, p.
208.) Why might it not be lawful to go to Church with the Donatists? -- if
occasion so require, And Ibid. p. 209. In all public Meetings pretending
Holiness, so there be nothing done but what true Devotion and Piety break, why
may not I be present in them, and use Communication with them?

2 The particular force of that Text, Phil. 3. 16. As far as you have already
attained, walk by the same Rule, etc. And one would think, such as have
attained so much Knowledge, as to see it lawful to join with the Roman Church in
some parts of W^^ship, might know, it cannot but be as lawful at least to join
in Worship with Non-conformi^ts.

5. Are you not partial, when you lay this down, ( p. 157.) As one of the
provoking Sins of the Non-conformists, that they have been so backward in doing
what they were convinced they might have done, with a good Conscience, when
they were earnestly pressed to it by those in Authority, etc. (yet you tell us
not what things those are, neither the time when they were pressed thereunto,
and refused the same. And I never heard of any Motions or Overtures for Peace,
that were reasonable, made to them, which they refused.) But you never take
notice of it, as any provoking Sin, in those that would not hearken to their
most just and earnest Petition for Peace. Might not they with a good Conscience
have forborne those needless Impositions, which they very well knew would be so
grievous and burdensome to many? And might not so much have been expected from
them, as they would profess themselves to be for Unity and Peace? May I not
here return your own Words; page 159. Was ever Schis^^ made so light a matter
of, and the Peace and Unity of Christans valued at so low a Rate; that for the
Prevention of the one, and the Preserevation of the other, a thing that is
lawful may not be done? (Or as I would say, that the imposing of things
indifferent, and not necessary, in their own Judgment, but things doubtful, or
unlawful in the Judgment of others, might not be forborne?)

Now, (Sir) are you for palliating so great Sin, as the causing of Schism and
Dissension in the Church, when you know, The Obligation which lies upon all
Christians, to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church, (which you give us
again, p. 209.) And I find you citing these words of A. B. Laud in your
Rational Account, p 324, Nor is he a Christian that would not have Unity, might
he have it with Truth. But I never said, nor thought, that the Protestants made
this Rent (Dissenting Protestants, say we) The cause of the Schism is yours;
for you thrust us from you, because we called for Truth, and redress of Abuses.
And there at the End of page 102. You could not but judge it a very prudent
Expression of his Lordship, That the Church of England is not such a Shre^ to
her Children, as to deny her Blessing, or denounce an Anathema against them, if
some peaceably dissent in some Particulars remoter from the Foundation, etc.
Where I observe you cannot well plead the Cause of our Separation from Rome,
without pleading something for Dissenters. But to return to your Impartial
Account, p. 209. You say, Violation of the Unity of the Church, where there is
no sufficient Reason to justify it, is a Sin, as much as Murder is, and as
plainly forbidden (and in some respects aggravated beyond it, Preface p. 45.)
All which returns upon your selves, if the Ar^h-Bishop's Words may take place.
And consider further seriously, whether there be any sufficient Reason to
justify the pressing and imposing of those things, which might lawfully be
forborne, when the imposing of them will certainly cause a Violation of the
Churches Unity and Peac^. Yet this is a thing, you take no notice of, unless it
be to justify it. As p. 76. The Church of England has as much occasion to
account those Scruples unreasonable, as they do those of the Ind^pendents,
A^^baptists, and Quakers. And page 59. So it is impossible for them to answer
the Anabaptists, who have as just a Plea for Separation from them, as they can
have from the Church of England. Now lay these together, and what follows, but
that as much is to be pleaded for the English Ceremonies, and other things
imposed, which the Non-c^nformists stick at, as can be pleaded for the
baptizing of Infants, or against Re-baptization (and I may add, or against the
way of the Quakers.) In the Fifty Queries concerning Infants Right to Baptism,
I set that down last, which ^ desired they would specially observe, Scil.
Whether the Anabaptist's Schism be not worse than their simple Opinion? And
whether it be not desirable, and possible, that some Way be found out, and
Terms laid down in which good and sober Men on both sides might agree, and hold
Communion, (as Christians?) concerning which, something is proposed there (from
Mr. B.) to others Consideration. This the Author of the Anti-Queries took
little notice of, which engaged me to mind him of it again, in my Reply, p. 25,
26. And yet I have met with no other Answer from him, but that he is loath at
present to give an Answer to it, entreating all his Friends to take it into
Consideration, because it is a matter of Moment, and common Concern. (T. G's
Controversy, etc. epitomized, p. 64.) From whence I conclude, if such Terms of
Moderation were offered, they would be hard put to it, scarce know what to say
for a standing off, and denying to have Communion with Christians of a
different Persuasion; but they would have enough to say against your Terms: and
that from your self, and not only in your Irenicum, but in your Rational
Account, p. 209. It is a very necessary Enquiry, what the cause of (the
distance) is, and where the main Fault lies; and it being acknowledge that
there is a possibility, that Corruptions may get into a Christian Church, and
it being impossible to prove, that Christianity obliges Men to communicate
with a Church, in all those (they will say, in any) Corruptions, its Communion
may be tainted with; it seems evident to Reason, that the cause of the Breach
must lie there, where the Corruptions are owned, and imposed, as Conditions of
Communion, etc.

I should have hoped, that at least you would have granted the conditions put
upon Ministers to be very hard; yet I find nothing, but a deep silence here.
Tho Mr. Cheny says, I am satisfied that it is in it ^elf a great and `dreadful
Sin to silence the Non-conformists. It seems here is a provoking Sin, which you
was willing to overlook, tho once in your Sermon, p. 20. you were very near it.

6. Do you speak Impartially, p. 378, 379. when you tell us, you wonder, that
none of us have taken any care to put any stop to Separation, or to let you
know, where you may fix and see an end of it; what Scruples are to be allowed,
and what not? I will say nothing for those, who are better able to speak for
themselves: but for my self, I thought I had told you plainly, and sufficiently
out of your Irenicum (if you will not be offended that I call it yours) where I
would have you fix. Let Christians stand upon the same terms now, as they did
in the time of Christ and his Apostles. Do not add other conditions of
Church Communion than Christ has done. (As Rector of Sutton, p. 6, 7. See also
p. 59.) If you make no new Terms, and yet others will separate from you still,
the Sin is theirs: but if indeed you add other Terms, then beware, that you be
not found the Schismatics.

Do not turn me off here, as you do Mr. Baxter's Way of Concord. You ^^^not
justly say, we go on in impracticable Notions here, or dividing Principles.
(When you have that Word, Preface p. 38. As tho he had been Christ's
Plenipotentiary upon Earth, You forgot that others might as well apply it to
the Rector of Sutton, for publishing his Irenicum.)

And I hope you will not deny, but we are backed with great Authority, when you
consider, what King James tells Cardinal Du Perron, by the Pen of Isaac
Causabon, (which Mr. Baxter takes notice of, Direct. p. 752.) His Majesty
thinks, that for Concord there is no nearer way, than diligently to separate
things necessary from the unnecessary, and to bestow all our labor that we may
agree in the things necessary, and that in things unnecessary, there may be
place given for Christian Liberty. A Golden Sentence! And there is nothing that
can be proved necessary, but it must be either expressly taught, or commanded in
the Word of God, or deduced thence by necessary Consequence. And that of the
Lord Bacon (Essay 3.) is considerable, who for the true placing the Bonds of
Unity, would have Points fundamental, and of Substance in Religion, truly
discerned and distinguished from Points not merely of Faith, but of Opinion,
Order, or good Intention. And Chillingworth is full of such impracticable
Notions, (if they deserve to be so called,) p. 197. -- He that could assert
Christians to that Liberty, which Christ and his Apostles left them, must needs
to Truth a most Heroieal Service. And seeing the over-valuing of the
Differences among Christians, is one of the greatest Maintainers of the Schism
of Christendom, etc. p. 198. Certainly if Protestants be faulty in this matter
(of playing the Pope) it is for doing it too much, and not too little. -- Take
away these Walls of Separation, and all will quickly be one. Take away this
Persecuting, Burning, Cursing, Damning of Men, for not subscribing to the Words
of Men, as the Words of God: Require of Christians only to believe Christ, and
to call no Man Master but him only; Let those leave claiming Infallibility,
that have no Title to it; and let them that in their Words disclaim it,
disclaim it likewise in their Actions. In a Word, take away Tyranny, which is
the Devils Instrument to support Errors, and Superstitions, and Impieties. -- I
say, take away Tyranny, and restore Christians to their just and full Liberty
of captivating their Understanding to Scripture only; and as Rivers when they
have a free Passage, run all to the Ocean: so it may well be hoped, by God's
Blessing, that universal Liberty thus moderated may quickly reduce Christendom
to Truth and Unity. This Citation being to long, I shall add but one more out
of him, and that a shorter, p. 209. This is most certain, and I believe you
will easily grant it, that to reduce Christians to Unity of Communion, there
are but two ways that may be conceived probable. The one, by taking away
diversity of Opinions, touching Matters of Religion: The other, by showing that
the diversity of Opinions, which is among the several Sects of Christians,
ought to be no hinderance to their Unity in Communion. Last of all, I close
with your Rational Account, p. 291. And therefore those lesser Societies cannot
in Justice, make the necessary Conditions of Communion narrower, than those
which belong to the Catholic Church: i. e. those things which declare Men
Christians, ought to capacitate them for Communion with Christians. (Even an
acknowledgment of the Scriptures as the indispensible Rule of Faith and
Manners: Which (be pleased to note) is something different from your late
established Rule.) Now would you fix here, that those things which declare Men
Christians, shall suffice to capacitate them for Communion with you; how many
Men's Scruples would be removed? and what better way can you think of, to put a
stop to Separation?

7. Are you Impartial in charging all Nonconformist's Meetings with Separation,
tho very many of them ordinarily join with the Parochial Congregations, and do
not deny them ^o be true Churches, as the old Separatists did? p. 56. It is
true, (say you) in that Opinion they differ, but in Separation they agree. As
in your Sermon p. 33. For do they not do the very same things, and in the same
manner, that the others do? how comes it then to be Separation in some, and not
in others? Which I answered ( Rector of Sutton, p. 49.) thus: What they do is
not done upon the Separatists Principles, and therefore not done in the same
manner. Yet you neither retract that Saying of yours, nor refute my Answer. And
have not others as much reason to object against you, that when you receive the
Sacrament k^eeling, you do the same thing that the Papists and Lutherans do: (I
do not think it manifestly appears from the Pope's manner of receiving, either
sitting, or a little leaning upon his Throne, as you say, p. 15. that the
Papists are allowed to follow him herein.) How then comes that to be an Act of
Worship in them, when with you it is no Act of Worship, but a ^eer indifferent
Ceremony?

8. Are you not very Partial, in loading those that do not absolutely separate
from you, but only secundum quid, as you do, p. 54, 55, 56. Making their
Practice, that own you to be true Churches, to be the more unjustifiable, more
inexcusable, more unreasonable Separation? Is it not a greater Schism, to
separate from you, as no true Church, than to do it, only because you are
faulty, in imposing such Conditions, as they cannot lawfully submit to? Are
they the greatest Separatists, who hold Communion with you, so far as they can?
I should think, they are the greatest Separatists, whose Separation is the most
unjustifiable, inexcusable, and unreasonable. As I had thought, there was not
so much reason to deny the Being of the Church of England, while she retains
the true Faith, and has the true Worship of God for substance; as there may be
to doubt of the lawfulness of Ceremonies, and Modes of Worship, invented and
imposed, without any clear Scripture-Warrant. And suppose one dares not receive
the Communion with you, because he holds kneeling in that Act a participating
with Idolaters; and another is kept off, because he suspects there may be some
Superstition in it? will you say, the latter is the more unreasonable? And do
you not own those Lutheran Churches, that have Exorcism with Baptism, yet to be
true Churches? And if you was placed there, must you therefore own and use
Exorcism, (tho against your Judgment) or be guilty of a more inexcusable,
unreasonable Separation from them, than the Papists, who deny them to be true
Churches?

9. Are you Impartial, in allowing a different way of Worship, to the Members
of Foreign Churches here in England, (as p. 147, 148.) while you are against
allowing the like Liberty to Natives, which you deny not to Strangers? Bishop
Davenant (Ad pacem Eccl. Adhort. p. 116. Rat. 3.) argues, That none ought to
deal more hardly, with their Christian Brethren of other Churches, than with
their own. (Romans 12. 5.) Nam fra^^rnit^s Christiana quae Intercedit inter
membra Christi non variatur pro locorum aut nationum varietate. You would have
your own more hardly dealt with than those of foreign Churches. Now what
Equity is here? Either you have Communion with those of Foreign Churches (not
withstanding their different way of Worship) or you have not. If you have no
Communion with them, then are you not Schismatics from those Churches? If you
have Communion with them, why may you not as lawfully have Communion with
Nonconformists in their way of Worship? Can you assign any just and sufficient
Cause ex Natura rei, why such a way of Worship should not be allowed?

10. Do you deal Impartially, while you complain, p. 112. that no bounds are
set to the Peoples Fancies of purer Administrations; (concerning which I am
quite mistaken, if I did not wish the Rector of Sutton had cautioned what he
said) and you on the other hand, set no Bounds, but (by your excepting against
what Mr. B. has written of it) would have People own, and commit the care of
their Souls to such Ministers, as are in place, be they never so profane,
insufficient, or unsound? Tho Mr. Cheyney (Full Answer, etc. Introduct. p. 7.)
grants, That where God does make a difference, Men may. Now God does make a
difference (says he) between the Ministry of the best and the worst, between
the Ministry of a John Baptist and a Pharisee, a living Man and an Image. P.
177. Say you, And does this Kindness only belong to some of our Parochial
Churches? etc. Where you suppose every Parochial Church in England to be a true
Church, and every Parochial Minister (by consequence) to be a true Minister;
unless you would argue fallaciously there. Tho I had thought it possible to
have found out some few at least, whom you would have been ashamed to own. I
cannot but wonder at that you urge again and again. p. 111. Were they not
baptized in this Church, and received into Communion with it as Members of it?
p. 148. Our Business is with those, who being baptized in this Church, etc. May
not all those that were baptized in Presbyterian, or Independent Congregations,
as well plead their Baptism, for their continuing in that way of Worship, which
was in the Church, wherein they were baptized? Or would you have such
Rebaptized? Or can you prove, that unless Men renounce their Baptism, they
must needs own Diocesan Churches, and the Parish-Minister (howsoever
unqualified) whom the Bishop sets over them?

You that could find out a Mean betwixt Tyranny over Men's Consciences, and
endless Separation, to wit, a prudent and due Submission in lawful things, (as
page 208.) methinks it is a little strange, you could think of no Mean betwixt
tying People to their Parish Minister (though notoriously unfit for the
Ministry,) and suffering them to run after Quakers, or Papists, p. 330. I
suppose you approve of that Saying of the Bishops you cite, page 320. If he
(that was chosen) were worthy, they would consecrate him, but not otherwise. So
you would not have Bishops obliged, or forced to consecrate the unworthy,
neither surely should they ordain such, or grant Institution and Induction to
such: Yet I see not, but you would have People obliged to accept of them, if
instituted and inducted, though it be never so apparent, and easy to prove,
they are unworthy. It would seem, it is enough with you, that we have the same
Religion, (publicly professed) page 308. Though some in place are never so
great a scandal to Religion, great Enemies to it, whose Ministry tends to do
more harm, than good, p. 123.

11. Are you Impartial? or rather, are you not uncharitable in your Censure of
all those, whom you condemn as Separatists, and guilty of Schism? As you say to
the Romanist, Rational Account, page 613. ^. 3. You expressly grant a
possibility of Salvation, -- in case of invincible Ignorance; and dare you deny
it, where there is a preparation of Mind to find out, and embrace the most
certain way to Heaven; where all Endeavors are used to that end, and where
there is a conscientious Obedience to the Will of God, so far as it is
discovered: So say I to you. But here, do not in Effect charge them, with not
using the best means for a right Information? otherwise you say their
Noncommunion in the Particulars scrupled, may be excused, (p. 73. f.) Therefore
say I, their Non-communion with you (who yet acknowledge you to be true
Churches) cannot be the most inexcusable, unless you suppose them to be the
most deficient in using the means for right Information. Do you not charge them
with wilful Error or Mistake? p. 373. There must be wilfulness in the Error or
Mistake which does not excuse. For I say expressly, if the Error be wholly
involuntary, it does excuse. So you suppose, page 140. That the terms of
Communion are only fancied to be sinful through prejudice, or wilful Ignorance,
or Error of Conscience. Where we must understand, you would have [ wilful]
joined to each of these, otherwise it would excuse. And you add, page 141. It
is to be supposed, that where there is no plain Prohibition, Men may with
ordinary Care and Judgment, satisfy themselves of the Lawfulness of things
required. Therefore you suppose that all who are not so satisfied, (...) Men
that want both ordinary Care and Judgment, who suffer themselves to be so
easily deluded, p. 142. f. Here I meet with a Letter of some old suffering
Non-conformists, (being an Answer to what a Reverend Conformable Divine had
written to them.) Some Passages therein I shall transcribe, (supposing it was
never printed, that they may be new to you, though written many Years since.)

-- The second Course you direct us to, of seeking Information [but with all
Humility, and Prayer in the use of means (but with all Indifferency) lest
halting with God, as Balaam did, we find his success) we readily accept it,
according to the measure of the Truth and Integrity of our Hearts; only we have
cause to be humbled, and fear our own Hearts (for we speak of our selves, we
judge not others) lest any of us yield without such serious search after the
Truth, as you advise, and that for fear of losing what Balaam gained. For ought
we see, there is small hopes of gaining Balaam 's ways by standing for the
Purity of Gods Ordinances, and therefore less Fear of halting as Balaam did, in
seeking and following after that way, which exposes us to the loss of all the
chiefest Comforts of this Life, and which if it be not the way of Truth, we are
of all true-hearted Englishmen the most miserable. And further on, they say,
-- Or suppose (which God forbid) that we were so void of Christianity and
Humanity together, as to undo our selves (inward and outward Man, without all
Reason or Conscience;) yet will you pass the same Judgment upon all those three
hundred Ministers, which in our memories have been deprived for that very
Cause, for which we suffer? Were not some of them such, as the Christian World
never yielded more eminent Lights of Sincerity and true Holiness, since the
Apostles times? And did Misprision, or long Use make such a fell ado in their
Hearts also, as to blind their Consciences in this Cause? Was all their
Patience in this Cause for Conscience sake, not a Fruit of God's Spirit in
them, but a Bastard of their own Spirit? (And Sir, you may be informed, how
some of them suffered for Preaching and keeping Conventicles, as they were
called, as well as for In-conformity.) Afterward toward the Conclusion, they
have these words, Consider whether you rightly take such things for
indifferent, when they do not suffer you to carry an indifferent Mind toward
you poor Brethren, which in them only, and in no weightier Matters, do differ
from you. And let me beg of you to consider it; and once more to consider your
own words, Rational Account, p. 614. But we have not so learned Christ, we dare
not deal so inhumanly with them in this World, much less judge so uncharitable
as to another, of those who profess to fear God, and work Righteousness, though
they be not of the same Opinion or Communion with us. Remember this, unless you
will retract it.

The last point of Partiality I shall take notice of, touches me in
particular, Preface p. 61, 62. You say of that worthy Person, (whosoever he
was) who wrote the Letter out of the Country, He seems to write like a
well-disposed Gentleman, -- He discourses gravely and piously, without
Bitterness and Rancor, or any sharper Reflections, etc. Though he also reflects
on your Irenicum, yet there is no harm done. You have the same from him as it
were by wholesale, (almost two Pages together, Letter, p. 15 16.) which I
return in small Parcels; yet do you not pay Him off with such sharp Inve^ives,
as I have from you, Preface p. 72.

So now I come to consider what you say to me, Preface p. 71. The whole Design
of that Book does not seem very agreeable to the Christian-temper which the
Author pretends to. Whether is it your meaning, that it is not wholly
agreeable, or not at all agreeable? Whether, not agreeable in all things, or
agreeable in nothing? But is it not for Moderation in such Cases, wherein
Moderation ought to be shown? And is not that very agreeable to the
Christian-temper? And what may others say now of your Icenicum? If what I
transcribed thence, seem to you not agreeable to the Christian temper, then,
was you not under some great Distemper, either at the writing of this latter,
or that former Book? In the Christian-temper I have Occasion ( p. 370.) to
borrow something from Bishop Downam; what he notes to have always been the
Hypocrit Guise, I there say is the genius of false Zeal, S^il. To neglect the
greater Du^^es, and to affect the Observation of the less; to prefer
Circumstances before the ^obstance, and Ceremonies before the Works, either of
Piety or Charity; to place the heig^th of their Religion, either in observing,
or urging Ceremonies, or Controversies, in inveighing against them. And I say
further, ( p. 371.) You would not take him for a wise and careful Builder, that
laid the greatest Weight on the weakest part of the Wall. -- And is that true
Zeal for God? Or rather is it not a selfish Zeal, which is for ones own
Opinions (or own Party) neglecting those things, which make most for the Honor
of God, and wherein the main Interest of Religion lies. If I could see any
thing there, or in that Book, which chances to bear the Name of the Rector of
Sutton, that is not agreeable to the Christian-temper, and to the Truth, and
Doctrine of Christ, I hope I should be ready to retract the same.

Ibid. For it is to pick up all the Passages he could meet with (in a Book
written twenty Years sinc) with great tenderness toward Dissenters, before the
Laws were established.

And have you repented of that your former Kindness and Tenderness toward
them, since the Laws were against them? But Solomon tells us, A Friend loves at
all times, and a Brother is born for Adversity. Which I observed (...)
agreeable to the Christian-temper, (p. 219.) And you cannot deny that which you
told us twenty Years since, of the Magistrates Power being bounded. He has
Power of determining things (undetermined by the Word) (...) they be agreeable
to the Word -- His Laws must be regulated by the general Rules of the Divine
Law, (Rector of Sutton, p. 12.) That no Laws of Men can hinder, but what was
Truth, will be Truth still, and what was Duty, will be Duty still.

In what follows, you more humbly (as it would seem) than truly confess (in
Mr. Cotton's words) the weakness or unwariness of those Expressions, which I
have gathered out of your Irenicum. That Book was your Firstborn. And the
Firstborn was the chief of their Strength, Psalm. 105. 36. But it seems, you
are for reading Genesis 49. 3. Principium doloris, rather than Principium roboris.
The beginning of your Strength, is now become the beginning of your Grief. Thus
you now let the World know indeed, that whereas you had written much, favoring
the Cause of Dissenters, your Thoughts at last are changed, as to those Things
and Persons too.

Next you fall hotly on me, [ And, have you not very well required the Author
of that Book, for the Tenderness and Pity he had for you, and the Concernment
he then expressed, to have brought you upon easier Terms, etc.]

Reverend Sir, I hope you will give me leave to speak, when I am thus spoken
to. I suppose you expect my Answer, when you put Questions so close to me.
First then, I thank you for your good pains taken in that Book, and for your
truly Christian Design in it, so agreeable to the Christian-temper; though it
has been unsuccesful. I doubt not yet, but that Book will stand as a Witness
before God and the World against many, who can never answer that Strength of
Reason in it, an Evidence of Truth, against unn^cessary, rigorous, mischievous
Impositions; and yet were for pressing, and are still for continuing them upon
us. But it is no ill Requital of the Author, that I have an esteem of his Work.
And if you can reconcile the Scope of your Sermon with what I cite out of your
former Writings, do your self that Right. Or if you can, refute those
Collections; otherwise such as meet with them may be tempted to think you
self-condemned

When you say, you wrote in Tenderness, etc. I hope, you did not only play the
Orator, make a flourish merely with Words; or plead our Cause against your own
Judgment; nor acted the part of Politician, as hoping to engage a Party; but
wrote your Judgment, as a sober (and indeed well studied) Divine. Will you say,
you wrote partially then, as swayed with your Pity and Tenderness toward
Dissenters? How then shall we be satisfied, and assured, that you have not
written partially of late, out of overmuch Fondn^ss on Conformity? If you wrote
impartially, your Judgment, and Reason deserves to be regarded, till you, or
some other for you, bring greater Str^^gth of Reason to prove you was then in
an Error. You pleaded wel^ for (...) ^^ms, and what can you say now, what have
you thought of since to justify Men's imposing harder Terms? How can you answer
your own Interrogatories, [ What ground can there be, why Christians should not
stand upon the same Terms now, which they did in the time of Christ and his
Apost es? And, whether do they consult the Churches Peace and Unity, who
suspend it upon such things, (as you know what?) How far does the Example of
our Savior or his Apostles warrant such rigorous Impositions?] Rector of
Sutton, page 7, 8.

You express your having been concerned to have brought us in, -- But were not
many of us in, both in the Church, and in the Ministry, before we were put out
by the late Impositions^ By this expression of yours, it would seem, your
Church is a new Church, lately erected, standing upon new Terms, (which I shall
have occasion again to take notice of.) But were we not true Ministers before?
had we not a valid Ordination? Deny it if you can. And if we were true
Ministers before, then it is a great Question, whether we are not so still,
(unless you can prove we were justly degraded.) And consequently, whether we
are not obliged to the exercise of our Ministry, as we may have opportunity?
Preface p. 72. And has he now deserved this at your hands, to have them all
thrown down in his ^ace, and to be thus upbraided with his former Kindness? Is
this your Ingenuity, your Gratitude, your Christian-temper?

Now are not these pretty sharp Reflections? If you can justly charge me with
any Bitterness and Rancor, etc. I shall acknowledge such things not agreeable to
the Christian-temper, and would be ashamed of them. If you are ashamed to own
your former Principles, many will judge, it is without Cause. It may prove you
fallen from those sober Principles, but it will not prove those Principles
false.

When you speak of my throwing them in your Face, my Design was not to cast
Dirt upon so worthy a Person. What I alleged, I took to be matter of Argument,
and with this Advantage, ad Hominem. I know no Reason you have to be sorry for
what you wrote formerly, tending to Peace and Union, as you may have cause to
be sorry for what looks another way. I should have thought, the Method I took
(minding you how much you had said against such an established Rule, as you
would now bring us under) might have tended to moderate, rather than exasperate
you. What if you have since changed your Opinion? Yet methinks, you should not
judge those former Principles of yours so sinful and dangerous, that none are
fit to be tolerated in the Church who hold to them. How happy and glorious
would the Church of England be, had she no worse Teachers, than Dr. Stilling
fleet was, when he maintained those Principles? Or if you do account them so
sinful and dangerous, are you not the more obliged to disprove and refute them?
which you will find as hard a Task, as it would have been to Grotius, had he
gone about the Confutation of what he had written de satisfactione Christi.

You go on, Are you afraid of having too many Friends, that you thus use those,
whom you once took to be such? Methinks herein you appear very self-denying.

I am not careful to answer in this matter. But is it so, that we have quite
lost you? Will you no more stand our Friend? Where is then the Kindness you
spoke of? I remember, Dr. Borrel silenced me, when I had been silenced not two
Months before: But I could not have thought 20 Years ago, that when we were
driven into Corners, Dr. St. would be for driving us out of our Corners too,
even he that could plead so well for us, that we might enjoy public Liberty.
Here I look back to that ( Preface, p. 52.) They would have had me preached for
Alterations and Abatements, and taking away Ceremonies and Subscriptions, --
and then I might have been thought to have preached a very seasonable Sermon.
This indeed would have showed, that you was still our Friend, and not our^
only, but as good a Friend to this poor Church and Kingdom. To plead for all
Abatements that ( with the Honor of God, and safety of true Religion) might be
granted to Dissenters, for the uniting and strengthening of the Protestant
Interest, in such danger to be trodden down by the common Enemy, would
certainly be more seasonable, than this work you are engaged in.

I would know, whether that Speech of the Bishop of St. David's in the
Convocation-House, May 23, 1604, was not seasonable? Can it ever be
unseasonable, moving for the due Liberty of grave, honest, sound, and
conscientious Men, such as the Church has need of at all times, and whose
Labors might be very profitable? And then, whether pleading for Abatements at
this day be not as seasonable? I put a great difference (said he) between Quid
liceat, and Quid expediat, -- And then speaking of those who were scrupulous
only upon some Ceremonies, and other Circumstances, being otherwise learned,
studious, grave and honest Men, whose Labors have been both painful in the
Church, and profitable to their several Congregations, (he says) though I do
not justify their Doings, yet surely their Service would be missed, at such
time as need shall require them, and us to give the right hand of Fellowship
one to another, and to go arm in arm against the common Adversary, that so
there might be vis unita fortior. -- If these our Breth^en aforesaid should be
deprived of their places for the matters premised, I think (...) Cause to bend
our Wits to the uttermost extent of our Skill to provide (...) cure of Souls
for them, where they may exercise their Talents.

Furthermore, If these Men, being diverse hundreds (as it is (...)) should
forsake their Charges (as some do presuppose they will) who I (...) should
succeed them. -- Besides this, for so much as in the Lifetime of the late
Archbishop of Canterbury, these things were not so extremely urged, but that
many learned Preachers enjoyed their Liberty herein, conditionally that they
did not by Word or Deed openly disgrace, or disturb the State established; I
would know a Reason, why it should now be so generally and exceeding strictly
called upon, especially seeing that those Men are now the more necessary, by so
much as we see greater Increase of Papists to be now of late, than were before.
To conclude, I wish, that if by Petition made to the King's Majesty, there
cannot be obtained a quite remove of the Premises, which seem so grievous to
diverse, not yet a Toleration for them, which be of the more staid, and
temperate Carriage; yet at the least, there might be procured a Mitigation of
the Penalty, if they cannot be drawn by other Reasons to a Conformity with us.
Thus the Bishop of St. David's. And if all the Bishops in England were of his
Mind, and would move for their Ministerial Liberty, whose Service is needful,
at such a time as this especially, whether would it not be very seasonable? And
if you had a Kindness, and Pity for Dissenters, is there not the same Reason
for it still? And is not this very Iuncture of Time as good an Occasion, as
ever you may have to show it?

You say further to me, Preface p. 72. But I cannot take you to be any of the
wisest Men upon Earth.] And I should wonder if you did. But you know what
Diogenes said to one that told him, many mocked him. But (said he) I am not
mocked. I might well expect your Contempt, when I see you contemning such,
whose Books I am not worthy to carry after them. Yet it may be questioned here,
whether you take not your self to be wiser, than the Wisdom of the whole
Nation in Parliament, comparing your Preface p. 81, etc. with the declared
Sense of that great and honorable Council? Pref. p. 93. you say, These are all
the things which appear to me reasonable to be allowed in order to an Union. So
that if they were inclined to have gone further, therein they appeared to you
not very considerate, or reasonable.

When you think it reasonable, that upon longer time, and farther
Consideration, those Divines of the Assembly, who then opposed Separation,
should change their Opinions: [But where find you this in what I wrote] Will
you not allow one single Person (but stupendae eruditionis Theologum, as the
Latin Apologist then called you, page 118.) Who happened to write about these
matters when he was very young; (as you may say, Mr. Joseph Alleyn was very
young, when he was very ripe) in twenty Years time of the most busy and
thoughtful part of his Life, to see Reason to alter his Judgment? And yet you
was as close a Student in that former part of your Life, and as free from other
Business, from Diversions, and Temptations, as can be supposed you have been
since. But you should be allowed to alter your Judgment, and none can blame
you, if it be for the better. Only in this case, you should be so just, and
charitable, as to let us know your Reasons, that if they be sound, we may see
Cause to alter ours. I hope, you will not say, Then was then, and now is now.
And can you now assure us, that you shall not alter your present Judgment once
again within twenty Years? We read of Bishops that have cried peccavimus again
and again, and of Councils doing and undoing again, and sometimes in less than
twenty Years.

But after all this, wherein is it that he has thus contradicted himself? Is
it in the point of Separation, which is the present Business? No, so far from
it, that in that very Book, he speaks as fully concerning the Unlawfulness of
Separation, as in this Sermon, which will appear by these Particulars in it.

If by Separation, you mean a Separation from any Church upon any slight,
trivial, unnecessary Cause, as you define Schism, Irenic. p. 113. I am not for
such a Separation. But perhaps some may tell you, that if you separate from
such Assemblies as Mr. B. etc. when you might have occasional Communion with
them, you do it upon far less Cause, than many separate from those of yours,
where they are required to join in Practices more to be suspected.

If by Separation you mean any assembling for the Worship of God, otherwise
than according to your established Rule; and so condemn the Assemblies of mere
Non-conformists, that are not of Schismatical Principles; yea, even their
occasional Meetings, and those kept off from the times of public Worship in
the Parochial Congregations, I doubt not but the Lawfulness of such Assemblies
is, and shall be evidently proved from that Book.

Preface p. 72, 73. Which will appear by these Particulars in it.

(1.) Irenic. p. 123. That it is unlawful to set up new Churches, because they
cannot conform to such Practices which they suspect to be unlawful.

(2.) Those are new Churches, when men erect distinct Societies for Worship,
under distinct and peculiar Officers, governing by Laws, and Church-Rules,
different from that Form they separate from.

(3.) P. 124. As to things in the Judgment of the Primtive and Reformed
Churches left undetermined by the Laws of God, and in matters of mere Order and
Decency, and wholly as to the Form of Government, every one, notwithstanding
what his private Judgment may be of them, is bound for the Peace of the Church
of God, to sub mit to the Determination of the Church. Allow but these three
Conclusions, and defend the present Separation if you can.

Ad Trianos ventum est, I hope now we shall come to something. Methinks, we
have been too long beating ab^ut the Bush. And yet I am kept off a while seeing
you taking up a good part of two Pages to no purpose; unless it be to persuade
your Readers, that I was unwilling to take notice of that, which you cannot but
grant I do take notice of, viz. that you distinguish betwixt N^n-communion in
unlawful, or suspected Rites or Practices in a Church and entering into distinct
Societies for Worship. And it were strange, if I had overlooked, or was
unwilling, the Readers should see these Conclusions of yours, when you cannot
but say, I there cite the very Pages, Rector of Sutton p. 30. A nd I can say, I
gave them what I thought might seem material. They will ^ind but two
Conclusions in Irenicum; your second Conclusion here is there but an
Explication of the first. And what I granted you, is all you can make of them,
to your purpose here. And did I not acknowledge, again and again there, that the
Primitive and Reformed Churches were two of your Judges? And what Advantage you
will get by that, or any of these Conclusions, we shall now see. Methinks, I
have this Advantage that you here own these three Conclusions. When you would
have me to allow them; it is to be supposed, that you allow them your self.
Yea, you say of them, These are most p^rtinent and material. Therefore I shall
go over them again.

Conclusion 1. That it is unlawful to set up new Churches, because they cannot
conform to such Practices, which they suspect to be unlawful.

Here, 1. I urge you with what you say, Ir^nic. p. 117. Withdrawing Communion
from a Church in unlawful or suspected Things, does not lay Men under the Guilt
of Schism. You say, Men may lawfully deny Communion with a Church in such
things. I say, Men cannot lawfully have Communion in such things. As King
James, (on the Lord's Prayer, page 44.) It is a good and sure Rule in Theology,
in matters of God's Worship, quod dubitas ne f^ceris. So Hales (Miscel. of
Schism, p. 210.) Not only in Reason, but in Religion too, that Maxim admits of
no Release, Caut^shmi cujusque praeceptum, quod dubitas ne feceris. And Mr. R.
Hooker, (Preface to his Eceles. Polit. ^. 6.) Not that I judge it a thing
allowable for Men to observe those Laws, which in their Hearts they are
steadfastly p^rswaded to be against the Law of God. What he says further there,
of Men being bound to suspend their Persuasion in matters determined by
Governors, which they have not demonstrative Reasons against, you very well
take off. Irenic. p. 118, 119. No true Protestant can swear blind Obedience to
Church Governors, etc. And certainly, it is neither in a Man's Power to suspend
his own Persuasion, or lay aside his Doubts ad libitum, no^ is he allowed to
act against his own Judgment and Conscience (though misinformed.) That Man
sins without doubt, who ventureth on Practices he suspects to be sinful
(though in themselves the Practices be lawful.) What the Apostle says, Rom 14.
5, 14, 23. puts the matter out of dispute.

Now to join in Common Prayer is an unlawful, or suspected Practice to some.
They take it to be polluted with Superstition. Perhaps they take Communion
herein to be a sinful Symbolizing with the Papists, for what King Edward 6, and
King James said of it. And if you should tell them our Service Book is
reformed; it is possible, some may now reply, How can you say so? Will you
blast the Credit of, and cast a Reproach upon our first Reformers? Again,
baptizing with the Sign of the Cross, and kneeling in the Act of receiving the
Sacrament, (as it were before the Sacramental Elements) are suspected unlawful
Practices to many. And thus they are barred from Communion with you in
Sacraments. And therefore you had no Reason to slight others modest Expressions
here, as you do, page 333. [ They judge, they think, they esteem them unlawful,
and they cannot be satisfied about them.] Though you are far short of answering
all that has been said to prove some things enjoined unlawful; yet suppose a
Man ignorant, erring and mistaken here (not without Fault) notwithstanding he
must suspend his own Act till he be better informed, and satisfied about it.
And here I would again mind you of those significant Expressions, Irenic. page
119. Let Men turn and wind themselves which way they will, by the very same
Arguments that any will prove Separation from the Church of Rome lawful,
because she required unlawful Things, as Conditions of her Communion, it will
be proved lawful not to conform to any suspected or unlawful Practice required
by any Church Governors upon the same Terms,* if the Thing so required, be
after serious and sober Enquiry, judged unwarrantable by a Man's own
Conscience. Which (with more you have in that Page, and the Page before it)
cuts off your third Particular, Preface p. 75. Here now I have gained so much
Ground of you. Such are necessitated to withdraw from your Communion, who must
otherwise join in some unlawful or suspected Practice. As Chillingworth, p.
269. To do ill that you may do well, is against the Will of God, which to every
good Man is a high Degree of Necessity. And say you, Rational Account, p. 290.
Can any one imagine it should be a Fault in any to keep off from Communion,
where they are so far from being obliged to it, that they have an Obligation to
the contrary, from the Principles of their common Christianity. Here I assume,
they are bound by the Principles of common Chrisianity to keep off from
Communion with you, that know they should certainly sin, if they held Communion
with you, because they should then join in suspected ^ractices, and things,
which after Enquiry, their Consciences tell them are unlawful.

Ergo, you must say, it cannot be a Fault in such to keep off from Communion
with you. Though I would grant them faulty so far as any keep off through
Prejudice, Error, Ignorance; yet so far as these are involuntary, they are more
excusable, than to go directly cross to their own Consciences here. So
therefore such are necessitated to withdraw Communion from you, who would
certainly sin, if they held Communion with you, judging such Communion to be
sinful.

2. If you say here, What is this to a positive Separation, which is the
present Business? You shall see, it is something toward it. You are come a
fair Step on the Way. Once grant that it is lawful for Men (or that Men are
necessitated) to deny Communion with you in unlawful, or (but) suspected
Practices, which are unlawful to them, and you come presently to the Point.
Allowing them to withdraw from yours, you must allow them to join in some other
Christian Assembly; unless you would have them utterly deprived of the Worship
of God, and to live like Heathens: As you say well, Irenic. p. 109. Every
Christian is under an Obligation to join in Church society with others; because
it is his Duty to profess himself a Christian, and to own his Religion
publicly, and to partake of the Ordinances and Sacraments of the Gospel, which
cannot be without Society with some Church or other. So then, Christians that
cannot enjoy Sacraments with you, must join with some other Society, where they
may enjoy them. And further, take notice of that remarkable Assertion, in your
Rational Account, p. 335. and apply it here, as far as there is Cause, Our
Assertion therefore is, that the Church and Court of Rome are guilty of this
Schism, -- by forcing Men ( N. B.) if they would not damn their Souls by
sinning against their Consciences, in approving the Errors and Corruptions of
the Roman Church, to join together ( N. B.) for the solemn Worship of God,
according to the Rule of Scripture, and Practice of the Primitive Church, and
suspending (I suppose it should have been, and to suspend) Communion with that
Church till those Abuses and Corruptions be redressed. And I observe further,
Ibid. p. 291. you would not have Men bound to Communion with a particular
Church, but in Subordination to God's Honor, and the Salvation of their Souls.
Yea, you say, Men are bound not to communicate in those lesser Societies, where
such things are imposed, as are directly repugnant to these Ends. And where Men
should be forced to damn their Souls by sinning against their Consciences,
would not this be directly repugnant? And yet are not such bound to join
together for the Solemn Worship of God, etc. You see now how far I have brought
you, even on your own Grounds: how you will get off, I know not.

Then might it not have been expected, that you would have been more
favorable, and charitable toward the Assemblies of those Ministers and
Christians, that are kept off from you by unlawful Terms, or at least such
unnecessary Terms as are to them unlawful? You speak more temperately, Rational
Account, page 331. Here let me use some of your own Words there, which
something favor those Assemblies, you now engage so zealously against, By
their declaring the Grounds of their Separation to be such Errors and
Corruptions, which are crept into the Communion of your Church, and imposed on
them in order to it, they withal declare their readiness to join with you
again, if those Errors and Corruptions be left out. And where there is this
readiness of Communion, there is no absolute Separation from the Church as
such, but only suspending Communion till such Abuses be reformed. This they will
say is very good. But now in your new Impartial Account, Preface page 46. you
speak in another Dialect, Would they have had me represented that as no Sin,
which I think to be so great a one; or those as not guilty, whom in my
Conscience I thought to be guilty of it? Would they have had me suffered this
Sin to have lain upon them without reproving it? etc. (What? that which is as
plain a Sin as Murder, page 209. which is really as great and as dangerous a
Sin, as Murder; and in some respects aggravated beyond it, Preface p. 45.) And
yet on the other hand, would you have them conform to you, though against their
Consciences? Would that be no Sin? Would God be welpleased with such Service,
as was done but to please Men, while their Consciences (in the mean while)
condemned them for it? Can you say bona Fide, that it is better, more pleasing
to God, that Men conform to your Modes and Ceremonies, though they have real
Doubts of Conscience, that they are unlawful; or better, they should live
without God's public Worship and Ordinances, then to join with such as the
Non-conformists? That this is as the Sin of Murder! Dare you go, or send to all
the Dissenters in your Parish (supposing you take them to belong to your
Charge) and give 'm it under your hand, that though they are still unsatisfied,
(after all you have said and written) though they believe, they should offend
God, if they joined with you upon such Terms; yet I say, durst you give it
under your hand, that they would do better to join in your way of Worship, than
in that of the Non-conformists; though they have no more doubt of joining with
the latter, than you had heretofore? If you are clear in the Point, have you
done this? Or why do you neglect your Duty toward them? Why do you not
endeavor to bring them in, or lay the Sin at their Door? But I observe, you
would have Care taken, ( Preface p. 86.) that there be No Pretense left for
idle, loose, and profane Persons, never going to any Church at all; whence I
conclude, that you cannot but allow it, that such as are not satisfied to join
with you, yet ought to join in God's Worship elsewhere: and that in your
serious Thoughts you judge it better for Persons to join with Congregations,
that hold Communion in your way of Worship unlawful (for of such you are
speaking in that place) than to be of no Christian Society, than not to attend
at all on God's Worship.

Here, if you would not be offended, I shall tell you, what a plain Christian,
a Neighbor of mine, said of you; I can remember, I have seen him at the
Sacrament with some of you, (abov^ 20 Years ago) and would he now have poor,
hungry Souls deprived of such Ordinancees and Means of Grace, that cannot be
satisfied to partake of them in his Way? If any were a Cause of depriving so
many thousands of their bodily Food, as he would have deprived of Food for
their Souls, what would the World say of such? Whereby he seemed to think your
Sin as great, as Murder, and in some respects, aggravated beyond it. (As he may
likewise think, the Sin of those that care not unnecessarily to offend others,
or would cause them to offend, to be a kind of Murder, in the Apostles Account,
Romans 14. 15. -- Now walk thou not charitably? Destroy not him with thy meat
for whom Christ died.) Such was the honest Man's Zeal, he would have written to
you, to put it to your Conscience, (as he said) but I thought this Intimation
from him sufficient.

3. I find you so kind, or just, you help such to Ministers, those that cannot
conform. Irenic. p. 42, you say, It belongs to the Magistrate, To see that
Ministers preach the true Doctrine, though he cannot lawfully forbid the true
Doctrine to be taught; and that they duly administer the Sacraments, though he
cannot command them to administer them otherwise than Christ has delivered
them down to us. (And that Christ did not deliver the Sign of the Cross down to
us with Baptism, I suppose the highest Conformists will grant.) This gives some
Hopes, such may lawfully preach still, whom others cannot lawfully forbid
Preaching. And you tell us from another ( Unreasonableness of Separation, page
7.) that Cranmer held himself for a Archbishop still, and was by Q. Marry
forcibly restrained from it. -- Latimer though he renounced his Bishopric, yet
he kept his Ministry, and never repented him of it. And Ibid. p. 132. you say,
The Question is not, whether all public Worship be sinful, when forbidden?
(which you never said, or thought, as you tell us in the same Page) -- I abhor
and detest such Principles, as to set up Man's Laws above God's. This is good.
And you seem to allow, that such public Worship, as has no Evil in it,
antecedent to the Prohibition, may not be forbidden. Very good still. All the
Question here is, Whether there be not Schism in it? For I hope, you shall
never find Idolatry or Sedition in that Worship, I would plead for. Now as for
the Charge of Schism, do but allow Ministers equal Favor with others, and you
have said enough to clear them, Iren. p. 113, 116, 119, 120. Charge not them
with Schism upon account of their distinct Meetings, who are driven into them
by your over-rigorours Impositions. You know well how great a matter this
imposing unlawful Conditions is with Chillingworth, to warrant Separation. How
often he is upon it, in Chap. 5. where p. 267. ^. 40. he has the confidence to
tell his Adversary, You mistake in thinking that Protestants hold themseves
obliged not to communicate with you only, or principally by reason of your
Errors and Corruptions. For the true Reason (according to my third Observation)
is not so much because you maintain Errors and Corruptions, as because you
impose them, etc. (like your pleading for Non-conformists, Irenic. p. 118.) So
Ball of Separation, page 159. The Lord needs not Man's lie, neither does he
allow us to do Evil that Good may come thereof: And therefore I must not
subscribe to an Error against Conscience, though never so innocent, nor profess
Approbation of that which in Conscience I cannot allow, though never so small,
etc. But thus are many Ministers driven from you, who neither dare lay down
their Ministry, nor take the charge of Parochial Congregations on them, upon
such hard, that is, sinful Terms. For (to borrow an Expression of Dr. Potter's)
Though in the issue the Errors be not damnable to them, which believe as they
profess, yet for us to profess, etc. what we believe not, were without question
damnable.

Now may I come in with my Conclusion: It is this.

Conclusion 1. It becomes unavoidable necessary for such Ministers and
Christians as cannot in Conscience submit to your Terms, and conform to your
way of Worship, neither may lawfully lay aside their Ministry, nor live without
God's Worship and Ordinances, to be for other Assemblies than yours, where the
one may exercise their Ministry, and the other (with such Ministers) may
partake of God's Ordinances, and join in his Worship, which you call setting up
of new Churches. After the drawing up of this, looking into Corbet of
Church-Unity and Schism, I find something to this purpose, page 31, 32. Though
indeed I took my Hints from you here.

Now because I would not leave this Proposition so naked, as yours stands, I
shall here offer something, 1. On the behalf of Ministers. 2. On the behalf of
private Christians

1. On the behalf of such Ministers.

1. You cannot deny, but the Ministers, who are forced to stand off from you,
were (at least very many of them) duly qualified for, and had a sufficient,
valid call to the Office of the Ministry, that they were God's Ministers,
Christ's Ministers, before their Ejection. You cannot deny, but the mediate
Call is from God, and Christ, even as well as the immediate Call was. Those two
Texts, Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 12. 28. (to name no more) fully prove it.

2. Though it is not questioned by us, but the Clergy is under the Jurisdiction
of the Prince, Ministers (as well as others) under the Civil Magistrate, and
that they may ( where there is just Cause) by him be deprived of their public
Liberty, and may be imprisoned, banished, put to death; yet without just Cause
(as Maladministration, or matter of Scandal, rendering them unfit, to use your
own Words) no Power on Earth (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical) may turn those
out of the Ministry, whom God has called to it. Rulers, Bishops may neither
put in, nor put out of this Office, as they list. Men may neither admit into,
nor put from the Ministry, merely at their their own Pleasure, but only
according to Christ's Will and Appointment. For his Officers and Servants they
are. And Christ has, by his Apostles (whose Authority is certainly Superior to
that of the greatest Bishops and Councils that ever were) described the Office,
and how Persons are to be qualified for it. And when such have been called to
the Office, while they give no just Cause for Suspension and Degradation,
Christ looks on them as his Ministers still, and accordingly his Will is that
Men own them as such. And they that despise them, may therein ^ in a Degree) be
guilty of despising Christ. Chemnitius (Loc. com. par. 3. p. 136. col. 1.)
speaks fully to the purpose, thus; As God alone properly claims to himself the
Right of Calling, even when the Call is mediate; so also properly it belongs to
God ^o remove one from the Ministry. Therefore so long as God suffers in the
Ministry his Servant teaching rightly, and living blamelesly, Ecclesia non
habet Potestatem alienum Servum amovendi, The Church has no Power (Authority)
of putting away another's Servant. But when be no further edifies either by his
Doctrine, or Life, but destroys the Church, then God himself removes him.

3. If what you have said formerly (remarked in Rector of Sutton, p. 29.) hold
true, (and you have not hitherto disproved the same) then you must yield, the
present Nonconformist Ministers have not been suspended, and cast out for any
just Cause. And may I not also add, If Clement say true, as you cite him here,
( Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 314, 315.) Those therefore who were
appointed by them, or other eminent Men, the whole Church being therewith
wel-pleased, discharging their Office with Humility, Quietness, Readiness, and
Unblameableness, and being Men of a long time of good Report, we think such Men
cannot justly be cast out of their Office. Though in the heat of Disputation,
your Opinion seems to be changed of Persons, as well as Things; yet I hope in
cool Blood you would not deny, but such a Character agrees to many
Non-conformists; that you should think, they cannot justly be cast out of
Office. And I doubt not, but you are well acqainted with that old Canon, That
no Bishop or Priest should be taken into another's Place, if the former were
blameless.

4. If still they are in Office, as Ministers of Christ, are they not obliged
to serve him in that Office, as they have a Call and Opportunity? (See again
Rector of Sutton, page 29, 34, 75.) They must not neglect the Gift that is in
them. Sad was the Doom of the unprofitable Servant, that buried his Talent! The
Teacher must wait on Teaching. I suppose, all Christ's Ministers are concerned
in that solemn Charge, 2. Tim. 4. 1, 2. And they are to take heed to the
Ministry, which they have received; even though Men forbid them. You abhor and
detest such Principles, as to set Man's Laws above God's Laws. And though they
be threatened with Persecution for it; when they are persecuted in one City,
they may flee to another, Mat. 10. 23. Yet must they not run away from their
Work, but be carrying that on in other Places, where they come, according to
their Ability and Opportunity. Prudence directed them, Ioh. 20. 19. to meet
privately there, at Evening, keeping the Door shut, for fear of the Jews; yet
meet they would. If Ministers be driven from their former Flocks, yet are they
Men in Office, and preach as such, not only as gifted Men, in what other place
soever God (by his Providence) calls them to bestow their Pains. They are
Teachers by Office, to more than their proper Charges, even to as many as they
have a Providential Call, hic and nunc, to preach unto.

So it appears, Men cannot lawfully silence Christ's Ministers, without just
Cause; or if they do, that such Decree and Sentence does not oblige Conscience.
I have it from Mr. B. Church History, p. 446, 447. The Dominican Inquisitor
that reasoned the matter with the Bohemians, would have silenced,
excommunicated Priests bound to cease preaching: but had the wit to add [if
silenced for a reasonable Cause,] and to confess, Sententia injuste lata a suo
judice, si Errorem inducat, vel Peccatum mortale afferet, nec timenda est, nec
tenenda. The old Bohemian Reformers held, (as Ibid. p. 446.) Every Priest and
Deacon is bound to preach God's Word freely, or he sins mortally; and after
Ordination he should not cease, no, not when excommunicated, because he must
obey God rather than Man. I see in Carranza (fol. 437.) It was one of the
Articles, for which the Council of Constance sentenced I. Wickliffe's Bones to
be dug up and burnt, ( Art. 13.) They that leave off to preach, or hear
God's Word for Men's Excommunication, are excommunicate: And you (that have
greater store of Authors, and choice Books, then such as I must ever hope to
have the Advantage of^ you, I say) I doubt not have, what others add; they are
excommunicate, and in the day of Judgment shall be judged Traitors to Christ.
And these were among the Articles, for which I. Husse was condemned, Carranza,
^ol. 440. Art. 17, 18. A Priest of Christ living according to his Law, and
having the Knowledge of the Scripture, and a working to edify the People, ought
to preach notwithstanding any pretended Excommunication. And, every one that
comes to the Office of a Pri^st, has a Command to preach, and ought to obey
that Command, notwithstanding Excommunication. And these you know were before
our oldest Non-conformists.

5. But now (Sir) that I may come home to you: If Ministers were bound to cease
preaching, to lay aside their Ministry, when silenced unjustly, then at what a
miserable Loss might the Church be left? And if you could scarce satisfy your
selves to see her at such a loss, we may very well hope, Christ would not have
her left at such a Loss. His care of his Church (no doubt) is greater than
yours would be.

Because you seem not to take any notice of what I said, ( Rect. of Sutton, p.
28.) give me leave here to mind you of it again. What a woeful Case the Church
was in, if she might be deprived of all, or the greatest and soundest part of
her Ministers at Man's pleasure? And further, page 43. I put a Case, showing
that if what you would have, be admitted, it might fare a great deal the worse
with the Church under Orthodox Bishops, (and Governors) than if they were
grand Heretics. But to come to the Point I aim at; You know when almost two
thousand Ministers were cut off from their public Ministerial Work (as it
were) in one day, by a Law of Conformity. Now let us suppose the Minds of
Rulers to change (which is not naturally impossible) and put the case that your
Conformity should be made as great a Crime, as Nonconformity has been, and
yet, the true Religion acknowledged, and the true Doctrine of Faith owned, (as
you say here, page 148. ^. 6.) Though I find Mr. Phil. Nigh, (who is a very
considerable Person with you, Preface, p. 27.) In his Beams of Light, page 192.
saying, Let the same Impositions and Penalties be put into the other Scale,
against Epis^pacy and Ceremonies: If the Law had said, it shall be the loss of
a Man's living to practice or preach for Episcopacy, Common Prayer Book, or
Ceremonies; these things even in their own Opinions would have been light as
Vanity, (p. 193.) Yet for what you say, Preface, p. 89. I am to suppose, he was
under a mistake. For we must not think (as you tell us there) that the Friends
of the Church of England will be either afraid, or ashamed to own her Cause, --
or that you will give up the Cause of the Church, -- so as to condemn its
Constitution, or make the Ceremonies unlawful, which have been hitherto
observed and practiced in it. Now suppose ye were all outed of your Livings,
because ye could not, or would not declare your Assent and Consent to the utter
abolishing of such things; I besee^h you, tell us sincerely, what you would do
in such a Case, and would have others of your Brethren to do? Do you judge it
the Duty of Pastors to go on in passing a just Censure (though against the Will
of the Magistrate, as I urged you with it, Rector of Sutton, p. 76.) and yet
would you wholly lay aside the Office of the Ministry, and preach the Gospel no
more, rather than c^oss his Will? Would ye think your selves no more concerned
to endeavor to keep up the Exercise of true Religion (as you might) when it
was against the Will of the Magistrate? If only such as the Non-conformists
were in place, you would be forced to confess, that, The true Religion was yet
maintained and preached in public Assemblies, (as page 136.) And that there
was an Agreement in all the Substantials of Religion, between you and them; and
therefore (according to your arguing, page 132.) you could not exercise (though
more privately) when turned out of your Livings, but such Faults as Sedition,
or Schism, etc. would be found in your Meetings. Make the Case of Dissenters
your own, suppose your selves in the like Circumstances, and I doubt not, you
will see cause to judge more favorably of them. Do but allow them to do, as you
would do your selves in the like Case, and I hope, this Dispute will soon be at
an End.

Here I shall take off all you say to that Question I proposed, Rector of
Sutton, p. 26. And may it not be a Question, whether they can properly be said
to erect New Churches, or to proceed to the forming of separate Congregations,
who were true Ministers, and had their Congregations before others came into
their places? If they had done nothing ( N. B.) worthy of Ejection, or
Exclusion from their Ministry, whether they have not still a Right to exercise
their Function? etc. You migh have done well to have joined my Tenth Query
(page 3.) with it, and to have considered both together. But what say you to
this? Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 137. There is not one word in all this
Plea, but might have equally served the Papists in the beginning of the
Reformation. How Sir! Are you in good earnest? Not one word but might equally
have served the Papists? Why, certainly you wrote in haste, and forgot your
self; or else it is your Judgment, that the Popish Bishops and Priests had done
nothing worthy of Ejection, or Exclusion from their Offices, that they had
still a Right to exercise their Functions. And yet you argue it, ( Rational
Account, page 379.) that they were justly deprived. How can these things stand
together? They had done nothing worthy of Ejection, and yet were justly
deprived. You seem to have a great Conceit of this poor Shift; we had it but a
Page or two before, page 135. The Papists then had the very same Plea, that
these Men have now. So you must say, and argue thus, The Ministers of
Antichrist (and those such as were State-Incendiaries too) might justly be cast
out by Law; ergo, so may true Ministers of Christ, (though peaceable, and
loyal.) I grant the Antecedent, but do you prove the Consequent.

But what have you further to say to me? For indeed what you have yet said
here, is worse than nothing. But in what follows, the Reader may think, you had
a good mind to pay me home. For the Law signifies nothing with them in any
Case, where themselves are concerned. If Ministers be ejected without or
against Law, they who come into their place are no Usurpers; and if they are
cast out by Law, they that succeed them are Usurpers; so that the Law is always
the least thing in their Consideration.

Now I thank you for this. But is there here no sharp Reflection? Do you not
here bewray some undecent Passion, which you so condemn others for? Are not
these things invidiously spoken? Would you not here be raking into old Sores,
etc. contrary to what you say in your Preface, p. 44, 45? But did you think to
pinch me here, who never was in a sequestered Living, nor my predecessor before
me; but came in upon the choice of the People, none opposing? You thought to
give us a dry Blow here, never considering that it would reach as many, if not
more Conformists; though it could not once touch him, you seem especially to
direct it to.

(...) thus far of Ministers exercising, though silenced, if silenced for no
(...). Now,

II. To say something on the behalf of the People that hear them.

1. They are under an Obligation to worship God in Society with other
Christians, with respect to God's Glory, and their own Edification, and
Salvation. They are charged, not to forsake the assembling of themselves
together. And commanded to be swift to hear.

2. The way is blockt up so, as many cannot come to your Assemblies, unless (to
use your own Phrase) you would have them damn their Souls by sinning against
their Consciences. And if you judge it better for such to want the ordinary
means of Salvation, than to enjoy them, by joining with Non-conformists, we
must take you to be no more infallible herein, than that Popish Council, that
decreed it righter to remain without visible Communion, than to have it with
those they call Heretics.

3. Some (though they could dispense with the Liturgy and Ceremonies, yet)
cannot satisfy themselves to take up under some Parish-Ministers, who are
apparently no way qualified for the work they take upon them. I take the 9th
Canon of the Council of Nice, to be for nulling the Ordination of such as are
scandalous, or insufficient. You are not for the People's choosing their
Pastors; but it is evident and undeniable, that they are to refuse some. Beware
of false Prophets. Beware of them, i. e. fly from their Communion, and have
nothing to do with them (as you say, p. 215.) They are to flee from Corrupt
Teachers, as from Wolves. As the People forsook Photinus, of whom Vincent
Lyrinen (adv. haeres. c. 16. p. 42.) says, Nam quem antea quasi arietem Gregis
sequebantur, eundem deinceps veluti Lupum fugere caeperunt, (which you have
also noted, Irenic. p. 115.) Some are blind Guides. And may not People very
well be startled with what Christ says concerning such? If the Blind lead the
Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch. And have you forgotten, or have you
retracted that, in Answer to Several Treatises, p. 265. (cited in Rector of
Sutton p. 61.) Men may have reason to question, if not the Skill, yet the
Sincerity of their Guides, and though they must have some, may seek new ones.
-- The ignorant follow their Guides only upon the opinion of their Skill and
Integrity* and when they see reason to question these, they know of no
Obligation to follow their Conduct over Rocks and Precipices. And yet is it now
a loose Principle? some the People are to mark and avoid, Romans 16. 17. some
they must not bid God speed, 2 John v. 10, 11. There are three Cases, (you say
Vnreas. of Sep. p. 213.) wherein the Scripture allows of Separation. The
second, is ( p. 214.) In case of false Doctrine being imposed instead of true.
-- If any Teachers offer to bring another Gospel, or to corrupt the true one,
St. Paul denounces an Anathema against them: and that implies, that they should
have no Communion with them, etc. Now do you not here make the People Judges of
such Heretical Teachers, whom (I suppose) by an Ironie you call admirable
Judges? p. 123. Yet for them to own and encourage such, is to partake of their
Evil Deeds. If Mr. B. says, as you have it there, [ Any one whose Ministry is
such as tends to Destruction more than to Edification, and to do more harm
than good, is not to be owned;] I wonder what you have to say for such, when
better may be had? Camero speaks to the same purpose, as Mr. B. ( page 327.
col. 1.) Si non faciant quod spondet tanti Muneris professio deserendi sunt,
nam parendum Deo potius quam Hominibus; ut siquis Medicinam professus, etc. If
any one having professed Physic, should not cure, but exasperate the Disease,
truly he should be forsaken, and another is to be chosen in his room. And what
Peter Martyr says, ( Loc. com. p. 909.. 33.) may fitly be applied here, Vexant
praeterea nos, quod non publica sed privata discesserimus Authoritate, neque,
considerant, Deum cuique, mandasse, ut propriam salutem curet. This you cannot
deny, but God has commanded every one to have a care of his Soul, and that Men
are not bound to lesser Societies (as to their own Parishes, or
Parish-Ministers,) but so far as may stand with promoting the Salvation of
their own Souls.

Who could speak more fully than you have done, Rational Account, p. 611. The
main thing to be discussed, is, Whether the Communion of your Church or ours,
be rather to be chosen in order to Salvation? -- The tendency to that ought to
be the Rule, by which we should embrace or continue in the Society of any
Church. Since the Regard Men ought to have of their eternal Welfare does oblige
them to make choice of the best means; -- the bare remote possibility of
Salvation,^ ought to have no force in determining their Choice in a matter of
so great Importance.

4. Many have not the least Doubt, or Scruple, but those Ministers which you
would not have them to hear, are such as God has owned, and still does,
blessing their Ministry to their own, and others Souls Benefit. Many are well
assured, The Lord has not yet forsaken that Ministry, you would have them
forsake. Yea, I have spoken with some on their Deathbed, who have sadly
bewailed it as a great Sin of theirs, that lay as an heavy Burden on them,
(and we use to say, Hora mortis est hora Veritatis) That they had despised, and
neglected the Ministry of such. But it seems, had they made their Complaints to
you, you could soon have satisfied them, telling them, It was no Sin at all;
but they had done well, in refusing to hear such, as submitted not to the
Orders of the Church. Though perhaps they would have thought it very strange,
that you could have allowed them to hear Romish Priests, and yet should suppose
it unlawful for them to hear Non-conformists.

5. These would also wonder, if you your self should at all question such
Ministers being true Ministers of Christ, and that Worship (wherein they join)
being true Religious Worship; they are confident you could not but acknowledge
the truth of both these, did but the Law of Man allow them. And then for ought
they know, they are such in themselves, and in God's Account. For no Law of Man
could make that to be true, religious Worship, which is not so, abstracted from
the Consideration of the Law's Allowance. No Law of Man could make those to be
true Ministers of Christ, who are not such, or would otherwise be none.

6. Because I suppose, you will be ready to object here, How is it possible for
Order to be kept up, if People may run after what Teachers they please? I
desire you to do me right; I am only for their hearing such as they have reason
to believe are allowed of God, whom therefore Men should allow to preach the
Word. And where the publicly allowed Minister is not such a one, they are not
bound (for order-sake) to neglect other faithful and sound Teachers, and
therein also to neglect their own Souls. There is no Order Men can make in the
Church, that should be urged, or stood upon against the end of Order, against
the Honor of God, against Religion, and the true Service and Worship of God,
and against the Salvation of Men, and the ordinary means thereof. And if the
Sabbath was made for Man, (as Mar. 2. 27.) and therefore was not to be turned
to his Destruction; much less should any human, external Order be strictly
urged and pressed to Men's Destruction. Bishop Bilson (Christian Subject, part
3 p. 299. An. 1586.) speaking to that, [ We would have things done in order]
returns this smart- Answer, Call you that Order, where Christ shall stand
without doors, till your Clergy consent to bring him in? Though according to
the order of Nature, light Bodies move upwards, and heavy Bodies tend downwards
in their ordinary Course; yet (which Camero applies to a like case, p. 581.
col. 1.. 2.) this very order of Nature is inverted, Ne detur vacuum. Here I
call to mind what you say, ( page 198.) Is Schism indeed become such an
inconsiderable and petty Inconvenience? And methinks, that Inconvenience, the
Breach of external Order (which with you is Schism) is a far less Evil, if it
be Evil in this case, compared with the Mischief of Men's destroying their own
Souls, or neglecting the means of their Salvation. There is an higher Law,
which (to use the words of Camero) Ordinem deserere jubet ut extremo malo and
irreparabili jacturae occurratur, etc. And qui tam justa and urgente occasion
ordniem deserit, reipsa non deserit, sed servat. And that Instance he gives
there is convincing, If a Soldier knew his Captain, his Leader, was for
opening the Gates to the Enemy, and yet followed such a Leader, keeping Rank
and Order so unseasonably, he would show himself a Traitor, rather than a
faithful Soldier.

The Disciples would seem to have been for Order there (as you are) when they
were hindering Christ's Service, Mar. 9. 38. Luke 9. 49. Master, we saw one
casting out Devils in thy name, -- and we forbad him, because he follows not
us. Now I heartily wish, even for your own sake, from that true and due Respect
I owe to you, that you would more impartially examine what you have been doing,
and reflect upon your self; consider seriously, whether you are not forbidding,
and condemning some, as faithful Followers of Christ as your self, even in
their serving Christ, and serving their Generation? What are your Thoughts of
such, as Iospeh and Richard Alleyn, with diverse others that might be named, who
kept to their ministerial Work, and (as you say of Father Latimer) never
repented them of it? If now they have that Well-come home, Well done good and
faithful Servants, enter into the Joy of your Lord.] How far are they above all
your Censures? And methinks, it deserves Men's serious Consideration, whether
they pray as they ought [ Thy Kingdom come] or whether indeed they act not
against their own Prayers, who endeavor to hinder the preaching of the Gospel,
(a means of enlarging and building up God's Kingdom?) And as you declare to the
World, (p. 394.) you are one that believes a day of Judgment to come, (which I
would not once question) I beseech you, Sir, think well of what that well
disposed Gentleman (as you call him) says, (I think gravely and piously) Letter
out of the Country, page 38, 39.) Let us bring the Cause before our Supreme and
Final Judge. And bethink your self whether of these two things he will be most
likely to have regard unto, the saving of Souls, which He bought with his
Blood; or the preserving inviolate certain Humane Institutions and Rules,
confessed by the Devisers of them, not to be necessary, etc. And so much of
your first Conclusion, and mine.

Your second Conclusion follows, Preface, p. 73.

2. Those are new Churches, when Men erect distinct Societies for Worship,
under distinct and peculiar Officers, governing by Laws, and Church-Rules
different from that Form they separate from.

Here, 1. I cannot but look on you as very unfortunate, unhappy in this Cause
you have espoused. How often do you greatly expose your self, that what you urge
agianst your Brethren may justly be retorted on you? So here, how plain is it,
that you look but on one side, (which as I remember you suppose those that
differ from you to be faulty in?) Had you not one Thought, that if you owned
such a Conclusion as this, I should be likely to tell you, you had spoiled your
Cause, Nihil quod nimis, satis, that by proving too much, you would in effect
prove nothing of that you aim at? Should you not have considered, what an
Argument you here put into the Mouths of the Dissenters against the National
Church of England, against Diocesan Churches, and against Parochial Churches
too?

1. Will not many be ready to tell you, that it follows undeniably from this
Conclusion of yours, that you have made the National Church of England, and the
Diocesan Churches therein, New (unlawful) Churches; because under diverse
peculiar Officer, governing by Laws and Church-Rules different from the
Apostolical Primitive Church, (as from other Reformed Churches.) If those are
new, unlawful Schismatical Churches with you, that are under distinct and
peculiar Officers, governing by Laws, and Church-Rules different from the
Apostolical truly Primitive Churches, (as I suppose it must come to that,
Primum in unoquoque genere est Regula and Mensura reliquorum) what work have
you made here? What an heavy Task, and hard Province have you taken on you? Can
you ever prove, that there are no Officers, Laws, Rules and Orders in your
Church, different from what were in the true Primitive Church? Can you ever
find all these Officers, Archbishops; Lord-Bishops, Deans, Chancellors, etc*
down to Apparitors, in the Primitive Church? Will you undertake to find there
all our Ecclesiastical Canons, even Rules for kneeling in the Act of Receiving,
for signing with the Cross in Baptism, for excluding the Parents, and setting
Godfathers and Godmothers in their stead, with a Rule for peculiar,
appropriate Vestments, etc.

To say here, that though you have peculiar Officers, Laws, and Rules,
different from the Apostolical Primitive Church; yet you do not own your selves
to be a Church, separate from that Primitive Church, will not bring you off.
For, this many Dissenters likewise say, they separate not from you, but hold
Communion with you in all that is necessary; and further have more Local,
Presential Communion with you, than you can pretend to have with the Primitive
Church. Yet you will have their Assemblies separate Churches, while they
worship God by any other Rule than yours, though their Worship be as agreeable
to the Scripture-Rule. And yet can you, or any mortal Man prove, that others
may not be allowed to differ from you in such things, wherein you differ from
the Apostolical, primitive Church?

Again, it will as little help you to say, That you speak of particular
Congregations, or Societies for Worship. For,

2. Do you not here make your Parochial Congregations also New Churches? If the
Primitive Church had not your Liturgy, were not bound to the use of your Book
of Common Prayer, then you cannot deny, but you are under a somewhat different
Rule. And are there not some Parishes, that have only Deacons to officiate? And
may I not be bold to tell you, that you can never prove your Deacons the same
with those in the Churches erected by the Apostles? According to P. Paul Sarpi
(of matters Benefic. N. 27.) Deacons were Ministers of temporal things. You
your self say, p. 311. It was no properly Church Power which they had; but they
were Stewards of the common Stock. Then are not Deacons, that are allowed to
preach, and baptize, etc. different Officers? By this time I hope, you will be
sensible, what a Wound you have given to the Cause, you take upon you to
defend, by this Conclusion, which is my first Note upon it.

(2.) At the first view and reading of this your second Conclusion, I was
willing to hope, that then you would not condemn such Assemblies as Mr. B's.
who leave the ruling Work to you, and are glad if they be permitted to preach
and hear God's Word, and do not separate from you, but join with you, even in
Sacraments, as well as other parts of God's Worship. But looking farther into
your Book, I see my Mistake: For you say, page 98. (as was cited before) No Man
denies, that more places for Worship are desirable, and would be very useful,
where etc. But is it possible that Mr. B. should think the Case alike, where
the Orders of our Church are constantly neglected, the Authority of the Bishops
is slighted and contemned? Tac^o caetera.

Now I had thought, you might have granted more places for Worship, not only
desirable, and useful, but very necessary for such as cannot come to yours, as
far as the Apostle makes hearing of the Word necessary, Romans 10. 1^, 17. more
necessary than unnecessary Modes of Worship, or such matters as you count but
indifferent things. But by what is here last cited, it is too plain and
manifest, that you condemn all Religious Assemblies in England, that follow not
your Church-Rule, and own not the Authority of the Bishops. And thus it seems,
where you are zealous in words for Communion, yet Subjection to the Bishops
Authority, is the thing you drive at. And upon this Account, though your
Discourse was calcul^ted chiefly for the City of London, yet it may
ind^fferently serve for all other Places and Meetings in England, where you^
Church-Rules and Orders are not observed and obeyed. As to our grief, we in the
Country have found many of the conformable Clergy, with others, improving your
Authority and Arguments as far as they are able, even against such Assemblies,
as meet off from the times of the Paro^hi^l Congregations meeting, that they
might not be censured to meet in opposition. These are s^parate Meetings with
you, as well as others; because the Orders of the Church are neglected in them.
But,

(3.) What will you say of those Assemblies, where Christ taught, and the
Disciples likewise whom he sent forth? Did they d^ this, as under the
Inspection and Government of the Rulers that then were? Were they tied up to
the Church-Rules of the Jews in what they did? were they not distinct and
peculiar Officers? Certainly, you mince the matter, when you say, page 163. Our
Savior himself did only Teach his Disciples occasionally, and at c^rtain
Seasons. As if he taught but rarely, or seldom. And as if he was c^ntent with
his Disciples only to be his Hearers. (As you would have the silenced Ministers
think it enough, if they have three or four besides the Family.) whereas we
read of Christ's teaching the Multitude, and of the Multitude pressing upon him
to hear. And when he sent forth the Tw^lve, M^t. 1^. preaching was a good part
of their Work. And the Miracles they w^ought, were to seal and confirm their
Doctrine. So the Seventy, ( Luke 10.) were to t^^ch. So much is implied, ver.
16. He that hears you, hearet^ me; and he that despises you, despises me,
etc. Now what will you make of them, and their Hearers? Here were distinct and
peculiar Teachers, not under the Government of the Jewish Church-Rulers: Then,
were they new (unlawful) Churches? I know you will not say i^. But if you say
h^re, though they differed in somethings from the Form of the Jewish Church;
yet they did not separate. Well, grant that; yet consider, whether this Example
may not justi^y those, who ordinarily (...) with their ^arochial Congregations,
in hearing Non-conformists at (...) times? And may it not justify those
Nonconformist Ministers, that (...) from the Parochial Congregations? And how
many more (...) but for the five Miles Act, which (...) distinguish betwixt
such, and others (that I can find,) but all are alike to you. Yea, so far are
you from favoring these, that sometimes you would have the Sin of those that
own you for true Churches, and have Communion with you, as f^r as they can, to
be aggravated, and more inexeusable, in having other d^stinct (which you
account s^parat^) Meetings.

Ball against Can (part. 1. p. 82.) Neither did our Savior, nor his Disciples
before his Death, (...) upon them to erect a new visible Church, altogether
distinct from the erring Synagogue, but lived in that Church, and frequented
the Ordinanc^s, neither as absolute Members of the Synagogue, nor yet as the
visible Church distinct from it: But as visi^le Members of that primitive
Church, from which that Synagogue had degenerated.

I find you so hard, and u^yielding in this Controvers^, I should be glad, if
you would grant a little here, (which I wonder how you can so stiffly deny) in
hopes of more in time.

(4.) As you know our Reformers pleaded, that (in their departure from Rome)
they forsook not the Church, but approached nearer to the Catholic, an^
Primitive church (as P. Martyr Loc. Com. p. 915.) So those Christian
Assemblies, you censure as new (unlawful) Churches, because not under you^
Rule, suppose you have censured them rashly here, if in their Worship they are
nearer the Scripture-Rule. And truly (Sir) you speak so home, and fully to the
purpose ( Rational Acc^unt, p. 356, 357.) as is quite beyond the power and
r^a^h of my poor Imagination to conceive* how you can ever answer your self.
There you say, Supposing any Church (tho pretending to be never so Catholic)
does restrain her Communion within such narrow and unjust Bounds -- Whatever
Church takes upon her to limit and enclose the bounds of the Catholic, becomes
thereby divided from the Communion of the Catholic Church: and all such who
disown such an unjust enclosure, do not so much divide from the Communion of
that Church so in^losing, as return to the Communion of the Primitive and
Universal Church. How will Dissenters thank you for this? Methinks, I have some
hope that we shall in time be agreed, that we shall have you (who do so clearly
understand and apprehend what Schism there is in any Churches limiting and
enclosing the bounds of the Catholic Church; shall we not have you) again
pleading for Catholic Terms? And you say further, ibid. p. 357. -- The
disowning of those things wherein your Church is become Schismatical, cannot
certainly be any culpable Separation. For, whatever is so, must be from a
Church so far as it is Catholic; but in our case it is from a Church so far
only as it is not Catholic, etc. While such Passages (so greatly befriending
Dissenters, that would gladly close with you upon Cath^^ick Term^) drop from
you at unawares, when you s^arce think of them, wh^t an excellent (...) should
they have of you, it indeed you was minded to undertake their Cause? Yet how
contrary hereunto are you, in your too partial Account, p. 305. where your
Gentleman pinching you with this Question, Can it be proved that Christ (...)
the Guides of this Church -- with a power to make Laws and Decrees, preseribing
not only things necessary for common Order and Decency, but new fed^ral Rites,
and teaching Signs and Symbols, etc. I answer, (say you) that such a Church
has power to appoint Rules of Order and Decency not repugnant to the Word
(which whether this be to the purpose of new fed^r^l Rites, and teaching Signs
and Symbols, will I suppose be further examined) which on that account other
are bound to submit to; and to take such care of its (...) to admit none its
Privileges, but such as do submit to them; (Here you are (...) off from your
Catholic Terms again, and ^or limiting and enclosing the Catholic Church) and
if any disturb the Peace of this Church (and here you do not (...) the most
peaceable Dissenters, that only meet for the Worship of God, and separate no
farther from your Church, than as it is not Catholic: you go on) The Civil
Magistrate may justly inflict Civil Penalties upon them for it. Is this your
Mind, that all that submit not t^ those new federal Rites (as they are
supposed) and teaching Signs and Symbols (spoken of) should be both debarred of
Church Priviledges, and laid under Civil Penalties, as disturbers of the
Churches P^ace? Then I cannot but wish that Governors may have more Moderation
and Clemency, or poor Dissenters more Faith and Patience, than you show
Christian Charity herein.

But if they are as near the Primitive Church, and as much in Communion with
the Catholic Church as you are; yea, and in Communion with you still, so sar
as you are Catholic, what great reason can you have so severely to condemn
them? I hope the Doctrine of the Non-conformists generally is sound, their
Worship agreeable to the Word. The only Question then remaining seems to be; By
what Authority they do these things? And who gave them Authority? Now it is
true, they cannot pretend Authority from the Bishops: but if they can prove,
they have Authority from Christ, is not that sufficient? If he has called them
to the work of the Ministry, and commands them to be diligent and faithful in
it (according to their Abilities and Opportunities) me th^nks Men should not
deny their Authority. And whether may not such Societies as you call n^w
Churches, return what you cite ( p. 179, 180.) out of Calvin (Instit. l. 4. c.
1. n 9.) as proving them to be true Churches, They having the Word of God truly
preached, and Sacraments administered acc^rding to Christ's Institution? Now he
says (as you have him) where ever th^se Marks are to be found in particular
Societies, those are true Churches, howsoever they are distributed according to
Humane Conveniences. And therefore if you did not look only on one side, you
might probably see, that you are no more allowed wilfully to separate from
them, than they are from you. And as that Synod of the Reformed Churches in
France, at Charenton, A. D. 1631. declared (as you have it p. 186.) That there
was no Idolatry, or Superstition in the Lutheran Churches; and therefore the
Members of their Churches might be received into Communion with them, without
renouncing their own Opinions or Practices: So why might not the
Non-conformists, and their Hearers be taken into, or acknowledged in Communion
with the Church of England, without renouncing their Opinions or Practices,
they being certainly as far from Idolatry or Superstition, as any of the
Lutheran Churches. As the Helvetian Churches (with you, p. 187) declare; That
no Separation ought to be made for different Rites and Ceremonies, where there
is an Agreement in Doctrine: and the true Concord of Churches lies in the
Doctrine of Christ, and the Sacraments delivered by him: Even so because the
Non-Conformists consent with you in Doctrine, do not break them off from your
Communion, for their difference about Ceremonies.

May not several Churches differ in Modes and Forms of Worship, and yet have
Communion with one another? Some Difference you cannot but grant betwixt your
Cathedral Service, and that in common Country Churches. p. 146, 147. You will
not say, the Churches in other Nations, that have not the same Rule with you,
are Schismatics. No, not though such came over into England, and lived among
you. And what if the old Liturgy, and that new one (which you cannot but
remember the compiling of, and presenting to the Bishops, at the Savoy 1661.)
had both passed, and been allowed, for Ministers to use, as they judged most
convenient, might not several Ministers and Congregations in this case have
used different Modes of Worship, without Breach of the Churches Peace, or
counting each other Schismatics? Would you have called those, new separate
Churches, that made use of the new reformed Liturgy? And what if a Dutch Church
was in your Parish? Would you disclaim Communion with them, because they had
some Rules and Orders different from yours? And what if diverse of your Parish,
living near it, should join with that Congregation, would you thence conclude,
that they erected a new separate Church? And, as the Canon 1640. speaks of
bowing toward the East or Altar, That they which use this Rite should not
despise them which use it not, etc. if now our King and Parliament (like true
Catholic Moderators) should put forth an Henoticum, make an healing Law,
enjoining Conformists and Non-conformists, that agree in the same Faith and
Worship for Substance, to attend peacably on their Ministry, and serve God and
his Church the best they can, whether they use the Liturgy and Ceremonies, or
no, without uncharitable Censures, and bitter Reflections upon one another,
either in Word, or Writing; would you yet say, that the Non-conformists
Assemblies (not following your Rules and Orders) were no other than new
separate Churches?

(5.) I know no Laws, nor Ecclesiastical Canons, that the present
Non-conformists have made. And non-entis nulla sunt praedicata. But if your
meaning be, that it is enough to prove them New Churches, that they come not up
to your Laws, and Church-Rules, and therefore are so (...) as they conform not
to you, I would argue thus:

Either Conformity in all things to your Church-Rules is necessary to Communion
with the Church of England, and to cut off the charge of being of a New church,
or not*

If Conformity in all things be not necessary here, why may not sober
Dissenters, that own the Church of England for a true Church, and profess the
same Faith, and worship God in no other manner, than according to the Liturgy
and Practice of the Church of England, (as you say, p. 160. Mr. B. declared in
writing, and as I told you a good Lawyer pleads, Rector of Sutton, p. 26, and
50.) I say, why may not such be owned as in Communion with the Church of
England? Why do you charge them with erecting new separate Churches, merely
because they differ from you in some alterable Circumstances, and separable
Accidents, not necessary to Churches Concord and Communion? I see, you dare not
say, that those things wherein they differ from you are any parts of Worship;
So they are of the same Faith, and agree with you in all parts of Worship. And
is not all this (with their owning themselves to be be of the Church of
England, so far as it is Catholic) a bidding fair for your Reception of them,
and acknowledging them still in Communion with you? And then why have you so
many words of such being no good Christians, because Members of no Church? (as
page 104, 105, 110. f.) If Conformity in all things to your Church-Rules be not
necessary, pray tell us what is necessary, and what not: what things may be
dispensed with, and what not. Rector of Sutton, p. 27. n. 9. You were put in
mind of it to inquire, whether there be not some in public Place, (not very
well satisfied with what they have done) who come not up to your Church-Rules?
As, some read not all the Common-Pr^yer they are enjoined to read, and yet had
declared their Ass^nt and Consent to the use (at least) as you would have it.
Some use not the Surplice, some omit the Cross in Baptism; some dare not put
away from the Sacrament any, merely for not kneeling. And yet you charge not
such with Schism, ( page 148. n. 5.) yet have they different Rules, or at
least, they differ from your Rules, as well as Non-conformists. And I know not
whether you may not be understood to allow Men to go from their Parish Church (
page 145. n. 1.) provided they elsewhere join with your Churches, as Members of
them. What then is the parting Point from the Communion of your Church, or the
trying Point of Conformity, without which a New Church is erected? Here I offer
this Note upon what you say farther, page 148. n. 5. That many whom you
condemn, though not satisfied with such and such Orders of the Church, yet
continue in all Acts of Communion with your Church, (or in all that you will
call parts of Worship) and draw not others from it, upon any mere Pretense, no,
not at all; though they dare not but join at other times with Non-conformists,
in that which they are well assured is as truly God's Worship, and if they say,
in some Respects more pure, you have not yet disproved it. And therefore you
should make good your word there, and not charge such with Schism.

Or if you should say, Conformity in all things to your Church-Rules is
necessary, that if Men differ never so little from those Rules, it is to erect
new Churches, what woeful rending work would this make? By a Parity of Reason,
may not other foreign Churches be denied to have Communion with the Church of
England? How many that could not submit to these Laws and Rules, without
receding from their own public Confessions? Could the French, and Belgic
Churches assent to the Ius divinum of Episcopacy? could they own it, as evident
to all Men diligently reading the holy Scriptures, to be of Apostolical
Institution? And would not any one that reads the Declaration of the Faith and
Ceremonies of the Psaltzgraves Churches, printed at London A. D. 1637, take
them to have been averse from such Conformity, as the Church of England stands
upon? You glory in the good Opinion of the Reformed Churches, and Protestant
Divines abroad, concerning the Constitution and Orders of our Church: and their
owning Communion with our Church, (page 96, 97.) And you make nothing of what
has been returned by way of Answer to Dr. D. Bonasus Vapulans is but a little
Creature (I confess, to look on) yet some that have read it, do not look on it
as nothing. But if an owning of the Divine, or Apostolical Right of Episcopacy
and Reordination, etc. be made the Terms of their Communion with our Church,
how many Protestant Divines abroad, that would renonuce Communion with us,
rather than be pleased with it upon such Terms?

And further, if Conformity in all things to your Church-Rules be necessary,
etc. How many Parochial Ministers and Congregations (as was noted before) must
be denied to be in Communion with the Church of England, whom for the same
Reason you must call new erected Churches? For as one says (alluding to that)
They who themselves were circumcised, kept not the Law. They who have assented
and consented, observe not the Orders and Rules to which they have given their
Assent, etc. And yet (as you have it from another) The Priests in the Temple
break the Law, and are blameless. Then must you not either acquit many
Dissenters here, or condemn many Conformists?

You see how fain I would have Protestant Dissenters acknowledged still to have
Communion with the Church of England, (if it might be) the difference being not
in such things as belong to it, as a Church. If you took away those things,
which are as the Wall of Partition betwixt you and them, your Churches would be
as sound and entire without them. And if you make them S^hismaticks, for
differing from you in such things, while they agree with you in all things
necessary; whether will you not make your selves, or other Churches (you would
be ashamed to disown) Schismatics, who differ from you in as great Matters, as
such Dissenters do? Here let me press you a little further, Keep to your own
Rule, Preface p. 46. As far as the Obligation to preserve the Church's Peace
extends, so far does the Sin of Schism reach. Then it follows, if the
Obligation to preserve the Church's Peace extends so far as to the Rulers and
Governors of the Church, there may be as much Schism in their setting up
unnecessary Rules, which others cannot submit to, as in Men's varying from such
Rules. P. 209. You argue, From the Obligation which lies upon all Christians,
to preserve the Peace and Unity of the Church. And now (say you) I have brought
the matter home to the Consciences of Men. Had you put the Matter home
indifferently and impartially to the Consciences of Men on both sides; that is,
both of Imposers, and Dissenters, many could not but have thought in their
Consciences, you was to be commended for it. But then, had you not pleaded as
much for Dissenters, as here you plead against them? I must grant, they ought (
for the Peace and Unity of the Church) to yield as far as they can, without
sinning against God, and their own Souls: and should not Imposers do the like?
Were this one Rule agreed on, what Peace and Unity would soon follow? What
Chillingworth (p. 283. 71.) says of Protestants, That they grant their
Communion to all who hold with them, not all things, but things necessary, that
is, such as are in Scripture plainly delivered:] Make this good of the Church
of England, and by my consent, all we (who have unwillingly appeared against
you) will readily and joyfully give you our public Thanks.

What you say further, p. 209. may thus be handed back again to you: If there
be no sufficient Reason to justify such Rules and Orders, if they are a
Violation of the Unity of the Church, you there make it a Sin, as much as
murder is, and as plainly forbidden. And therefore I do earnestly desire (as
you, p. 213.) all Parties concerned, as they love their own Souls, and as they
would avoid the Guilt of so great a Sin, impartially and without prejudice to
consider that Passage of Irenaeus (with you, p. 212.) That Christ will come to
judge those who make Schisms in the Church, and rather regard their own
Advantage, than the Church's Unity, etc. And if any indifferent Men had the
matter put to them to decide, who were more likely to regard their own
Advantage, whether some of you, or such as Mr. B. one might soon guess, what
their Sentence, or Verdict would be. If I seem here, and sometimes elsewhere to
digress a little; yet I think in reason you should overlook it. I would hope
that in time you may be convinced of a greater Digression in the scope of your
late Writings.

(6.) If you, and the Church of England, will not be so favorable toward
those distinct Societies, that are not under your Church-Rules, as to
acknowledge them in Communion with you; yet by what you, and Chillingworth say,
I see not but they may be still in Communion with the Catholic Church, and
Members of it. Knot talks thus to our Reproach, ( Charity maint. part 1. c.
5. 38.) Protestants cannot avoid the note of Schism, at least by reason of
their mutual Separation from one another. For most certain it is, that there is
very great difference -- between the Lutherans, the rigid Calvinists, and the
Protestants of England. But it is observable, what Chillingworth says, p. 255.
Eighthly (to that) That all the Members of the Catholic Church, must of
necessity be united in external Communion.] Which tho it were much to be
desired it were so, yet certainly cannot be perpetually true -- Diverse times it
has happened, as in the case of Chrysostom and Epiphanius, that particular
Men, and particular Churches, have upon an over-valued difference, either
renounced Communion mutually, or one of them separated from the other, and yet
both have continu^d Members of the Catholic Church. Here let us suppose some
unhappy difference to arise among your selves, as if some were for the public
condemning of your Irenicum, some against it; some offended at those Ministers
who appear not as zealous against Dissenters, as you have showed your self, and
others offended as much at you, and them; some taking offense at those that bow
at the word Jesus, or bow toward the Altar, and others taking the like offense
at those who scruple, or forbear such Practice. Suppose now the contention was
carried so high, that the disagreeing Parties refused Communion with one
another hereupon; and if it came to that, I would know which of these should be
the new Church? Or whether both Parties might not yet be in Communion with the
Church of England? And much more, may not the same Catholic Church hold
Conformists, and Protestant Dissenters?

And you give us this Note, Ratinal Account, p. 331. He that s^parates only
from particular Churches as to such things which concern not their Being, is
only separated from the Communion of those Churches, and not the Catholic. Now
will you say, those Rules and Orders, about which all the Difference is betwixt
you, and the Non-conformists, concern the Being of your Church? I doubt you
will never be able to convince many, but the Church of England might be every
jot as well without them.

But if it should happen, that any Error, or Corruption is to be found therein,
then you have more to say for those you here oppose. Ibid. and page 332. which
is therefore more properly a Separation from the Errors, than the Communion of
such a Church. Wherefore if we suppose that there is no one visible Church,
whose Communion is not tainted with some Corruptions, though, if these
Corruptions be enjoined as Conditions of Communion, I cannot communicate with
any of those Churches; yet it follows not that I am s^parated from the external
Communion of the Catholic Chuch, but that I only suspend Communion with those
particular Churches, till I may safely join with them. Which you illustrate
there by a Comparison, where you have these remarkable Words, And if several
other Persons, be of the same mind with me, and we therefore join together; Do
we therefore divide our selves from the whole World by only taking care of our
own Safety? etc.

So Chillingworth speaks as like you as, if one had taken his Hints from the
other, page 298. He is for distiguishing, not confounding these two, departing
from the Church, and departing from some general Opinions and Practices, which
did not constitute, but vitiate the Church. More he has to that purpose. But
that which I would specially note out of him here (to show the Harmony and
Consent betwixt you, which otherwise should have come in before) page 269. A
Man may possibly leave some Opinion, or Practice of a Church (says he) -- and
continue still a Member of that Church: provided that wh^t he forsakes be not
one of those things wherein the Essence of the Church consists. Whereas
peradventure this Practice may be so involved with the external Communion of
this Church, that it may be simply impossible for him to leave this Practice,
and not to leave the Churches external Communion.

I cite such Passages as these, because I would have the World know, and take
notice, what Friends you are sometimes to poor Non-conformists. That if any
should now send an Hue and Cry after them, as after Murderers, you are willing
they should take Sanctuary either in your Church, or in the Church Catholic,
the New Church, your second Conclusion speaks of, being not so safe.

Now my second Conclusion is this.

2. That many of those Societies which you condemn, do not separate from the
Church of England, many of them have ordinary external Communion with you; and
though in their Worship, they do not in all things follow your Church-Rules and
Orders, yet their Worship cannot be proved contrary, but is agreeable to
Scripture-Rule. And as for those, who are not satisfied to go so far, as to
hold external Communion with you, yet having Communion with you in the same
Faith, it were a very desirable thing, that the Bars to their full Communion
with you were removed (if they be such things as are not necessary.) And in the
mean time (possibly) those New Churches are better than no Churches.

And indeed it is matter of wonder to me, if you have no more Charity for such,
have no better Thoughts of them, than of those idle, loose, profane Persons,
that wholly neglect and contemn the Worship of God, that never go to any Church
at all.

I would say more to this, did I not think enough is said already.

Now I come to your last Conclusion.

3. As to things in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches left
undetermined by the Law of God, and in matters of mere Order and Decency, and
wholly as to Form and Government, every one, notwithstanding what his private
Judgment may be of them, is bound for the Peace of the Church of God, to submit
to the Determination of the lawful Governors of the Church.

But would you not lead us here into a Maze, a Labyrinth, without any Clew to
guide us out? Let us now see how Pertinent and Material this is to your purpose.

Here first, I must suppose this Question, viz. How far, or in what things is
every Man bound (whatever his private Judgment be) for the Churches Peace, to
submit to the Determination of the lawful Governors of the Church?

And your Answer is, every one is bound to submit to the Determination of such
(what ever his private Judgment be.)

1. As to things in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches left
undetermined by the Law of God.

2. And in matters of mere Order and Decency.

3. And wholly as to the Form of Government; This I think, you cannot deny to
be the true Analysis of your third Conclusion.

How pertinent this your Resolution is to the case of Dissenters, and how
material to give them Satisfaction, will appear by examining the several Parts.

But first, it is worth nothing, that you speak only of the Determination of
the lawful Governors of the Church. Implying, that Men are not bound to submit
to the Determination of such as may be proved Usurpers, such as are not lawful
Governors of the Church. Then so far you and they may be agreed, that if the
Pope should set up a Patriarch, etc. in England, Men were not bound to submit
to their Determination, till such could be proved lawful Governors of the
Church. And then whether you have fully answered your Gentleman (p. 305.) and
others, and proved that Christ has invested with Power to make such Decrees
and Determinations (as lawful Governors of the Church) those who neverwere
chosen, or approved by the People, is another Question?

But then where lawful Governors of the Church determine, you tell us; (1.)
Every one is bound to submit to their Determination, As to things in the
Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches left undetermined by the Law of
God.

Here 1. You should have told us, whether by the Primitive Churches you meant
the primo-primitive Churches, or only such Ancient Churches, as those of the
fourth, or fifth Age. One would guess that these latter are your Primitive
Churches. Now in my Thoughts King James was quite beyond the Cardinal, and got
the upper Ground, (In Defense of the Right of Kings, p. 398.) where the
Cardinal arguing, that a Doctrine believed and practiced in the Church, in the
continual Current of the last Eleven Hundred Years, was not to be condemned.]
His Majesty replied; In these Words he makes a secret Confession, that in the
first five hundred Years, the same Doctrine was neither apprehended by Faith,
nor approved by Practice. Wherein to my understanding, the Lord Cardinal
voluntarily gives over the Suit; for the Church in the time of the Apostles,
their Disciples, -- was no more ignorant what Authority the Church is to
challenge, -- than at any time since in any succeeding Age, in which as Pride
has still flowed to the height of a full Sea, so Purity of Religion and
Manners has kept for the most part at a low Water-mark.

You should have told us also what Reformed Churches you meant, whether all, or
only some of them? And if but some, whether those that only took the Scripture,
as their Rule in reforming; or those that took in the Example and Practice of
some of those Ancient Churches, together with it?

2. What are those things, that in the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed
Churches are left undetermined by the Law of God; besides matters of mere Order
and Decency, and what relates to Form of Government?

3. Can this be a safe and sure Rule? When you grant the Church may err, and
general Councils may err; may they not then judge some things left undetermined
by the Word, that are not s^ left? Chillingworth grants, there may be just and
nec^ssary Cause to depart from some Opinions and Practices of the Cath^lick
Church (p. 298.) And you say partly the same in your Rational Account (page
331, 332.) Those Errors in practice, in the Judgment of the Church, may be such
things as are left undetermined by the Word, when yet others are not bound to
submit to them. You tell us, Rational Account, p. 627. The matter to be
enquired here is, what Liberty of Prescription is allowed by virtue of the Law
of Christ; for since he has made Laws to govern his Church by, it is most
sensl^ss pleading Prescription, till you have particularly examined, how far
such Prescription is allowed by him. So then it is not enough to say, in the
Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches such things are left
undetermined by God's Law, and the Church has Power to determine them. But Men
are to examine whether such Liberty be allowed by Christ. And as you go on, p.
628. It may be you will tell me, that in this Case, Prescription interprets
Law, and that the Churches Possession argues it was the Will of Christ. But
still the Proof lies upon your side, since you run your self into new Briars;
for you must prove that there is no way to interpret this Law, but by the
Practice (here I must say by the Judgment) of the Church, and which is the
(...) of all, that the Church cannot come into the Possession of any thing, but
what was originally given her by the Legislator. -- He that undertakes to prove
it impossible that the Church should claim by an undue Title; must prove it
impossible, that the Church should ever be deceived.

4. Is this a plain, or rather is it not an Impossible Rule? If every one be
bound to submit to the Determination of those things, that in the Judgment of
the Primitive and Reformed Churches are left undetermined by the Word; then
every one should be bound to know the Judgment of the Primitive, and Reformed
Churches, as to those things. We should think it well, if Men would be
persuaded to search the Scriptures, and to submit to what God has revealed and
made known there to be their Duty; but (according to what you have here laid
down) this should not be sufficient: but every one is also bound to search the
Monuments of Antiquity, to turn over the Ancient Fathers and Councils, and so
likewise to get a View of the whole Body of latter Confessions, that may inform
him of the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches. And is not this to
bind heavy Burdens upon Men's Shoulders, and to make more Sins than are found
to be so in God's Law? Or will you say, that Men are bound to an Implicit
Faith here, that what you assert to have been the Judgment of the Primitive and
Reformed Churches, they must believe without more ado? Or if you will not say
they are bound to such an Implicit Faith in your Word, will you allow them to
suspend the Act of Submission, to the Determination of Church Governors, till
such time as they can be satisfied, that such Determination is agreeable to the
Judgment of the Primitive, and Reformed Churches? Will you give them time, till
they can find Reordination in the like Case, reading of Apocrypha in the room
of God's Word, etc. to have been approved and practiced in the Primitive and
Reformed Churches?

5. Is this a golden, rather is it not a leaden Rule? May it not be turned
contrary ways? Was the Primitive Church for kneeling in the Act of receiving?
Were not the Psaltzgraves Churches to be reckoned among the reformed Churches?
And were they for our English Ceremonies? Do not the Lutheran Churches hold
some things lawful, and indifferent, which in the Judgment of the Church of
England are unwarrantable? As things indifferent, and lawful in the Judgment of
the Church of England, are not so in the Judgment of some other reformed
Churches. I do profess plainly (says Chillingworth, p. 376.) that I cannot find
any rest for the Sole of my Foot, but upon this Rock only (the Bible.) I see
plainly and with mine own Eyes, that there are Popes against Popes, Councils
against Councils, some Fathers against others, the same Fathers against
themselves, a consent of Fathers of one Age against a consent of Fathers of
another Age, the Church of one Age against the Church of another Age.

6. Is this Rule, of the Judgment of the Primitive and Reformed Churches indeed
applicable to your established Rule? Do you find the one agreeable to the
other? Were the Primitive Churches for imposing the same Liturgy, the same
Rites and Ceremonies, which they yet held undetermined by God's Word? Was it
their Judgment, that each Nation, or Province should be tied up to a strict
Uniformity in such things? Do you find this within the first five hundred
years? Can you gainsay those Words of yours, (cited, Rector of Sutton, p. 19.
which I think are pertinent and material here) We see the Primitive Christians
did not make so much of any Uniformity in Rites and Ceremonies; nay I s^arce
think any Churches in the Primitive times can be produced, that did exactly in
all things observe the same Customs: which might be an Argument of Moderation
in all, as to these things, but especially in pretended admirers of the
Primitive Church. And yet would you have every one bound to submit to the
determination of Church-Governors in such Matters, whatever his private
Judgment be concerning them? As Eusebius notes from Irenaeus (l. 5. c. 26.
English c. 23.) the Primitive Christians could differ in such Matters, and yet
live in Peace. And (...) So Anicetas and Polycarpus could differ in such
Matters, and yet communicate one with another. The Primitive Christians
retained c^ntrary Observations, and yet (as Irenaeus said) held fast the bond
of Love and Unity. Can you ever prove that the Primitive Church, or the best
reformed Churches, have assumed a Power of suspending Ministers from their
Office, and of debarring Christians from Communion for such Matters?

Here comes to my Mind that which you say, Vnreas. of Separat. p. 14. that our
Reformers preceeded more out of r^verence to the Ancient Church, than mere
opposition to Popery. (Yet with King James, Defense of the right of Kings, p.
47c. the Christian Religion reformed, is as to say, purged and cleansed of all
Popish Dregs.) And p. 17. Although they made the Scripture the only Rule of Faith,
and rejected all things repugnant thereto; yet they designed not to make a
Transformation of a Church, but a Reformation of it; by reducing it, as near as
they could, to that state it was in under the first Christian Emperors, etc.
(Agreeable to Chillingworth, p. 287. ^ 82.) But whether you took not the hint
of distinguishing the Transformation of a Church from the Reformation of it,
from Archbishop Whitgift, I cannot tell. However T. C. (latter part of his
second Reply, p. 172.) could not discern it to have any Solidity, but called it
a single solid Argument: seeing Transforming may be in part, as well as
Reforming. And you have not improved it at all. But what a strange Assertion is
that of yours, p. 96. That there are in effect no new Terms of Communion with
this Church, but the same which our first Reformers owned, and suffered
Martyrdom for in Queen Mary's Days? And will you stand to this, that they died
M^rtyrs for Ceremonies, and for such Impositions, as have thrust out so many
Ministers, that are most ready to subscribe to the same Truth, for which indeed
they laid down their Lives? I had thought, that I. Rogers (the Proto-Martyr in
that Persecution) had been a Nonconformist. As there were other Nonconformists
also that suffered. And can you make the World believe, that they suffered for
Conformity? And did not the Martyrs in Queen Mary's Days suffer in one and the
same Cause, whether Conformists, or Non-conformists? Indeed they agreed well in
Red (in Blood, and Flames) who before had differed in Black and White. But as
you will have it, p. 2. Our Church stands on the same Grounds, etc. And p. 4. I
would only know, if those Terms of Communion which were imposed by the Martyrs,
and other Reformers, and which are only continued by us, etc. I say, you would
persuade us, that you are upon the same Grounds with our first Reformers, who
were for Reforming according to the Scripture, rejecting all things repugnant
thereto, only they would have the Church reduced, as near as they could, to
that state it was in, under the first Christian Emperors, ( p. 17.) Now to make
this good it lies on you to prove from Catholic written Tradition, that the
present established Rule was the Rule for Admission of Ministers into their
Function, and other Church Members into Communion, observed in those Ancient
Churches, or one as near as could be to it; and further to make it good, that
it is not at all repugnant to the Scripture-Rule: Or if you cannot do this, you
must then grant, that you are gone off from the Rule of our first Reformers,
that is, the Scripture, and those Primitive Churches, and that the Terms of
Communion are not indeed the same. Propter externos ritus disciplinae homines
pios ferire, neque Domini est voluntas, neque purioris Ecclesiae m^s.

7. Would not such a Rule be point blank contrary to Scripture-Rule? If never
so many Councils, if all the Churches upon Earth determined, that they had such
Power, that they could cut off both Ministers and Members of the Church for
Matters left undetermined by God's Law, we could not submit to such
Determination, while we believe the Scripture, which tells us so plainly, that
they have no Power for Destruction, but for Edification. I subscribe to that of
Panormitan, Magis Laico esse credendum, si ex scripturis loquatur, quam Papae,
si absque verbo Dei agat. Is not the Scripture-Rule plain here, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
that the Governors of the Church must not Lord it over God^s Heritage? And tho
the Laity, or common Christian People are directly and properly intended there;
yet no doubt, by just and undeniable Consequence it will as well follow, that
they are not to Lord it over the Clergy. And when Peter Martyr sets down the
just causes of separation from Rome, he gives this for one good Reason; Because
they usurp more Power than the Ap^stle Paul accounted belonging to him. 2 Cor
1. Not as if we had Dominion over your Faith. Quibus verbis testatur fidem
n^mini subjectam esse, ^isi verbo Dei. And then it would be seriously enquired,
whether to require Assent and Consent to another Book besides the Bible, a Book
in Folio, and to all things contained in it, be not to have Dominion over Men's
Faith? Many are in doubt here, whose doubts you have not (so far as I can
perceive) yet resolved. You your self must grant, that the Churches of God
have, or should have no such Custom, to tyrannize over the Faith and
Consciences of Men (that is Lording it indeed.) As here Vnreas. of Separat. p.
184. You cite M. Claude, allowing, or maintaining Tyranny over Men's Consciences
to be a justifiable Reason of S^paration. And Le Blanc, p. 185. And the
Confession of Strasburg, p. 188. That they look on no human Traditions as
condemned in Scripture, but such as are repugnant to the Law of God, and bind
the Consciences of Men. And Io^. Crocius (ib.) Ceremonies forbidden break the
Churches Unity; yet its Communion is not to be forsaken for one or two of
these, if there be no Tyranny over the Consciences of Men. And Bishop Daven^nt,
p. 189, 190. Who grants that Tyranny over Men's Faith and Consciences would be a
s^fficient Reason to hinder Communion. As he says ( Sentent. D. Dav. p. 6.) If
some one Church will so have Dominion over the Faith of others, that she
acknowledges none for Brethren, or admits none into Communion with her, nisi
credend^ ac loquendi legem ab eadem prius accipiant -- the Holy Scripture
forbids us thus to make our selves the Slaves of any Mortals whosoever they
are: our one only Master (Christ) forbids -- Quae hac lege in Communionem
alterius Ecclesiae recipitur, non pacem inde acquirit, sed iniquissimae
servitutis pactionem. Here I set down a little more than you cite; as indeed it
was not for your purpose. To these you agree, P. 221. Not but that I think
there may be a Separation without Sin, from a Society retaining the Essentials
of a Church: but then I say, the Reason of such Separation is, some heinous
Error in Doctrine, or some idolatrous Practice in Worship, or some Tyranny over
the Consciences of Men; etc. This Tyranny over Conscience with you, is an
imposing of unlawful things. Which I infer from those Words, p. 208. A prudent
and due submission in lawful things lies between Tyranny over Men's Consciences,
and endless Separation. With Bishop Davenant it is credendi ac loquendi legem
dicere. Now if this be the Case of Nonconformist Ministers, that others would
tyrannize over their Consciences, will it not justify their Separation, which
is but a Separation secundum quid? And if you deny this to be their Case, be
pleased to give a sound and solid Answer to those few Pages of the second Plea
for Peace, toward the end, p. 116, etc. Qui tyrannidem in Christianissimum vel
usurpat, vel invehit, ille Christum, quantum potest, e solio dejicit, etc.
Amyrald. in These. Salmur, p. 435. 22.

8. Will you say, every Man is bound (for Peace-sake) to submit to the
Determination of Church Governors, whatever his private Judgment may be; When
his Judgment may be, that such a Determination is against the Word, tho never
so many Churches, and Councils judge otherwise? And when his Judgment may be,
that submission to such Determination of Men, would be real Disobedience and
acting contrary to the Will of God? If his Conscience be rightly informed, then
he opposes the Authority of Scripture, and the Judgment of God to the Judgment
of Men (as Chillingworth says, p. 309.) which is certainly allowable. If his
Conscience and Judgment be erroneous, yet he must suspend the act of Submission
to such Determination, till he can be better informed: or acting here against
his Judgment and Conscience (tho erroneous) he would greatly sin. As suppose
the Governors of the Church to have determined, that we shall all declare our
Assent unto that in Preface before the Book of Ordination, [That it is evident
unto all Men, diligently reading Holy Scripture, and Ancient Authors, that from
the Apostles time, there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's
Church, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as several Officers.] You could not have
submitted to such Determination, while your Judgment was the same, as when you
wrote your Irenicum. This is evident from what I noted thence, Rector of
Sutton, p. 41, 66. Nothing can be more evident, than that it rose not from any
divine Institution, etc. Could you have dissembled with God and Man for
Peacesake. (But more of this afterward.)

But I am thinking, you may possibly object, That you speak of things supposed
to be left undetermined, whereas I Instance here, in a matter that the Word
determines. Yet I hope this may be more convincing. Let us for this once
suppose, that you could now prove from Scripture, that the Bishops Office is
distinct from that of Presbyters; yet I hope you will grant me, that you could
not have submitted to such Determination of the Church, while you believed no
such thing. And then I have what I would have. Every Man cannot lawfully submit
to the Churches Determination, though it be according to the Scripture (that
is, so long as his Judgment, is the Determination is without, and against
Scripture) then must not the same be said, of such Determination, as is besides
the Scripture? I know you will not say, the Churches Word is above God's. So
you see how this part of your Rule falls short of what you aim at.

One thing you have under this Rule, Irenic. p. 124. I should take a little
notice of some-where, and let me do it here. There must be a Difference made
(say you) between the Liberty and Freedom of a Man's own Judgment, and the
Authority of it. So by being under Governors a Man parts with the Authority of
his Judgment; but you would not have him deprived of the Liberty and Freedom of
his Judgment* otherwise to what purpose is this distinction brought? Now I
would not be so uncharitable, as to think, that by the Liberty of a Man's own
Judgment you could mean a Liberty of professing and declaring contrary to his
own Judgment, in Submission to the Determination of Church Governors, for the
Churches Peace. And therefore I say, your Rule here is short, and reaches not
to our Case.

2. You say, in this last Conclusion, that in M^tters of mere Order and
Decency* every one for the Churches Peace is bound to submit to the
Determination of the lawful Governors of the Church.

Here, 1. This is readily granted, if by Matters of mere Order and Decency, you
understand Matters of mere Order and Decency. As you seemed to understand no
more, when you wrote your Iren. For there you distinguish betwixt Ceremonies
and Matters of mere Decency and Order for Ordersake. And you further say that
Matters of Order and Decency are allowable and fitting; but Ceremonies,
properly taken for Actions significative, their Lawfulness may with better
Ground be scrupled. (Noted, Rector of Sutton, page 16.) And thus far (if you
please) you and I are agreed, That Rules of Order (not contrary to the end of
Order) should be submitted unto; and that not only for the Churches Peace, but
also in Obedience to God's Command, Let all things be done decently and in
order. And to such orderly Determinations, what Camero says ( page 314. col.
1.) may in some sort be applied, -- Admonitiones quidem sunt respectu
Ecclesiae, at Leges respectu Dei; nempe hac Ratione quod commendavit Ecclesia,
Deus imp^ravit.

2. But I observe, that in other Writings since your mind is changed, and you
have learned now to confound, what before you would have distinguished, that
is, your Rites and Ceremonies, and Matters of Order and Decency (as was noted,
Rector of Sutton, p. 63.) So you say, in your New Account, or Unreasonableness
of Separation, p. 393. We declare, that they are appointed only for Order and
Decency. And thus now these become mere Matters of Order and Decency with you.
Of which there has been, and is so great dispute.

Here two or three Questions come in for your Solution.

1. Whether such Rites and Ceremonies, are Matters of mere Order and Decency?

2. Whether the Governors of the Church have Power to appoint and determine
the use of such Matters?

3. Whether every one is bound to submit to them, upon such Determination?

I intend not to say much upon these Questions, supposing they may fall in
others Way. And but that you seem too resolved to hold your own Conclusion, so
much has been written upon these Points, that might excuse us from saying
more, till what has been published, be fairly answered.

Question 1. Whether such Rites and Ceremonies are Matters of mere Order and
Decency?

1. You say, and declare, they are appointed only for Order and Decency. But
not as if the contrary implied a natural Indecency (as was noted, Rector of
Sutton, p. 63.) whereupon it follows, that you must hold them vainly appointed,
or that the contrary might as well have been appointed; and so teach, or tempt
People to have hard Thoughts of the Governors of the Church, for appointing
and so rigorously imposing such Ceremonies, whereby many are deprived of their
Ministers, and of some of God's Ordinances; which may seem very harsh, if they
are only for Order and Decency, and that in so low a Degree, that the Worship
of God might be as orderly and decently performed, without them. Would you have
the Governors of the Church deprive Ministers of their Liberty, and others of
the Sacraments for no other Cause, than their mere Wills?

2. Do you well accord here, with Mr. R. Hooker, who says, Our Lord himself did
that which Custom and long-usage had made fit; we, that which Fitness and great
Decency has made usual? You seemed, ( Answer to several Treatises, p. 268.)
unwilling that any should urge you with that, Scil. Then the Apostle's way of
Worship, was not not in it self altogether so decent and fit^* But if the
Ceremonies be in themselves of such an indifferent Nature, that the contrary
implies no Indecency, then you cannot say, that their great Decency and
Fitness was the Ground of appointing and using them. Wherein you and Mr.
Hooker, appear to be of different Minds. And kneeling at Communions with him (
l. 5.. 68. p. 366.) is a Gesture of Piety, which is something more than mere
Decency.

3. Do you well accord here with the Governors of the Church? You declare, our
Ceremonies are appointed only for Order and Decency. Whereas they have declared
them to be for the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments. And
that they are apt to stir up the dull mind of Man to the Remembrance of his
Duty to God, by some notable and special Signification, whereby he might be
edified. Will you say such things, are only for Order and Decency, which are
for the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries, and for stirring up the dull
mind of Man to the Remembrance of his Duty to God, and for his Edification? One
would think, that such things should be good in themselves, and not as you say,
of an indifferent Nature in themselves. Can you imagine things that are only
for Order and Decency (whose contrary are as decent) to be the same, or as good
as things for the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries? etc. And if a
Ceremony be apt to stir up the dull mind of Man to the Remembrance of his Duty,
whereby he may be edified, then is it not made medium excitans, which you say (
Unreasonableness of Separation, p. 354.) our Church utterly denies? Is here no
spiritual Effect attributed to Ceremonies, which you can by no means allow,
page 347. But this you are commonly driven to in Disputation, to say, they are
only Matters of Order and Decency, and so would bring them under that Rule or
Precept, Let all things be done decently and in Order,] tho they are things of
a quite different Nature. Matters of Order and Decency are there commanded in
genere; but it would be no Transgression of that Command, though not one of
these Ceremonies were appointed, or used in the Worship of God, nor any others
like them.

Quest. 2. Whether the Governors of the Church have Power to appoint and
determine the Use of such Ceremonies?

Here 1. You say, page 347. If Men do assert so great a Power in the Church, as
to appoint things for spiritual Effects, -- it is all one as to say, the Church
may make new parts of Worship. And then the Question is, whether these are no
spiritual Effects, if they be for the due Reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries,
and for Men' s Edification? And as Dr. Field says, they are adhibited, to
exercise great Fervor and Devotion. And Hooker, Men are edified by Ceremonies
when either their Understandings are taught somewhat whereof in such Actions it
behooveth all Men to consider, or when their minds are stirred up to that
Reverence, Devotion, and due Regard which in those Cases seems requisite. If
you mak^ them unprofitable, idle Indifferents, are not such things unworthy of
the Churches Appointment? and if others make them profitable, edifying
Ceremonies, have you not here denied that the Church has so great Power of her
self to appoint such?

2. If Church Governors have Power, that is, lawful Power, or Authority from
Christ, to appoint and command the Use of such Ceremonies, then they can show
so much Power granted them in their Commission, or prove it from the written
Law of Christ. Here I remember what you say, Rational Account, p. 103. Is it in
that Place, where he bids the Apostles to teach all that he commanded them,
that he gives Power to the Church to teach more than he commanded? And a little
before it, what has he commanded her to do? to add to his Doctrine by making
things necessary, which he never made to be so? Surely, you cannot think the
Church has any such Power. In all kind of Grants, says Gurney (Vind. of 2 d
Com. 45.) The want of an Affirmative is Negative sufficient. Then may not Men
question, whether the Governors of the Church have such a Power from Christ,
till they can prove it?

If [ Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you] does
not imply, that the Governors of the Church may teach and command more, than
they have his Word and Warrant for; I can think of no other Text more likely
for the purpose, than that, 1 Cor. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and
in Order] Upon which Mr. F. Maso^ grounded [ The Authority of the Church in
making Canons and Constitutions concerning things indifferent, printed 1607.]
But here you will fall short too. For (I suppose) the Jews were as well bound
to perform the Worship of God decently and in order; yet that was no Warrant or
Allowance for their bringing in other Rites and Ceremonies into God's Worship,
than what God himself had appointed. And what if Church Governors forbad the
Use of such Ceremonies? Would it be to sin against this Rule? Cannot the
Worship of God be performed decently, and in ord^r without them? Antecedently
to any Determination of Christ's Governors Men are bound to worship God
decently and in Order; but none are so bound to use such Ceremonies in God's
Worship, as was hinted before. And that these differ t^to genere from Matters
of Order and Decency, may appear, in that if we suppose them approved of God,
they are Matters of an higher Nature, than things merely decent, that is, they
are pious and religious, not only finally, but formally, that a Man would do
amiss, that used them only as decent, neglecting the spiritual Signification of
them. And then will it not follow, that if they be not approved and allowed of
God, it is worse for Governors to appoint and command them, than if they
commanded some simple indecent thing in God's Worship? As Superstition, or
false Worship ( caeteris paribus) is worse than a mere Indecency.

3. It would seem, by what we read, Gal. 2. 11, 14. that the Apostle Peter had
no Authority to appoint the Observation of such things. Yet his Power was as
great, as any Church Governors now can pretend to, with Reason.

4. If Church Governors have such a Power (as you say of Men's separating upon
account of their Scruples, Vnreason. of Separation, page 379. which I answered
before, page 29.) where can you stop them from appointing new Ceremonies? And
where will you fix, as to the use of them? And what Assurance can you give us,
that we shall see an End of them, that they will never appoint more?
Notwithstanding what you say, p. 388. by the same Power that the Church has
decreed these, she may decree more Rites and Ceremonies, as indifferent as
these, and how many, who can tell? And being once decreed, you must think you
are bound to submit to such Deter^ination, who are to be Judges, whether such
or such Ceremonies be rightly determined and appointed? You well know what was
said, Commiss. Account, p. 71. Not Inferiors, but Superiors must judge what is
convenient and decent. So, if the Governors of the Church once judge all those
Ancient Rites of the Christian Church, we ever read of, with many new ones of
the Church of Rome, (as many as they could refine and purge from Popish
Superstition) to be all decent, and convenient, then must you not submit to
them all? Though it would be a Sign, that Religion was far past the Meridian in
the Church (as T. Fuller says) where she can hardly be seen, for the length of
her own Shadow. As you plainly declare, from another p. 184. that Separation is
not warranted upon the Account of bare Ceremonies, although many more were
enjoined; so you must say, that Submission to them is a thing not to be denied,
though many more were appointed. And therefore I say, suppose and grant, that
the Governors of the Church have Power to appoint such Ceremonies, and you
know not where they and you shall stop. And this Power you grant in your
subscribing to the 39 Articles. For Art. 20. says, The Church has Power to
decree Rites or Cer^monies (without li^^iting any Number.) Tho this Clause was
not extant in the Articles of Edw. 6, and Q. Elizabeth.

Here now I fall upon those two Reasons you give ( Vnre^s. of Separation, p.
16, 17.) for the appointing of these Ceremonies.

1* Out of a due Reverence to Antiquity, -- Therefore they retained the^e few
Ceremonies as Badges of the Respect they bore to the Ancient Church. (And yet
you cannot deny, but other Ceremonies more Ancient than some of these are laid
aside; and the most Ancient of these, is so in use with you, as it was not used
at first; and was so in use in the Ancient Church as it is not in use with you.
Such is your Respect and Reverence here to the Ancient Church.)

2. To manifest the Justice and Equity of the Reformation, by letting their
Enemies (the Papists) see they did not break Communion with them for m^er
indifferent Things. (As you have it before, p. 14.) Our Bishops proceeded (in
our Reformation) more out of Reverence to the Ancient Church, than mere
Opposition to Popery. Now I would be satisfied, whether it might not show more
Respect and Reverence to Antiquity, if more Ceremonies were retained, and the
more Ancient, rather than such as came up in latter times, (as Standing may be
proved before the Ceremony of Kneeling?)

And whether there are not many Ceremonies in use among the Papists, capable of
having a good signification put upon them, and so as innocent and indifferent
as these; and therefore for the Reason you have given, to be retained, or
entertained amongst us, to show our Justice and Equity toward them, that we
proceed not in mere opposition to Popery, that we break not with them about
mere indifferent things? And will you be for that peaceable Design, for going
as near to Rome as you can, without Sin? But thus upon your Principles, the
Church might be Reformed I will not call it, but Transformed, (borrowing the
Word from you) and become as Ceremonious as was the Jewish Church under the
Law. And they that highly applaud such Ceremonies, as mighty Helps to Devotion,
etc. may next tell the World that the Jewish Church was privileged above the
Christian, as having more such Helps; (unless they have a Face to say, that the
Ceremonies of Gods appointment were no such Helps, as those of Man's
Inventions.) And consequently that latter Churches (which some take to have
been less pure) had some Helps, which Christ and his Apostles were not mindful
to supply the Primitive Church with.

5. It would seem, that if Christ had approved of the appointing of such
things, he would rather have appointed them himself, in his Word, (which would
have gained them more repute and esteem, and might have ended the dispute about
them.) There is the same Reason for all Churches to observe and practice them,
as for ours. It Is impossible for you to assign any Reason for the Cross in
Baptism, etc. a natura rei, now, but what would have been as pleadable even in
the Apostles times, and at all times since. Then is it not most probable, that
Christ would have made an universal Law for them, that should equally respect
all Churches, had it been his Mind to have such things in his Church? Indeed we
find, Christ has instituted what religious Rites and Ceremonies, he would have
observed, in the Sacraments of the New Testament. And where he has determined
the matter himself, what have Men to do more, than to submit to his
Determination? What can Men do, that come after the King? None are like to do
his work better, or know his Mind better, than himself.

6. If the exerting such a Power be found contrary to many express Commands in
the Word, how can we imagine such a Power conveyed to Church Governors in any
general Command there? The Scripture is no where contrary to it self. Consult
Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 13, 14, 15, and v. 17, to the end of the Chapter. And
Chap. 15. 1, 2. Are there such plain Commands in Scripture for mutual
Forbearance, and against judging, and despising one another for such things as
God has not commanded, and against offending the weak, or casting a
Stumbling Block in others way, and for preserving the Peace and Unity of the
Church; and can we think it probable, or a thing credible, that Christ would
have all such Commands set aside, merely for the sake of things called
indifferent Ceremonies? Or that the Commands, or Determinations of
Church Governors about such Matters should be of Force against the standing
Rules, and Laws of Christ, who is King of his Church? Matters of Order and
Decency are things of another Nature, necessary in genere, as I have said
before; and yet Men cannot oblige us to this or that particular Order, when it
is repugnant to that, whereunto it should be subservient. Then much less is it
the Will of Christ, that mere indifferent things (if no worse) should take
place of great and necessary Duties. Such indifferent things must either be
made necessary, or else you must say, (it cannot be avoided) That the Churches
Peace may be broken, sound Ministers, and Christians (that scruple the
lawfulness of them) may be ejected, and cast out of Communion, or their
Consciences may be ens^^red unnecessarily. And yet one that ever read his Bible
might know so much, that the Governors of the Church have other work to do.
And as the second Book of Homilies says (p. 3.) Better it were, that the Arts
of Painting, Plaistering, Carving, Graving, and Founding had never been found
nor used, than one of them whose Souls in the sight of God are so precious,
should by occasion of Image or Picture perish and be lost: So indeed better it
were, that no such Ceremonies had ever been appointed by Men, than one Soul
should be ensnared by them, ^r one Minister or Member of Christ suffer.

7. I query, If Christ had not appointed the Sacraments of the New Testament,
whether it had been in the power of Church Governors to have appointed washing
with Water in token, and to put us in mind of our being washed and cleansed by
the Blood of Christ, and by the sanctifying influence and operation of his
Spirit; and so likewise to have appointed the eating and drinking of Bread and
Wine, as signifying that our Souls are to feed upon Christ, whose Body was
broken, and whose Blood was shed for us? Had not these been of the same Nature,
and as lawful as the significant Ceremonies, which the Church has taken on her
to appoint? Then let the People understand the Power of the Church, that if
Christ had never instituted Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, she could yet have
in part supplied that want with those significant Ceremonies, that would have
been something like them.

8. If Church Governors have power to appoint such a Ceremony, as the Cross in
Baptism, (for Instance) then they have power to add to the thing which God has
commanded, and to make new parts of Worship. But Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. 32.
forbids that. You grant p. 337. That for Men to make new parts of Divine
Worship is unlawful. For that is to suppose the Scripture an imperfect Rule of
Worship, and that Superstition is no Fault, etc.

The Cross in Baptism is an Addition. Tho you seem to understand the
prohibition of adding to the Word, of things directly repugnant; yet that is
not so properly an Addition, as an Abolition. As one says, Prohibetur hic
additio, non tantum contrarii, (quae non tam additio est quam abolitio) sed
etiam diversi. (v. M. Poli. Synops. Crit. in Deuteronomy. 4. 2.) Methinks, we may know
what it is to add, if we understand what it is to diminish; then as they might
not diminish, or take away from God's Worship one significant Ceremony which
the Lord had instituted, by a Parity of Reason it would seem to follow, that
they might not introduce or add one significant Ceremony to the Worship, God
had instituted.

The Cross in Baptism is made a new part of Worship. For that which is used in
God's Worship in such a manner, and to such an end, that there needs nothing
but Divine Institution, or God's appointing it to be used in that manner, and
to that end, to make it a part of the true Worship of God, that is made a part
of God's Worship, tho falsely, for want of Divine Institution. Had Christ
appointed the Cross in Baptism, as the Church has appointed it to be used, in
token that we should not be ashamed, etc. had Christ appointed it, by that Badg
to dedicate us to the Service of him that died upon the Cross; no doubt it had
thus become a part of God's true Worship. Here you speak short, p. 348. The
Canon says, It is an honorable Badg, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the
Service of, etc. And what is that, but a Sign from Men to God, to testify their
Subjection? Which by your own Confession there is an Act of Worship; and yet
you will have it no such thing. P. 355. you say, If Christ had instituted it
with such Promises -- (then no doubt, etc. And I say, If Christ had instituted
it only in token, that we ought not to be ashamed to confess him (which is
less, than that hereafter we shall not be ashamed) had he appointed it only to
signify our Duty, it would yet no doubt, have been made a part of Worship. And
I hope upon second thoughts, you will say the same.

Some other Passages, relating to this Matter, I would have glanced at* but it
is time to hasten to an end of this Conclusion I have been so long upon.

Yet methinks your slighty Exposition of the second C^mmandment, p. 141. calls
for one glance here. Can you find no more in the Affirmative part of it, than a
Command to worship God without an Image? What is there more? And are not even
Mystical Ri^s and Ceremonies of God's Institution within that Command? And does
not Bishop Downham say, It forbids all Will Worship and Superstition,
whereby Men worship God according to their own Inventions? There is no doubt,
but that Law forbids other Inventions of Men, besides the worshipping of
Images, or of God by Images. And whether the common Nature of the Inventions
there forbidden will not be found agreeing to some of your Ceremonies, I
suppose will lie fair in others way to take notice of. And so you may have a
fuller Answer to that, page 338. What is neither forbidden, Directly, nor by
Consequence, is lawful, and may be practiced in the Worship of God. And it may
seem a little strange, that such learned Men, as have written for the Cross,
and kneeling in the Act of Receiving, etc. should endeavor to prove them
lawful by Consequence from that Text, Let all things be done decently, etc.
(whence a more colorable Argument might be drawn against them. As, if we
suppose such Ceremonies there included, it would imply, that the Worship of the
Apostles, and Primitive Christians, was not so decent, wanting these
Ceremonies, as that of our Church, who observe them;) strange it is, I say,
that they could not rather see them forbidden by plainer Consequence in the
second Commandment, and such other Texts, as Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and 12. (...) ^xod.
30. 32, 33. Lev. 10. 1, 2. Number. 15. 39, 40. Ezekiel. 44. 2. Col. 2. (...), 21, 22.
Mar. 7. 5, 6, 7.

Quest. 3. Whether every one is bound to submit to such Ceremonies, being
appointed and enjoined by the Governors of the Church?

And here, 1. I cannot yet find, that you have taken off what you had said,
Irenic. p. 64. (cited Rector of Sutton, p. 14.) When the Generality of those
who use them, do not use them as indifferent, but as necessary things, it ought
to be considered, whether in this Case such an Use be allowable? Now will you
allow such Ministers to forbear the use of the Cross in baptizing, till they
can find their People better informed, and brought off from any such
Superstitious Conceit of that Ceremony? For certain it is, very many (such as
are ignorant, and most backward to be instructed) do conceit the crossing of
their Children necessary, as if Baptism could not be rightly administered
without it. What if a Minister be scrupulous, and in doubt, whether by the use
of the Ceremony he be not guilty of confirming them in their Superstition? Will
you consider such, to take off the Scruples you may have occasioned by this
Passage?

2. And what will you say to them, who cannot believe, but they are made
necessary? When they see them as strictly imposed and en^oyned, as if they were
Matters of the highest Necessity; this does (...) the least inform, or satisfy
them, that you account them, (for all that) but indifferent things. Would not
that considerable Person, you once speak of, Philip Nigh, have said, Quid verba
audiam cum facta videam? As he says, Our Church Governors questionless might
have brought in one Rite, or Ceremony, with the same Liberty to Men's
Consciences, that they have done another, Scil. The Cross, and Surplice, etc.
with the same Liberty, as bowing to the East or Altar. As he also cites, A
Petition of the House of Commons to King James, An. 1610. Wherein is as
follows, Ministers being removed from their Ecclesiastical Livings for not
conforming in some Points, it is a great grief to your Majesty's Subjects,
seeing the whole People that want Instruction are by this means punished. Here
I remember what you say of the Vow Corban, (p. 340.) and how they thought their
Tradition to overruled the Law. Then you can clear your Ceremonies, as
innocent, and free from any such Crime. And yet it has sometimes been known,
when no Surplice, no Service. And Conformity to the Ceremonies is made so
necessary, that People must have no Ministers without it. By which means many
Souls are at great wants. That you should hold it a thing more pleasing to God,
that the Ceremonies be used and kept up, than that the Souls of Men in many
places be relieved, and taken care for. And if the Worship of God must rather
be omitted, than the Ceremonies, is not this, to set up Men's Traditions above
God's Law, and Men's Inventions above Divine Institutions? Many cannot be
satisfied with that you tell them, p. 346. That these Ceremonies are purged
from Popish Superstition and Error. And therefore all Opinion of Merit and
spiritual Efficacy is taken from them; which do make them to be Parts of Divine
Worship. They know not that an Opinion of Merit is necessary to any part of
Divine Worship. And if you would convince them, that you look on them as no
more than naked, indifferent Ceremonies, they could wish, that as you disclaim
the Opinion of their spiritual Efficacy and necessity in Word, so they might
see that you do it in deed, that none may be deprived of the Means, that God is
wont to make effectual, and are ordinarily necessary to Salvation, for the sake
of such Ceremonies, which you will not say are effectual, or necessary thereto.
And to go on one step further with you here, to ( p. 347.) either you must
grant such Ceremonies are to be altered, dispensed with in this Case, or you
must take them to be unalterable, and then (by your own Confession there) you
make them parts of Divine Worship. For (as you say) this supposes an equal
Necessity (of them) with that of Divine Institution. And if Men must be without
the Word, and without Sacraments, rather than without your Ceremonies, as some
have been, and still ordinarily are) then do you not make them of equal
Necessity with Divine Institutions, if the preaching of the Word, and
Administration of Sacraments be such? And thus have you proved (for us) your
Ceremonies to be made parts of Worship. This Ios^^s Nichols complained of long
since, ( Plea, etc. p. 120.) That the Reverend Fathers, accounting those things
(for which they contend) but mere Trifles, would yet prefer them before the
Ministry. And page 229. (but mispaged) -- And for not yielding to their Minds,
suspended, deprived, and imprisoned their learned and Godly Brethren, and in
the mean time preferred the trifling Ceremonies before the weighty work of
Preaching. So that, as Mr. Calfill says, The People of God be sometimes
oppressed with Traditions and Ceremonies; and for outward Solemnities the
inward true Service of God is neglected. -- And they could not see all this
while any one thing ^miss, no, not so much as the unlearned Ministry, or
Non-residency; but defend all, and maintain all to the utmost.

Now if thus it appears, that the Ceremonies are made necessary, in being
preferred before the Ministry of the Word, if Non-residency, and a
Non-preaching Ministry be counted more tolerable than Nonconformity; and if
(as you say^ by making the Ceremonies of equal necessity with God's Ordinances,
they are made parts of Divine Worship; you will excuse those that cannot submit
to them, unl^ss they could be proved of Divine Institution. If they are things
not (...) by the Word (according to what you have, p. 116. they should not be
(...), they are not bound to use them. No Church Governors upon Faith have
such a Power to bind men to things not (...) by the Word. If their (...) enjoin
what Christ's Laws forbid, (as the making of any n^w part of Worship) they are
ipso facto null and void. King Iam^s (...) Right of Kings, p. 428.) It is
moreover granted, If a King s^all command any thing dir^ctly contrary to God's
Word, and tending to the (...) of the Church; that Cleries in this Case ought
not only to dispense with Subjects for their Obedience, but also expressly to
forbid their Obedience. For it is always better to obey God than Man. And I
hope you would not set up the Power of any Church-Governour above the King's
here, and ab^ve Christ^^. And what Episcopius says in defense of Severed
Meetings sometimes against the will of the Magistrate ( Vol. 1. Par. 2. p. 56.
col. 2.) may be appli^d h^re to Non-submission (in such case, as is spoken of,)
to the Determination of Church-Governous. Deirectatio autem illa Obedien^iae,
(...) est in Obedientia, nedum resi^tentia, sed tantum Supremi Iuris (...),
qu^d Magistratus sibi (...) adrogat, out userpat, debita Recognitio. It should
not be called Non-submission to our Governors, but rather a due Recogni^^^on
of the Sovereign Right and Authority of our highest Lord.

For haste I have here thrown things on heaps. A few words now to the third
part of your last Conclusion.

3. You say, Wholly as to the Form of Government every one is bound to submit
to such Determination.

Here I offer to your Consideration what follows.

1. Whether they that could submit to Episcopacy as to their Practice, that is,
live peaceably under it, and obey Governors in (Licitis and Honestis,) so far
as God's Law allows, should be urged further, to submit their Judgment to the
Divine, or Apostolical Right of Episcopacy, when determined by Governors,
whatever their private Judgment may be? Could Bishop Cranmer have declared his
Assent to such Determination, whose Judgment was, That the Bishops and Priests
were not two things, but both one Office in the beginning of Christ's Religion,
(as you cite his MS. Irenic. p. 392.) could such a Man as Dr. Holland, (and I
need not tell you what he was) who called Dr Laud a Schismatic* for asserting
the Divine Right of Episcopacy, saying, It was to make a Division betwixt the
English and other Reformed Churches? Or could Lud. Capellus have submitted to
such Determination, That it is evident to every one diligently reading holy
Scripture, etc. who in effect says the contrary, These. Salmur, p. 8.. 33.
Neque, vero praescripto ullo divino desinitum esse putamus, etc.

And if the like was determined of Archbishops, as of Bishops, I am in some
doubt from what I meet with in your Rational Account, whether you could submit
to such Determination. For there page 298. You speak of it, as a known and
received Truth in the Ancient Church, -- That the Catholic Church was a Whole
consisting of Homogeneal Parts, without any such Subordination or Dependence.
-- Here I would be satisfied, how you would expound Homogeneal Parts, and so
you seem to expound them, p. 300. Since the Care and Government of the Church
by these Words of Cyprian (Episcopatus unus) appears to be equally committed to
all the Bishops of the Catholic Church. (But then should not all, that have
the Care and Government of the Church committed to them, be supposed to be
Bishops; and no one Bishop above another; otherwise how is the Care and
Government of the Church equally committed to them; how is there Episcopatus
unus? And how does the Church consist of Homogeneal Parts?) And thus will it
not follow, that no Constitution higher than that of such Bishops as have the
Care and Government of the Church committed to them, (which you here suppose to
be with a Parity) should be made the Center of Ecelesiastical Communion And yet
more fully, p. 302. When S. Cyprian says, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a
singulis in solidum Pars tenetur, de Unit. Eccles. p. 208. That every Part
belonging to each Bishop was held in solidum, he therein imports that full
Right and Power which every Bishop has over his Charge; and in this Speech he
compares the Government of the Church to an Estate held by several
Freeholders, in which every one has a full Right to that Share which belongs
to him. Whereas according to your Principles the Government of the Church is
like a Man^or or Lordship, in which the several Inhabitants hold at the best
but by Copy from the Lord. Now it would be considered, whether in these Words
you have not given Metropolitan Churches a shake, if not Diocesan Churches too?

2. Whether you could submit, and declare your Assent, if lawful Governors
should determine that Bishops were no Superior Order of Divine or Apostolical
Institution, and should require your Assent? Would you then disown, and discard
such, whom you here maintain to be the Apostles Successors? For what you say,
( Unreasonableness of Separation, Preface, p. 89.) we may not think you would
ever be afraid or ashamed to own them. For there you tell us, The Friends of
the Church of England will not be either afraid, or ashamed to own her Cause.
-- They must not think, that we will give up the Cause of the Church for it
(that is, for Union, or the Churches Peace) so as to condemn its Constitution,
etc. Then you cannot say, that wholly as to the Form of Government, every one
is bound, for the Churches Peace, to submit to the Determination of Governors,
whatever his private Judgment be. Here I have put a Case, wherein you could not
submit.

3. What if the whole Work of Government, belonging to the Pastor's Office, was
quite taken out of their hand, that they were made mere Curats of the Bishop,
and such Copyholders, as must hold nothing but at the Will of their Lord?
Would you have them bound to acquiesce in the public Decision, without doing
any thing toward a Reformation? Should they betrary the Churches Interest, for
the Churches Peace? May they not endeavor any Alteration, not so much as by
complaining to Governors of such Exorbitances of Power, and by humble Petition
for Redress?

4. Is every one bound to submit (wholly as to the Form of Government) to
Governors Determination? Then what if our Civil Governors, and the
Ecclesiastical should differ in their Judgments, and Determinations? I make no
question, but you have one time or other met with that of Sir Francis Knolles
to my Lord Treasurer Sir William Cecil; Moreover, whereas your Lordship said
unto me, that the Bishops have forsaken their claim of Superiority over their
Inferior Brethren (lately) to be by God's Ordinance, and that now they do only
claim Superiority from her Majesty's Supreme Government: If this be true, then
it is requisite and necessary, that my Lord of Canterbury do recant and retract
his Saying in his Book of the great Volumn against Cartwright, where he says
in plain Words (by the Name of Dr. Whitgift) that the Superiority of Bishops is
of God's own Institution; which Saying does impugn her Majesty's Supreme
Government directly, and therefore it is to be retracted plainly and truly. And
I find something like this, in that small Tract, called ( English Puritanism,
c. 6.. 6.) They ^old, that all Archbishops, Bish^ps, Deans, Officials, etc.
have their Offices and Functions only by Will and Pleasure of the King and
Civil States of this Realm; and they hold, that whosoever holds that the King
may not, without Sin, remove these Offices out of the Church, -- or (...) these
Offices are Jure divino, and not only or merely Jure humano: That all such deny
a principal Part of the King's Supremacy, which indeed you must hold, as to
Bishops, if you can prove them an Apostolical Institution. Though I know the
time when you was of another mind, Rector of Sutton, p. 41. Will not all these
things make it seem very improbable that it should be an Apostolical
Institution? And page 40. you believed, that upon the strictest Enquiry it
would be ^ound true, that Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius,
Theodoret, Theophylact, were all for the Identity of both Name and Order of
Bishops and ^re^byters in the Primitive Church.

Now suppose the Civil Governors should determine the Government by Bishops,
as superior to the rest of the Clergy, to be only jure humano, that they had
Power to alter, if they pleased; and should require Assent to this their
Determination: and the Ecclesiastics on the other hand should be of your mind,
resolving not to give up the Cause of the Church, or disown its Constitution,
and should determine it to be Iure Divino, vel Apostolico, and to be owned of
Men, as such: In such a Case whether must the former, for the Churches Peace,
think themselves bound to submit to the Determinations of the latter? Or to
which of their Determinations must others submit? For none, but such as the
Vicar of Bray, could submit to both.

Thus I have gone over your three Conclusions which you seem to make great
account of. What great Service they are like to do you, let the Impartial
Reader judge.

Instead of my third Conclusion, I would offer to Consideration Chap. 26 of
Corbet's Kingdom of God among Men. [ of Submission to Things imposed by lawful
Authority,] p. 171, etc.

Particularly, page 173. Though the Ruler be Judge of what Rules he is to
prescribe; yet the Conscience of every Subject is to judge with a Judgment of
Discretion, whether those Rules be agreeable to the Word of God or not, and so
whether his Conformity thereto be lawful or unlawful. Otherwise he must act
upon blind Obedience, etc. (with what follows in that Page) And page 174. It is
much easier for Rulers to relax the strictness of many Injunctions about
matters of supposed Convenience, than for Subjects to be enlarged from the
strictness of their Judgment. And blessed are they that consider Conscience,
and load it not with needless Burdens, but seek to relieve it in its Distresses.

You go on with me, Preface, p. 74 But he urges another Passage in the same
Place, viz. That if others cast them wholly out of Communion, their Separation
is necessary. -- That is no more than has been always said by our Divines in
respect to the Church of Rome. But will not this equally hold against our
Church, if it excommunicates those who cannot conform?

Now may not it be said here (as Rational Account, p. 336. beginning) They did
not voluntarily forsake the Communion of your Church, and therefore are no
Schismatics; but your Carriage and Practices were (...) them to join together
in a distinct Communion from you? And may not your own Words ( ibid. p. 356) be
returned, Scil. That by your own Confession the present Division and Separation
lies at your door, if it be not made evident, that there were most just and
sufficient Reasons for your casting them out of your Communion. -- And
supposing any Church (though pretending to be never so Catholic) does restrain
her Communion within such narrow and unjust Bounds, that she declares such
excommunicate, who do not approve all such Errors in Doctrine and Corruptions
in practice, which the Communion of such a Church may be liable to, the cause
of that Division which follows, falls upon that Church which exacts those
Conditions, etc.

Here it is to be noted, that your own Words ( Irenic. p. 123, 124.) objected
against you, ( Rector of Sutton, page 30.) are as follow, This (Scil. entering
into a distinct Society for Worship) I do not assert to be therefore lawful,
because some things are required, which Men's Consciences are unsatisfied in;
unless others proceed to eject and cast them wholly out of Communion on that
account, in which Case their Separation is necessary. Whence I inferred, that
if Ministers be wrongfully ejected, and wholly cast out of their public
Ministry, for such things as their Consciences are not satisfied in (for not
conforming in unlawful, or suspected Practices) it becomes necessary for them
to have distinct Assemblies in this case (at least) if there be need of their
Ministry. Yet I cannot find that you have one word in Answer to this. That one
would think, either you knew not well what to say to the Case of the ejected
Non-conformists, or that they were so very despicable in your Eye, you thought
them not worth taking notice of at all.

Now to your Answers. (1.) Our church does not cast any wholly out of Communion
for mere Scrupulous Nonconformity in some particular Rites.

Yet whatever you say here, I doubt, a Man (though he has his Child lawfully
baptized) is not secured from the Sentence of Excommunication, if he bring it
not to the Church to be crossed. And though a Man would join in the Communion,
yet if he be not satisfied to receive the Sacrament kneeling, by the Rules of
the Church he is to be debarred from the Sacrament, and then liable to
Excommunication for not receiving. And being once excommunicated, I would know
what parts of public Worship the Church allows him to communicate in. Thus
there seems to be little more than a Color and Pretense in this first Answer,
if the Rules of the Church be followed.

But you further say, Preface, p. 74, 75. (2.) The Case is vastly different, as
to the necessity of our Separation, upon being wholly cast out of Communion by
the Church of Rome; and the necessity of others separating from us, supposing a
general Excommunication ipso facto, against those who publicly defame the
Orders of the Church, -- In the Church of Rome, we are cast out with an
Anathema. --

Now 1. If there be a necessity of our Separation from the Church of Rome, upon
account of that highest Censure of Excommunication with an Anathema, and her
pronouncing us incapable of Salvation, if we do not return to her Communion,
(as you here suppose): why then do you allow a Protestant to join in some parts
of Worship in the Roman Church, as in hearing Sermons? etc. (as is plain you
do, page 108.)

2. I shall not oppose you in this, that the general Excommunication ipso facto
in the Canons, lays no Obligation, till it be duly executed. As you say, page
368, 369. General Excommunications although they be latae sententiae, as the
Canonists speak, do not affect particular Persons, until the Evidence be
notorious, etc. -- And the Question is, whether any Person knowing himself to
be under such Qualifications which incur a Sentence of Excommunication, be
bound to execute this Sentence upon himself? Yet another Question may come in
here, viz. supposing such a Sentence unjust, though that alone would not
justify Separation, whether yet it may not something extenuate it? You are not
for extenuating at all, I can bear you witness.

3. And may I not say, that this is answering but by Halves? It never reaches
the Case of so many Ministers, who have been wholly cast out of their public
Ministry. It reaches not the Case of many private Christians, who have been
formally, and actually excommunicated for such Causes, as can never be proved
by Scripture to deserve such a Censure and Sentence. You know that Canon of the
Council held at Agatha (Can. 2. Carranza, fol. 159.) that if Bishops
excommunicated any unjustly, they were to be admonished by other neighboring
Bishops. And might not the Admonishers have received such into their Communion,
whom the other had unjustly cast out? As the Council at Worms, (Carrenza, fol.
388. Can. 2. cut short there, as I suppose.) Can. 14th is cited in Mr. B's
Church History, p. 275.. 56. saying, That if Bishops shall excommunicate any
wrongfully, or for light Cause, and not restore them, the Neighbor-bishops
shall take such to their Communion, till the next Synod. And to my weak
understanding you say nothing here to what you have Iren. p. 119, 120. where
you fairly clear Non-conformists, but lay the Imputation of Schism upon those
who require such Conditions of Communion, as they cannot conform unto for
Consciencesake. The very requiring of such Conditions, you would have there to
be no less than an ejecting Men out of Communion. And therefore I should
wonder, if by being wholly cast out of Communion, you then meant only being
excommunicated with an Anathema. As I doubt not, but Separation is as
necessary, where one cannot have Communion, without joining in unlawful or
suspected Practices, as where one is formally excommunicated, yea, and if an
Anathema were annexed to the Sentence too.

You add, (3.) That Author could not possibly mean, that there was an equal
Reason in these Cases, when he expressly determines, that in the case of our
Church, Men are bound in Conscience to submit to the Orders of it; being only
about Matters of Decency and Order, and such things which in the Judgment of
the Primitive and Reformed Churches are left undetermined by the Law of God.

Here 1. Be pleased to note, that as much as you seem taken with, and hug this
Conceit of yours, (as you have it once and again here, and likewise in your
Conferences, p. 171. as if you thought it would do you Knights Service) yet it
remains wholly unproved, that the things imposed are only Matters of Decency
and Order. (Still I conceive, that if Man only had ap^ointed such a use of
Bread and Wine, to signify and put us in remembrance of Christ's Body broken,
and his Blood shed for us, it had been something more than a mere matter of
Decency and Order, or something worse. And whether the same may not be said of
the Sign of the Cross, I am in doubt; for they seem to be parallel.) And so it
neither is, nor ever can be proved that such Imposition of such things, in the
Judgment both of the Primitive, and of all Reformed Churches, is allowable by
God's Law; and that Men are bound to submit to them, whether they are satisfied
about them, or not.

2. When you say, The Author of Irenicum could not possibly mean, that there
was an equal Reason in these Cases; I would fain know what those Words mean,
Irenic. p. 119. (cited Rector of Sutton, p. 21.) Let Men turn and wind
themselves which way they will, by the very same Arguments that any will prove
Separation from the Church of Rome lawful, because she required unlawful
things, as Conditions of her Communion, it will be proved lawful not to conform
to any suspected or unlawful Practice required by any Church Governors upon
the same Terms, if the things so required be, after serious and sober Enquiry,
judged unwarrantable by a Man's own Conscience. Did you not here suppose some
Equality in these Cases? And which way did you wind and turn your self, to get
off from those Arguments?

3. And let me say this further, How could you then possibly mean, that Men
should be bound in Conscience to submit to significant Ceremonies, as mere
Matters of Order and Decency, when you so plainly distinguished them, Iren.
page 67. And say of such Ceremonies, that their Lawfulness may with better
ground be scrupled, p. 68. (cited Rect. of Sutton, p. 16.) Could you then
possibly mean, that such Ceremonies, and Matter of Order and Decency were all
one? certainly you could not, any further than you might possibly contradict
your self.

Preface p. 76. And so much shall serve to clear the Agreement between the
Rector of Sutton, and the Dean of St. Paul's.

But if this be all you have to say, they are not yet well agreed. And whether
there be not the like Disagreement betwixt your Rational Account, and this your
Impartial Account, where I have compared them, let the Indifferent and
Impartial Reader judge.

Thus I have gone through so much of your Preface, as I am concerned in.

As you take little notice of me in your Book, I have little more to say. I
would not take others Work out of their hands, who are (by so great odds)
fitter for it.

The first place where I find Rector of Sutton cited, is p. 95. There you take
notice, how far I say, we agree with you; but you overlook what follows upon
it, that it seems very hard, that notwithstanding you break with us for things
you count but Trifles, yet would be Sins to us. Will you grant, that such as
agree with you in all things necessary, may not, should not be debarred
Communion, by imposing things unnecessary? Or will you assert the contrary, and
prove it?

Again, page 98. You cite Rector of Sutton, p. 35. All the Parish-Ministers a^e
not near sufficient for so populous a City. And can you say, they are
sufficient? Is there no need of more? Why then do you say, This is but a
Color, and Pretense. The case is plain, that there is real need of more
Ministers, than are in place. And I desired to know, whether it was better that
Men should be untaught, (and so p^rish for lack of Knowledge than taught by
such as the Non-conformists? Whether the Souls of Men are of no more value,
than our Ceremonies? But as yet I have no Answer from you, that may satisfy.

What you further say to me p. 137. I have fully answered before.

Again page 144. You cite a few Words of mine, which I know to be true of some,
and pity them. And though it is said, we would certainly give but bad Quarter
to others; yet I hope if I had been all this time in plac^, for me, they should
have had their Liberty to hear those they were (...) ^^tisfied with, and could
profit more by.

Page 168, 169. You contradict not what I said Rector of Sutton, p. 15, 16.
Onl^ (...) little use of it, as seemed to serve your purpose there; while yet
(...) ^^ands good against you.

Page 196. You do not fully set down my meaning; though it was plain enough,
Rector of S^tton, p. 42. Neither do you take any notice of what you had said
your self, Irenic. p. 65. though you there meet with it again. Wherefore I
wonder how you could overlook it. If that Council at Gangrae, had enjoined the
religious use of a peculiar habit, appropriate to the Service of God, and
others had refused to submit to it, I question then, whether the Council would
not have been the Schismatics! (As, whether any, without being guilty of
making a Schism, can exclude and silence Ministers for wearing Beards, or for
not obeying such a trifling command as that was, Mr. B, Church History, p. 360,
361.. 55.) But upon that matter of the Council's condemning the followers of
Eust. Sebastenus, I still query, whether you ought not to make a difference
betwixt such as separated merely upon pretense of Purity, while they were
indeed defiled with gross Errors both in Opinion and Practice, (as I there
showed;) and such as are necessitated to withdraw, and cannot otherwise keep
their Consciences pure? This you should consider. As Chillingworth says, p.
282. 71. A Murderer can cry, Not Guilty, as well as an innocent Person, but not
so truly, nor so justly* And P. Martyr (Loc. Com. cl. 4. l. 6. p. 894.) Si
quaedam parts ab eo (toto) se dividant, quod ^itiari and infici nolint,
discessio erit laudabilis.

The seventh and last place, where you take notice of me is, p. 307. And there
I am brought in, as concluding with and for you, about your National Church.

But if we are agreed herein, why then do you call that which I say of it, (
Rector of Sutton, p. 20, 21.) A weak Assault, as you do implicitly, p. 303. 23.
Assaulting (tho never so weakly) is not agreeing, but quite different, or
rather contrary. But there I say, 1. That we will thank you, if you can prove
the National Church of England, as it is now established, to subsist by a
Divine Law, and positive Institution of Christ. 2. I put it to the question,
whether it be not Schismatical, for any National Church to make such Terms of
Agreement and Communoon, as are ^ot agreeable to that same Rule, by which all
Christians ought to walk? (And that your Terms are such, is easy to prove from
your own Words there recited) And whether they that so far separate from such a
dividing National Church, tho they comply not with its established Rule, may
not yet be found walking by the same Rule, in the true sense of your Text? Yet
these things you thought fit to pass by, and would notwithstanding persuade
your Readers (that had rather take your Word, than be at any pains to compare
things together) that we are agreed, and this point is thought fit to be given
up.

And yet I do not deny, but Christians of whatsoever Society, (whether a less
or greater) should be for uniting so far as they can, to preserve and
strengthen the Society, and to promote true Religion and Christianity. So I
agree with you in what you say, p. 292. The best way of the Churches
Preservation is by an Union of the Members of it; provided the Union be such as
does not overthrow the ends of it. And doubtless this is a good and necessary
Proviso. for that which overthrows the ends of Union, is a wicked Conspiracy
against Christ and his Church, rather than true Christian Unity, or Concord.
But then it should be considered, if a National Church sets down such Terms of
Union, as have no tendency to promote the common cause of Religion, and true
Interest of Christianity, such terms as are sure to cause Dissension, as
evidently tend to divide, break and shatter the Society, whether the Churches
Preservation be therein truly consulted, or any way likely to be thereby
secured? And whether (as Mr. Corbet says, Kingdom of God. etc. p. 155. The
Constitution of the Church should not be set as much as may be for the
incomp^ssing of all true Christians, which indeed makes for its most fixed and
ample state? And whether the taking of a narrower compass, be not a fundamental
Error in its Policy, and will not always hinder its stability and increase?

Thus I think I have spoken to all the Passages in your Book, wherein I am
properly concerned.

Yet am I not at an end of my Task. In your Preface you direct me to three
Letters you have subjoined to your Treatise.

Preface, p. 76. You say. There is one thing more which this Author takes
notice of -- ( Rector of Sutton, p. 6. If we are condemned by oothers abroad,
we may thank our Friends at home, who have misrepresented us to the World,
while we have not been allowed to plead for our selves. Therefore, to give
satisfaction, as to the Judgment of some of the most eminent and learned
Protestant Divines abroad, now living, I have subjoyned to the following
Treatise, some late Letters of theirs, etc.

Now whether you have put these Letters in print with the consent of those that
wrote them, or by some Law or Privilege peculiar to your self, I know not, nor
shall I trouble my self to enquire.

And whether they were procured on purpose, to grace and set off this Book of
yours, (as by their Date they appear to have come lately, as you say, the first
written in September 80.) The second in October. The third in November.) this
however is not very material. But it is likely some may think your Five
Answerers confronted and confounded, with the Authority of these three Letters
of some of the most eminent and learned Protestant Divines abroad now living.
Yet to tell you my Thoughts, I could not but think thus with my self, That if
we had no more cause to fear a French-Army confuting us by Club-Law, than that
any eminent French Protestant Divines would condemn us (if they thoroughly
examined, and knew our Cause) we were so far safe enough.

Now as to these Letters, it concerns not me to descant on the whole: but
especially to enquire, and observe, whether it be not, as I said. Or as Calvin
wrote to Dr. Cox and his Brethren ( Ep. 165. as you have it not far from the
beginning of your Book. p. 12.) That the state of the Case at Frankford, had
not been truly represented to him, which made him write with greater shar^^^ess
than otherwise he would have done. I think, we shall see it plain, That either
they had not the true state of our Case laid before them, or if they had, then
they wrote very much besides it. I suppose their Letters here faithfully
translated.

The First Letter is from Monsieur Le Moyne.
THo I find a Letter of the same Persons formerly published, wherein it is
said, he thought himself abused, sundry Passages in his Letter, moderating and
regulating the Episcopal Power, being left out (B^^as. Vapul. p. 80, 81.) Yet I
must not suppose any such thing here, unless I could prove it.

But from what is here published, P. 404. I could not have persuaded my self,
that there had been so much as one, which had believed, that a Man could not be
of her Communion, without hazarding his own Salvation. -- It is a very strange
thing to see them come to that Extreme, as to believe that a Man cannot be
saved in the Church of England. And p. 408. Is it not horrible Impudence, to
excommunicate her without Mercy, -- for them to imagine that they are the only
Men in England -- that hold the Truths necessary to Salvation, as they ought to
be held?] From hence is it not plain now, that either he understood not the
matter of difference betwixt the Conformists, and Non-conformists; or else did
here forget it? Had M. Le Moyne consulted and perused your Sermon (which
possibly was the Occasion of those Writings that M. de L' Angle seems to
condemn unseen, p. 420, 423.) had he only read what you say, p. 21. I will not
make the Difference wider than it is, -- 1. They unanimously confess they find
no Fault with the Doctrine of our Church, and can freely subscribe to all the
Doctrinal Articles. -- Well then, the case is vastly different as to their
Separation from us, and our Separation from the Church of Rome -- 2. They
generally yield, That our Parochial Churches are true Churches -- They do not
deny, That we have all the Essentials of true Churches, true Doctrine, true
Sacraments. -- 3. Many of them declare, that they hold Communion with our
Churches to be lawful.] Or had he seen what you write here, p. 95. how all your
Answerers agree with you in the Doctrine of the Church of England; and as Dr.
Owen says, we are firmly united with you in Confession of the same Faith; had
these things been in his Eye, surely, he could not have written at this Rate,
as if we thought, we were the only Men in England that held the Truths
necessary to Salvation. So I leave you your self to judge, whether M. Le Moyne
goes not upon a great Mistake. Sure I am, that either he, or you, have greatly
misrepresented us, (as every ordinary Capacity, by comparing what I have here
set down, may readily discern.) If what he says of us here be true, what you
say must needs be false. Now I do the more willingly appeal to your Judgment
here, touching these things, whereof we are accused, because I know you are
expert in the Questions that are amongst us. Say then, Whether ever any such
Controversy arose betwixt the Conformists and Non-conformists? Let me hear of
one Nonconformist, that ever asserted, That a Man could not be saved in the
Communion of the Church of England, or, that no Conformist could be saved. Yet
this learned Professor would have them all to be such. As is too plain from
that very odious Parallel, which he says ( p. 408.) One might make, -- betwixt
them and the Donatists. -- Betwixt them and those of the Roman Communion, who
have so good an Opinion of their own Church, that out of her they do not
imagine that any one can ever be saved. (As for his comparing them with Pop^
Victor, some will smile at it, as more fitly agreeing to others that are for
excomunicating Christians, for mere Nonconformity in matters of Ceremonies.
And no better will the Comparison hold betwixt them and the Audeans (or
Anthropomorphites) as whosoever reads what Antiquity says of them, may
perceive. If they were against rich Bishops, that is not to the Point. If our
Bishops would be content with their Riches, and quit their claim of Divine
Right, (till it can be proved) or not require our Acknowledgment of it, before
we believe it, nor impose such things on us, as we are sure, and can prove from
what they wrote, the Apostles would never have imposed, whose Successors they
pretend to be; then I doubt not we could accord with them. (So that here also
he shoots wide.)

And thus alas, by overdoing, he has hitherto done just nothing for you. I
know, Sir, that you to whose Judgment I here appeal, must needs acquit us from
that Incharitableness we are here charged with. Or we are not the Men he speaks
of, we are not arrived to that horrible Impudence to excommunicate all of your
Communion without Mercy. We are not like the Donatists, or those of the Roman
Communion, not as here we are represented. And so, if Dr. Potter's word ^ay be
taken, we are to be cleared and acquitted from the charge of Schis^^. As he
says ( Answer to Charity mistaken Sect. 3. p. 75. printed at Oxford 1633.) This
clears us from the Imputation of Schism, whose Property it is, (witness the
Donatists and Lucif^rians,) to cut off from the Body of Christ, and the hope of
Salvation, the Church from which it separates. Can you find any such
Separatists amongst those, who yet remain firmly united to you in the
Confession of the same Faith? We differ only (as I said, Rector of Sutton, p.
31.) as to certain (external) accidental Forms, Modes, and Rites, which the
Church of England cannot say are necessary, and appear to us as things at least
to be suspected* and yet they are obtruded and imposed with as much Rigor and
Strictness, as if they were most highly necessary. We doubt not yet, but there
are sober and truly pious Conformists, whose Consciences do not scruple the
Lawfulness of these things. But here I would say, as Dr. Potter (ibid p. 76.)
To him who in simplicity of heart believes (them to be lawful) and pracfiseth
them, and withal fears God and works Righteousness, to him they shall prove
Venial. Such a one shall by the Mercy of God, either be delivered from them, or
saved with them. But he that against Faith and Conscience, shall go along with
the Stream, to profess and practice them, because they are but little On^s; his
Case is dangerous, and witout Repentance desperate. So though the learned
Professor compares the present Dissenters (because he knows them not) with the
Donatists, I may here borrow an Expression of Chillingworth's (p. 312.. 111.)
Though they did the same Action, yet doing it upon different Grounds, it might
in the one merit Applause, (or Approbation) and in the other Condemnation.

And what follows in this Letter, page 408. still proves, that he knows not the
Men, or their Principles, whom he here condemns. For my part (says he) as much
inclined to Toleration as I am, I cannot for all this persuade my self, that it
ought to be allowed to those that have so little of it for other Men; and who*
if they were Masters, would certainly give but bad Quarter to those that
depended upon them. To which I shall say but thi^, One would think, they that
would have Christ's Army consist of Volunt^^rs, and not of pressed Men, (as the
Lord of Faulkla^d is for it, page 126.) ^hey should not be for giving bad
Quarter; otherwise it could not be expected, that the Volunteers would come in
very freely to them. One would think, Christians could not expect better
Quarter from any, than from those, who would have all admitted upon Catholic
Terms.

Other Passages in this Letter I am not so concerned in. Otherwise his arguing
from Success and Providence, page 404. might be questioned. And what is s^id of
the Confession and Articles of Faith, p. 40* [ Can there be any thing more
(...), than to say, that an Instrument which God has hertofore ^^ployed for
the Instruction of so many People, for the Consolation of so many good Men, for
the Salvation of so many Believers, is now become a destructive and pernicious
Thing?] May not the like be truly said of the Ministry of many Non-conformists,
both heretofore, and to this present day? Has not God made them Instruments of
the Conversion and Salvation of many Souls? How then is their Ministry become a
destructive and pernicious thing?

Further, I am confident, you will not, you cannot say, as he does, p. 406.
that for the space of 1500 Years, all the Churches in the World had no other
Government, than Episcopal; you have asserted the contrary, (as I said, Rector
of Sutton, p. 41.) and I fear not your retracting here.

But it is likely, what he says, page 409. will please you. For to speak the
Truth, I do not see that their Meetings are of any great Use, -- when I was at
London, -- I went to several of their private Assemblies, to see what way they
took for the Instruction (...) the People, and the preaching of the Word of
God. But I profess I was not at all edified by it.

And is this Truth? Where was the Fault then? would be my next Question, (if I
had opportunity to speak with him.) By this Passage, it would seem, their
Preaching is of no use, if one cannot be at all edified by it. And are such
Discourses, as those in the Supplement to the morning Exercise, of no use? And
the Lectures in the morning Exercise against Popery, of no use? Were the
Labors of such worthy, learned, excellent Men as Ames, Brightman, Broughton,
Ball, Bradshaw, Cartwright, Baynes, Cotton, Hooker, Shepherd, Norton,
Buroughs, Hildersham, (whose way of preaching, a worthy Conformist lately said
he wished the present Clergy would imitate) Hooker, Dod, Parker, Dr. Drake. Dr.
Kendell, Dr. Burgess, etc. and of late, Dr. Tuckney, Dr. Spurstow, Dr.
Wilkinson, Dr. Seaman, Dr. Manton, Dr. Goodwin, (I speak of such as are dead,
whose Works follow them, and some of which I hope will remain) Dr. Grew, Dr.
Bryan, Dr. Staunton, Dr. Temple, Dr. Holmes, and of such as Mr. Calamy, Corbet,
Bridges, Rich. and Joseph Alleyn, Angier, Wadsworth, Wells, Swinock, Newcomen,
Caryl, Greenhill, Nalton, Roe, Reyner, Ieans, Truman, A. Iackso^, Thomas Adams,
Ant. Burgess, Ralph Robinson, John Gibbons, Gawton, Charnock, Theoph. Gale,
etc. Ol. Haywood, I. Shaw, Thomas Vincent, and Matthew Pool, (so well known by
his learned and useful Synopsis Critic^^) all of no use? Now they rest from
their Labors, yet do not many of their Works praise them in the Gates? Did he
not consult the Writings of many of the Non-conformists yet living, viz Dr.
Iacomb, Dr. Owen, Dr. Bates, Dr. Wilkinson, Dr. Collins, Mr. Ba^ter, Mr. How,
Mr. Woodbridge, Mr. Clarkson, Mr. Sam. Cr^dock? But how rare a Preacher must we
suppose him to be, who heard one of the most famous Preachers of the
Non-conformists in London, and says of what he heard, that it seemed nothing to
the purpose? And yet some Conformists have been known to transcribe, and preach
some of their Sermons almost verbatim. I hope, such thought them to be of some
use. I say not this of all, or the most. Not only such as the friendly Debator
would scorn it, but many others that could not satisfy themselves to serve God
with that which cost them nothing. But if there are but two such in a County,
Two are some. And then will it not follow, that People should not hear them?
For it seems, the best Sermons they are known to preach, are of no use.

But a little before these blunt Passages, p. 409. he speaks very right, if his
Words be rightly expounded, and applied. -- They should do all for a good
Agreement; and in the present Conjuncture of Affairs, they should understand
that there is nothing but a good Reunion, that can prevent the Evils with
which England is threatened.

Thus others at a distance can foresee Ruin coming upon us by ou^ sad
Divisions; and yet we that are so near to Ruin, cannot, or will not see it.
The good Lord make those sensible of these things, who might do most to promote
a good Agreement, and happy Union, and thereby prevent our Ruin and Confusion.

But alas! what can we do here in comparison of you? Id tantum possumus, quod
jure possumus. We must not sin against Consciences. Certainly, that could not
be a good Agreement, which is made up by Sin. Would others condescend to our
Weakness (if they will not have it called Tenderness of Conscience) I say*
would they condescend, only so far as they might certainly without Sin, where
we could not submit without sinning; then I doubt not, a good Agreement would
soon follow. And as the Lord of Faulkland, p. 235. I am confident, that all who
receive the Scripture for the only Rule, and believe what is there plain to be
only necessary, would (if they truly believed what they profess, and were not
led aside either by Prejudice or private Ends, or some Popish Relics of
holding what they have long been taught, or following the Authority of some (by
them much esteemed) Persons either alive or dead) soon agree in as much as is
necessary, and in concluding no Necessity of agreeing in more; there being no
doubt, but it would soon appear plainly what is plain. To my understanding,
there is more in these few Lines to show the way to a good Agreement, than in
all your Sermon, and this Book, and Letters taken in too. We readily agree with
you in all that is necessary; and if you (for your parts) would but conclude
there is no necessity of agreeing in more, I cannot see what can hinder a
mutual good Agreement.

Page 410. And seeing the good of the ^tare and Church depends absolutely upon
the Union of the People in the Point of Religion, one cannot there press an
universal Union too much. But it ought to be procured by good means.

An Union in Religion may be without Uniformity in Ceremonies. You will not own
it, that you place Religion in these, that they are any parts of Religion. But
the pressing of such unnecessary doubtful things upon Men, about which many are
and ever will be dissatisfied, seems no good, nor probable means to procure an
Universal Union. That Prudence and Charity (which* this Professor afterward
commends, as necessary in this Work) would (in my simple Judgment) direct to
other Means and Methods.

Notes upon the Second Letter, from Monsieur de L' Angle.
ADD P. 420. I have not met with such Writings, said to be lately published, to
make Men believe that Communion with the Church of England is unlawful, and
that the Ministers cannot permit it to private Persons without sinning. Or if I
have seen any such, they are quite out of my Mind.

As to the former of these, do but allow them to distinguish, as you do in your
Rational Account, and they will say, They have communion with the Church of
England, so far as it is a Church, and very many of them have ordinary
Communion in the self-same Worship, so far as it is God's Worship. And what is
redundant, it is not necessary that they should have Communion in. It is one
thing to say, Communion with the Church of England is simply unlawful, unlawful
in it self, and so unto all Men; and another, to say that Communion in the
Liturgies, or Ceremonies is unlawful to them, who cannot yet be satisfied that
they are lawful.

But we are further supposed to believe, that Communion with the Church of
England is intolerable, in what follows, that the Ministers cannot permit it to
private Persons without sinning. Here let every one so far as they are called
to it, speak for themselves. For my part, I have never made it any of my Work
(God, and Men are Witnesses) to warn others to take heed how they had Communion
with the Church of England. I have never told any living Soul, that I should
sin, if I did not forbid their joining with Parochial Congregations. Rather it
should be my Prayer, I am sure it is my Hearts desire, that sober Conformists,
and Non-conformists might once come to join each with other, notwithstanding
their lesser Differences. But it seems, it is not permitted to you to have
Communion with such at Dr. O. and Mr. B. tho you may have Communion with
others, from whom you differ in greater Matters (both as to your Judgments, and
Practices too) while they do but conform. then is there not some strange secret
Virtue, or Enchantment in this Chain of Conformity? It can congregate the
heterogeneous, while it separates those who are more homogeneous.

But that this is not the Doctrine of the Non-conformists, that they cannot
permit private Persons to have Communion with you, without sinning, I am very
apt to conclude, because M. Le Moyne went to several of their private
Assemblies. while he was at London, and could never hear any such thing from
any of them. Otherwise sure, he that could remember the citing of Pliny, and
Vitruvius a hundred times in one Sermon, and tell us of it five years after,
(tho I doubt his being so ^^sy in casting up such Accounts, might be the cause
he wa^ not at all edified by the Sermon) would not have failed to take notice
of such a thing as that* being more pertinent and material. And for the same
Reason (with others) I cannot believe what follows h^^e, p. 423. That The
Bugb^ar Words of Tyranny, Oppression, Limbs of Antichrist, are continually
beaten into the Peoples Ears. If so, M. Le Moyne had been as likely as any
Person to have catched at them; and then had we heard of them again.

But further, some of us have the very same to say, that this Learned Person
says, ( P. 420, 421.) That In frequenting your Assemblies, and preaching too in
^ongregations that are under the Jurisdiction of the Church of England, (when
we could enjoy the Privilege, which indeed ^^th been very rarely) we have thus
also shown, that we do not believe her (...) to be unlawful.

Add P. 422. Schism is the most formid^ble ^vil tha^ can befall the Church: and
for the avoiding of this (...) ^Charity obliges all good Men to bear with then
Breth^^ (...) much less ^olerable than those of which the dispute is, (...) the
Eyes of those that have the most aversion from (...).

I thought it would appear, that these ^minent, learned Men did not rightly,
and fully understand our case. So the former speaks, as if we did excommunicate
the Church of England without Mercy; Wh^^ alas! we are rather under her
Excommunication. And this learne^ Person speaks, as if we had not so much
Christian Charity as to bear with our Brethren, in the use of a few Ceremonies:
but that is not the thing in Question. Many of us (at least) could, and do bear
with you^ Conformity, and join with you notwithstanding. But will it not follow
from his own Words, That Christian Charity obliges you to bear with ou^
Nonconformity, yet you will not bear with us? I hope you would be counted good
Men. Now he says, Christian Charity obliges all good Men to bear with their
Prethren in some things much less tolerable, than those of which the dis^^^^
is. The Apostle gives Timothy a very solemn Charge (then are not Bishops
concerned in it, if Timothy was a Bishop?) 1 Timothy 5. 21. I charge thee before
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these
things, without preferring one before another, doing nothing by Partiality. And
one of these things, he was to observe, we find, v. 17. Let the Elders that
rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they who labor in
the Word and Doctrine. Yet how many that have been ^alled to the work of the
Ministry, how many of your Brethren, that would gladly labor in the work they
have been called unto; and you have been doing them what dishonor you can,
loading them with the charge of Schism and unreasonable Separation, while you
can bear with things much less tolerabl^ in others? Is this your Christian
Charity? Or doing nothing by Partiality? Are there no Non-conformists, that use
to hear you, when they have Opportunity? I am apt to think there are. And thus
they bear with you, as to matters in dispute, farther than you are seen to bear
with them.

But this must be noted, It is one thing for us to bear with your Conformity,
and another thing by Word and Deed to declare our approbation of Conformity, or
to conform merely because you do so, and require us to do so, tho we suspect it
to be sinful. As the Lord Faulkland (I choose often to speak to you in others
Words; because I suppose if I spoke the same things in my own Words, they would
not be so much regarded) Reply p. 214. If they have any never so slight Errors,
and which appears so to me, which yet they will force me to subscribe to, (and
this you know is our case, which M. de L' Angle seems to be ignorant of, or
else forgot himself, and in these Lines (I am upon) went quite besides it) if I
communicate with them, my Assent would be damnable, or if they require the same
subscription to some Truths, which yet after my real endeavors in enquiry,
appear Errors to me, I doubt not but my refus^l is ^o way damnable. Something
more you have immediately before. This is home, and answers M. de L' Angle's
charging us with committing a very great Sin.

And where he cites Calvin, and Beza, p. 422. We may well be confident, that
they could not have submitted to such Terms, as are put upon us. And if he
himself had submitted unto all that is required of us, when he was here in
England, had he submitted to Reordination, and owned Bishops, a^a distinct
order from Presbyters, of Apostolical Institution, I very much question,
whether it might not have drawn the displeasure of his Brethren upon him, if
not their Censure at his return, as he speaks, p. 421.

Add p. 423. When I see what he says of the First Authors of the Separation, I
cannot but wish he had known them. He condemns some Writings, as unreasonable
and passionate, possibly he may mean our Answers to your Sermon: but th^^ for
ought appearing in this Letter, very probably he has not seen them. Yet after
all, he comes to plead for Dissenters. -- There is a very great number of good
Men, whose Faith is Pure, and whose Piety is (...), ^This ^estimony I hope is
true) and who remain separate from you only because their Simplicity is
surprised, etc. And whether he should not have had the like Charity for very
many Ministers, as he has for very many of their Hearers, may be a question? I
rank these with those weak ones, who said they were not of the Body; and of
whom (...) said they were of the Body for all that.

So why may not they, who are of the same Faith, and have the same Worship for
substance, be acknowledged as Brethren, and still owned as in Communion with
the Body; tho they have not the same Ceremonies, which are mere Shadows?

But he speaks more fully to the purpose, p. 424. -- And I am sure, (I wish he
could make us sure here) That if there were nothing wanting to cure it, but the
abstaining from some Expressions, the quitting some Ceremonies, and the
changing the Color of some Habits, you would resolve to do that, and something
more difficult than that, with great Pleasure.

From hence, as from that earnest Expression he has in the Page foregoing, [
In the name of God then, do all that possibly you can:] On^ would easily infer,
that he was little acquainted with the Case, he understood not where we have
stuck, what has thus long hindered our full Communion with the Church of
England. Otherwise, for ought I can perceive here, we might have had him
pleading for us, that such matters of difference might be quite removed, or at
least that they might not be urged, and imposed. And by what immediately
follows there, p. 424. it appears, he is a great Stranger to the
Savoy-Conference, never truly understood how Matters were carried, or who have
been the Obstructors of Union. Had the Non-conformists then, or at any time
since, refused to hearken and submit to fair and just Proposals, which would
not have pinched at all on that part, which should be kept tender in every one;
Then had they been extremely to blame, and had stood very much in their own
Light. But God allows us not to break our Peace with him and our own
Consciences, for Peace with Men; neither can true Piety, Zeal, and Charity
(three Cardinal Virtues which he commends in our Bishops, and prays they
may be increased more and more) require so much of us, which is not in our
Power to grant and yield unto. But seeing (as he says afterward) he should be
past all comfort, if he should not see some new Attempt at least made for the
success of a work so holy, and of such Consequence, in a time that seems so
proper for it; and Thousands more may say the like, who truly prefer
Ierusalem's Welfare before their chiefest Joy; I cannot but pray that those,
who are chiefly concerned; may have all the Qualities of the Head and the
Heart, which are necessary to make them able and willing to contribute to this
good Work.

Upon the Third Letter from Monsieur Claude.
ADD P. 439. Tho he says, the distinction betwixt the Bishop and Priest is very
Ancient; yet had he been required to own this Distinction, as grounded on the
Word of God, and to assert the Right of Episcopacy as of Apostolical
Institution, I very much question, whether this would not have gravelled him.

Add P. 440. I believe, there are very few to be found amongst us, that
question the Ordination of all ordained by Bishops. And many would be glad, if
it was permitted, that some of you would sometimes help us in our Meetings.

Where he speaks of Christian Unity and Concord, to my poor understanding Mr.
Corbet speaks more soundly, accurately, and distinctly.

P. 441. He is expressly against Tyranny over the Soul, and Men's forcing the
Conscience, by imposing a necessity to believe that which they believe, and to
practice that which they practice (where we must suppose the things themselves
are not necessary.) And according to what follows, in this case, The external
Communion ceases of right, and there is not any that is lawful to be had any
more with such. Was there not need of an Index Expurgatorius here? This makes
something for Dissenters, and pinches some where else. And what follows that, [
We do not believe that a single difference of Government or Discipline, nor
even a difference of Ceremonies innocent in their own Nature, is a sufficient
occasion to break the sacred bond of Communion] is little to your purpose. I
think, a single difference of Ceremonies should not break Communion, where
there is an Union in the same Faith, and in things necessary. But there is more
than a single difference of Ceremonies, where no difference is allowed, but the
same Ceremonies are imposed on all, tho one part cannot look on them as
innocent Ceremonies.

P. 442. Speaking of the Protestant Churches in France, he says, We utterly
disapprove and see with Grief, certain Extremes, whereinto some of the one
side, and the other do cast themselves. The one looking upon Episcopacy as an
order so absolutely necessary, that without it there can be no Ecclesiastical
Society, etc.

Then according to them, there may be true Churches, true Ministers, without
Bishops. And as they are ready to receive Ministers Episcopally ordained, (p.
440.) so they should think it an Extreme, if we will not own such for
Ministers, as have been ordained by a Presbytery, (and that when there were not
Bishops at hand to ordain.) If we will force such to be reordained, or will not
admit of them as Ministers, this is an Extreme with them.

Add P. 443. Let not Men domineer over their ^^^th and Consciences, (a thing
destructive to Religion) and I hope they would not be for rejecting the Bridle
of Discipline, nor for shaking off the whole yoke of Government, nor for
depriving themselves of the Succors which might be drawn out of a general
Union, for to strengthen them in the true Faith and in true Piety. But they
cannot apprehend that the things imposed will ever contribute any thing to
either of th^se.

Page 444. He seems to suppose, they are kept off, only from an Apprehension of
some unpleasant Inco^^eniencies in the Episcopal Government: whereas generally
it is not the Government it self, but some particular Matters imp^sed, which
they cannot with a good Conscience submit unto, which causes the distance.

So, add P. 447. Tho I have opportunity of conversing with very few, yet I
cannot think there is a Man, of all those that believe the Presbyterian
Government is more agrable to Scriptu^e-Rule, than our Prelatical, that stands
off merely because he cannot have what in his Judgment he prefers, as the
better Government. So what he says toward the end of the same pag^ [ The
Question here is not about the esse, ^r the been esse, but only about the
me^^us esse, tha^ they dispute with you] fully proves, ^ as I said) ^h^^ indeed
they know not the true state of our Case, as we see plainly, he is quit^ beside
the Point we stick at.

Now I look back a little again.

Add P. 445. -- The Bond of Christian Charity does not only join us with some
of our Brethren, but with all our Brethren, to receive from them, and to give
them Edification by living together in the same Communion.

Then let the World judge (by this Rule) who have most Christian Charity, You
(...) the Non-con^ormisis. Many of these hear and join with you, so (...) they
can, and have opportunity; whereas few or none of you will hear, ^ join with
them. And yet you are sometimes pleased to (...) B^thren.

(...) follows, it still appears, h^ understood not the Case, or was beside
(...). ^^w many that ^pp^^^^ not of the Government, yet could submit to it, did
(...) require any thing but what they are satisfied is agreeable to the Wor^?
And both parts agree, that God's Word ought to be the Rule of our (...). What
^^se is there considerable, I have more fully debared with you before,

Add Page 446 To imagine that we cannot with a good Conscience be present at
Assemblies, but only when we do fully and generally approve of all things in
them, it is certainly not to know neither the use of Charity, nor the Laws of
Christian Society.

But what if a Church requires Ministers and Christians to declare their
Approbation of Things they cannot approve of, and to practice that in the
Worship of God, which (in their Judgment) ought not to be practiced? Is not
this a different Case? Would not this be contrary to true Faith and Piety? And
are not such so far cut off from the Communion of that Church, by what he says
in the beginning of that Page? That is not allowable for such to do, which yet
they look upon as tolerable in others, who are otherwise persuaded in their
Minds abut the same.

Add P. 447. I cannot believe that there is any one among them that looks upon
your Episcopacy, or your Discipline, or certain Ceremonies which you observe,
as Blots and capital Errors, which hinder a Man from obtaining Salvation. --
Something was spoken to this, in the Answer to the first Letter. So I say
still, they are not so well satisfied about these, as to give a true Assent
unto them, and then to declare their Assent, would be foul Dissimulation. They
know not how easily others get to Heaven by their Conformity: But if they
conformed against their Consciences, they know not how they should ever come
there without Repentance.

Then page 448. he comes to put in a good Word for us. I hope you will not be
wanting in the Duties of Charity, and the Spirit of Peace, and that when the
Dispute shall be only of some Temperaments, (as if the Dispute had not been of
these all this while) Or of some Ceremonies that are a Stumbling Block (and yet
innocent things) and which in themselves are nothing in comparison of an entire
Reunion of your Church under your holy Ministry, you will make it seen that
you love the Spouse of your Master more than your selves; and that it is not so
much from your Greatness and your Ecclesiastical Dignity that you desire to
receive your Glory and your Joy, as from your pastoral Virtues, and the ardent
care (...) take of your Flocks.

Now I had thought, that all the Dispute or Difference betwixt you, and the
Non-conformists, had been only about some Ceremonies, and the like things; I
mean, such as in themselves are nothing in comparison of an entire and happy
Union. Were but such things removed, or no such things imposed, I should hope,
you would be soon united and agreed. He that understands not, that it is the
strict and rigorous imposing of such things, (which the Imposers might lawfully
take off, and we cannot lawfully submit to) which keeps up the Difference
amongst us; I say, he that understands not this, and does not consider, and
speak to it, he cannot be supposed rightly to consider our Case. And yet how
obvious is it, that this is quite over-looked here, not once seriously debated
in any of these three Letters?

And therefore, as I before appealed to you, as Judge, whether we were not
misrepresented here, and you have judged the matter already; so I shall expect,
that in the next Impression of this your Impartial Account, you will take care,
these Letters may be left out. You cannot but know, that they were no competent
Judges betwixt us, who had only heard one Part, and seem wholly ignorant what
the other Part has to plead for themselves. Here I remember what you say,
Preface, page 35. (of one you speak of there) But I must do the Author that
Right, to declare, that before his Death, he was very sensible of the Injury he
had done to some worthy Divines, -- and begged God and them pardon for it. So
would I have you to do these worthy eminent, learned Divines, and us also that
write, to smother their Letters, as soon as you can, if you do no more.
Otherwise though I may not live, or have liberty to call you partial, the World
may account you so.

And yet observing every one of them to have some touch for Moderation,
Charity, some Temperament, and the like, if a Council of such as these were
called, and once thoroughly understood our Cause, I should not doubt of their
determining for us. (I have respect to what you say, Pref. p 77.) And to come
nearer to you yet, If a Council could be called of all the Protestant Churches
in Christendom (and let any one of these be set in the Chair,) that would
indifferently hear what both Parts have to say, (I would only exclude such as
you, for what you say, Rat. Acc. p. 292. and 338. What Justice or Reason is
there, that the Party accused, should sit Judge in their own Cause? None of the
Parties accused seem fit to you, either to be Judge, or Jury, and with this
Caution only) I should not distruct our Cause, if such a Council had the
hearing of it.

One thing more I learn from these Letters, viz. When I see that such eminent
learned Divines are so mistaken, and drawn to misrepresent so considerable a
numb^r of their Brethren, living in the same Age with them, and not very far
remote from them; it satisfies me how much more easy it was for the Romish
Party, being uppermo^^ in the World, to cloud and obscure those, who at any
time appeared against their Err^rs and Corruptions. As the Lord Faulkland
(Answer to Mr. Montague p. 281) If he consider the great Industry of his Church
in extinguishing those whom they have called Her^ticks, and also their Books,
so that we know scarce any thing of them, but from themselves (who are too
partial to make good Historians) if he consid^r how carefully they stop Men's
Mouths --. But here I shall stop my Pen. So much to these Letters.

Yet for a Conclusion, I have a few Words more particularly to you. Now,

Reverend Sir,

Be not offended at my plainness. I hope it is for the Interest of the true
Protestant Religion, that I appear in this Cause, (how weak, and unworthy
soever.) My Charity, (I speak my heart) is not confined to a Party, no, not so
set upon that, which you would call my own; but where I have reason to believe
others of a different Persuasion are more holy, and live more like Christians,
I would esteem, love, and honor such more. I am not conscious to my self of
wishing you the least harm, or enjoying your Dignities, or Estate. Live or dye,
sink or swim, however things go with me and mine, I hope, it is my Hearts
desire, it may go well with the Church and People of God. I see the Protestant
Interest in a lamentable, tottering State. Methinks, all that are true Friends
to it should readily yield, it would stand firmer on ample Ground, (Terms of
Communion of a due latitude) than on such a narrow Bottom, that admits not of a
Multitude of sound Christians, who would be firm to it. Yet the latter of these
you plead zealously for, (though it is plain, your dividing them from you, by
unnecessary, uncatholick Terms, must needs weaken both you, and them.) This I
cannot but be sensible of, and think it my Duty to lament.

Unless the Lord shall incline you to a more moderate Course, than you have
lately taken, in reference to Dissenters, I know I may expect a fiercer Assault
from you. But I know as well what Ground I stand on, and further am bold to
say, you cannot hope for Success in this Cause, without first destroying a
considerable part of your own Works, (not only pulling down your Ireni^um, a
good Sconce, however now slighted; but also sadly battering and shaking that
goodly Fabric, your main Fort, the Rational Account too.) And if you
causel^sly destroy, what you had so well built, and what is fortified and
strengthened with so much Reason, will you not make your self a Transgressor?
And may not this add something to the grief of your Wound (as Aejop has it of
the Eagle) to be shot with your own Feathers.

Yet Reverend Sir) I would be more concerned far, on other Accounts for you.
Refrain now from these Men, and let them alone; for if the Work wherein they
are employed be God's Work* then you cannot seek to overthrow it, but therein
you will be found a Fighter against God. Oh! be well advised what you do
further this way. You may be under a sore Temptation, seeing your self so far
engaged in this Cause, possibly you may think, it would be a Dishhonour now to
retract. But if by this Undertaking of yours, you seek to deprive very many
Souls of the ordinary means of Salvation, ( forbidding us to preach to Sinners
that they might be saved); if thus you set your self in some measure to
obstruct the Course of the Gospel; if you so far oppose the Interest of Christ,
(your great Lord and Master) if you are against what may be truly called God's
Worship, and truly Religious Exercises, be assured, this shall not be for your
Honor in the End. For the Lord has said, Them that honor me, I will honor;
and they that despise me, shall ^e lightly esteemed. And you know further, our
Lord Jesus Christ has denounced a sad Woe unto such as take away the Key of
Knowledge from M^n.

And ought you not to think seriously of it, whether you may not be accounted
to have a special Hand, in procuring what further Opposition and Sufferings,
your poor Brethren may meet withal? If ^en should be animated, and set on by
your Writings, to fine, impoverish, imprison, etc. them (being falsely
persw^^^d, that in persecuting them, they should do God and his Church good
Service) can you be found altogether clear in this matter?

And is it not a dangerous thing, not only to scand^lize and injure a Prophet,
or eminent Saint and Servant of God, but (...) offind the least and weakest
Believer? Mar. 9. 42. Whosover shall offend one of these little ones that
believe in me, etc. There we see, Christ makes not a light matter of it.

You may go on censuring such, as guilty of as great a Sin as Murder, when
nothing but a fear of sinning kee^^ them from d^ing as you would have them. But
when you have said ^^ll you can against them, and tho you will not allow them
to be Members of any Church upon Earth; yet with all your Authority (was it
greater) you cannot shut them out of Heaven, you cannot separate them from
Christ; As P. Martyr, Caeterum dic^nt quicquid velint, ^^^quam efficient qui^
vivdentes and ^^^ertes ad praescrip^um Verbi Dei s^^^ faelices. The best of it
is, they may be happy, for all that you can ever say, or do. Yea, though they
were supposed under some Misapprehensions, as suppose Conformity lawful in
^^self; yet their Nonconformity, and Noncompliance with you, through*
Conscientious Tenderness is better than a rash, precipita^^, or dissem^ling*
hypocritical Conformity would ^e. And thus endeavoring (as near as they can)
to keep to the Rule of the holy Scripture, avoiding what they cannot but
suspect is not according to that Rule they may be in a safer way, than if they
were in external Communion with you. And so much I have from my Lord Faulkland
too, (p. 287.) By that Rule, whosoever regulates his Life and Doctrine (or
Belief) I am confident, that though he may mistake Error for Truth in the way,
he shall never mistake Hell for Heaven in the End.

And yet further, should you not consider, whether it be not more agreeable to
the Revealed Will and Mind of Christ, that you should suffer some Ta^es to
grow, rather than pluck up good Corn with them?

Reverend Sir, It having so happened, that poor I have been called out (among
others an hundred times fitter) to show my Opinion touching the Matter you have
started, I cannot but think, as I here declare (so far as my Judgment serves)
you might have employed your Time, your Learning and Parts to much better
purpose, than you have done in this late Piece of Work. Surely my Life would be
but sad to me, if I could not find more pleasing Work than this, that you have
been an Occasion of engaging me in. And yet I hope to have more Comfort in it,
at the great day of Accounts, than I can conceive you to have of yours in that
Day. If you lay the Unity ^f Christians upon Conformity too, or Uniformity in
doubtful and suspected, if not unlawful Practices, a general Union can never be
had, or hoped for. If you would make the way to Heaven narower than Christ has
left it, many will be forced to leave you here.

But now if you would henceforth propose and promote an Union amongst
Christians upon Catholic Ierms, we are for you, and would heartily join with
you. And as that most learned and pious Bishop Usher (Sermon. of Universe. of the
Church, and Unity of Faith p. 43, 44.) If at this d^y we should take a Survey
of the several Professions of Christianity, that have any large Spread in any
part of the World, -- and should put by the Points where in they did differ one
from another, and gather into one Body the rest of the Articles wherein they
all did generally agree; we should find that in th^se Propositions, which
without all Controversy are universally received in the whole Christian World,
so much truth is contained as, being joined with holy Obedience, may be
sufficient to bring a Man unto everlasting Salvation. Neither have ^e cause to
doubt* but that as many as do walk according to this Rule, -- Pe^^e shall be
upon them, and Mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Now there^or^ do, as he says,
( ibid. p. 18.) We for our parts dare not abridg this Grant, and limit this
great Lordship, as we conceive it may best fit our own turns; but ^^ave it to
his own Latitude, and seek for the Catholic Church, neither in this Part nor
in that P^ece. but among all that in every place call upon the N^m^ of Jesus
Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.

And if a Zeal for such a general Comprehension, and happy Union of Christians
will (to use the Words of Mr. de L' Ang^e p. 424.) bring down a thousand
Blessings of Heaven and Earth upon those that shall contribute the most unto it
resolve now, and hence forward to put forth your self this ^ay; Put in for your
share of Blessings.

I remember, I concluded my former writing with a Collect borrowed from you.
Here I would say Amen to that Prayer, with which Dr. Potter shuts up his Answer
to Charity mistaken, [That it would please the Father of Mercies to take away
out of his Church all Dissension and Discord, all Heresies and Schisms, all
Abuses and false Doctrines, all Idolatry, Superstition and Tyranny; and to
unite all Christians in one holy Bond of Truth and Peace, Faith and Charity;
that so with one Mind and one Mouth, we may all join in his Service, -- ] I add
no more, but that the Father of Lights would so direct your Studies, and
Course, that you may do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth; which is
the Prayer of,

Reverend Sir, Your humble and faithful Servant, John Barrett.

I more wish, than hope, that of these sad Controversies here will be, The END.
Proper Materials drawn from the true and only way of Concord, etc.
QUERY 1.
WHether the Apostle Paul has not clearly and fully decided the case, against
censuring or despising one another for things Indifferent? Romans 14, and 15. And
if Men wi^^ not understand, nor stand to that Decision, whether it should be
any wonder, if they will not understand, or be satisfied with our most cogent
Arguments? [ Second Plea for Peace. p. 169. 75.]

Whether they that say, the Apostle does not forbid such Impositions there, can
see Day for Light? 1. Does he not forbid censuring, despising, and not
receiving one another; and command Dissenters to receive one another? And then
must he not forbid such Imposition as is inconsistent herewith? 2. Does he not
direct this Command to all the Church of Rome, even to the authorized Pastors
and Rulers of the Church, as well as to the People? 3. Was he not a Pastor and
Ruler of that Church as fully authorized as any that should succeed? 4. Is not
this Scripture (as others) written for a standing Rule, and so obligatory to
Rulers still? [ ib. p. 170. 77.] Did not the Apostle speak here by Divine
Authority? Are not his Words recorded here, part of Christ's Law indicted by the
Spirit? And may we think, that any that come after him, or to whom he wrote,
should have power to contradict or obliterate the same? [ Way of Concord, p.
152.] 5. Do not his Reasons touch the case of all Churches in all Ages, and not
only some particular Persons, and Case? As he argues from the difference
betwixt well-meaning Christians as weak, and strong* as doubting, and as
assured, as mistaken, and as in the right, etc. If such weak, mistaken
Christians in such matters ever have been, and ever will be in the Church upon
Earth, does not the reason from their case and necessity still hold? 6. How
many great and pressing moral Reasons (that all Christians are bound by) are
heaped up here? Does he not argue, 1. From Christian love to Brethren. 2. From
human Compassion to the Weak. 3. From God's own Example, who receives such,
whom therefore we must not reject. 4. From God's Prerogative to judge, and our
having no such judging power in such cases. 5. From God's Propriety in his own
Servants. 6. From God's Love and Mercy that will uphold such. 7. Because what
Men do as to please God, must not be condemned without necessity, but an holy
Intention cherished, so it be not in forbidden things. 8. Because Men must not
go against Conscience in indifferent things. 9. From Christ's dreadful Judgment
which is near, and which we our selves must undergo. 10. From the Sin of laying
Stumbling Blocks, and occasions of Offense. 11. From the danger of crossing the
end of Christ's Death, destroying Souls for whom he died. 12. Because it will
make our Good to be ill spoken of. 13. Because the Kingdom of God, or
Constitution of Christianity, and the Church, lies in no such Matters, but in
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. 14. Because Christ is
pleased in this without the other, and God accepts such. 15. Because such are
approved of Men, (i. e.) This Righteousness, Peace, and holy Joy, without
Agreement in such Ceremonies and By-matters, bears its own Testimony for
Approbation to the Judgment of all impartial Men; Humanity and Christianity
teach us to love and honor such. 16. From our common Obligation to live in
Peace with all. 17. From our Obligation to do all to the edifying of one
another. 18. Because God's Work else is destroyed by us. 19. Because our own
lawful Acts are turned into Sin when they hurt another, and from the Obligation
that lies on us to deny our own Liberty in Meat, etc. to avoid the hurting of
another that is weak. 20. From the Damnation of such as are driven or drawn to
act doubtingly. 21. From the special Duty and Mercy of the Strong that should
bear the Infirmities of the Weak. 22. From the Example of Christ himself, that
pleased not himself, and our great Obligation to imitate Christ. 23. From God's
Patience to us. 24. Because indeed this is the true way to Love and Unity, that
with one Mind and one Mouth we may glorify God, while we lay not our Concord on
impossible Terms. 25. Because Christ receives us, and it is to God's Glory,
etc. Whether do all these moral Arguments signify no more than this, receive
and tolerate such only till you make Laws against them? [ibid. p. 150, 151,
152.]

Query, 2. Whether Men have any Authority to make Laws about God's Worship, but
what Christ has given them? [ Second Plea for Peace, p. 28.. 36.] And whether
it be not against the Mind and Law of Christ (declared Act. 15. 28.) that
unnecessary Laws and Burdens in Religion should be made for, and laid upon the
Churches? [ ibid. p. 29.. 40.] So whether that Determination and Decree of the
holy Ghost by the Apostles be not obligatory to all Rulers and Churches upon
Earth, even to this day? And whether all that think not themselves wiser,
should not confess that at least it is safe to follow it? [ ibid. p. 169.. 74.]
If therefore the Pastors shall contrary to that Decree, impose unnecessary
things on the Church, not only under the Obligation of Duty, but as a necessary
Condition of Church Communion, whether this be not a tyrannizing over God's
Heritage, and usurping a Power never given them? [ ibid. p. 155.. 33.]

Q. 3. Whether what God has left to human Prudence to determine concerning
Churches and Church Affairs, be not thus limited by his general Laws, viz. That
all things be done to Edification (the Circumstances fitted to the end, the
Glory of God and the public Good, the promoting of Truth and Godliness,) that
all be done in Love, to the promoting of Love and Unity; and that all be done
in order and decently; and as may avoid Offense or Scandal to all, both those
without, and those within? [ First Plea for Peace, p. 19.] Then query,

1. Whether they do well, that unnecessarily bring Subjects into such a Strait,
by needless Laws, for Additions in Religion, that the Consciences of Men
fearing God must unavoidably be perplexed between a Fear of Treason and
Disobedience against Christ, and of Disobedience to their Prince or Pastors? [
Second Plea, etc. p. 28.. 38.]

2. Whether it be not more inexcusable to rack and divide the Church by
unnecessary Additions in Religion? [ ibid.. 39.]

3. Whether it be not against the Will and Law of Christ, to use things
otherwise indifferent, scandalously or temptingly, to the ensnaring and
endangering of Men's Souls, and the Dishonor of Religion? ( Romans 14, and 15. 1
Cor. 8.) And whether Men may make Laws about Religion, enjoining such an evil
use of such things? [ ibid. p. 29.. 41.]

4. Whether to invent and command new publick-Worship-Ordinances (either in
God's Name or their own) coordinate, or of the same kind with God's own
Worship-Ordinances, which have no peculiar usefulness to one Age or People more
than to another, nor any new Reason for them, but what was extant at the making
of God's Laws, (whether this) seems not to be an Accusation of Christ's Laws
of Omission and Defectiveness, and an Usurpation of his Legislative Power? [
ibid.. 42.]

5. Whether to forbid Baptism, or to alter it, or make a new Sacrament of
Admission, or a new consecrating, or dedicating Symbol for the Solemnization of
our Covenant with God, and a new Symbol of the Christian Church, or visible
Badge of Christianity, seem not an Usurpation, and Accusation of God's Law, as
insufficient? [ ibid. p. 30.. 46.]

6. Whether to forbid Preaching, or Prayer or Praise, ordaining Homogeneal
Means of our own, seem not an Usurpation, and unlawful? [ ibid. p. 31.. 47.]

7. Whether to add more Doctrines, or Articles of Faith, which God has not
revealed in Nature or Scripture, and to require Belief or Pro^^^^^ of Belief of
the same* (...) religious End, seem not an Usurpation, and unjust Accusation of
God's Word, as insufficient? [ ibid. p. 29.. 43.]

8. Whether to alter the Qualifications of Church Members, either forbidding
those that Christ requires us to receive, or receiving such as Christ
forbids us to receive, be not to contradict his Laws by Usurpation, whether
Magistrates, or Pastors do it? [ ibid. p. 30.. 45.]

9. Whether to alter the Qualifications of Christ's Ministers, or the nature of
their Office, and invent new coordinate Officers, seems not Usurpation? [
ibid. p. 31.. 48.]

10. Whether to overthrow, or prohibit Christ's Church Discipline, or to set up
another (that is not merely subordinate to it, modally to promote it) seem not
an Usurpation? [ ibid.. 51.]

11. Whether to forbid Religious Assemblies, or alter their Ends and principal
Use, be not to usurp, and to contradict the Laws of Christ? [ ibid. p. 29.. 44.]

Q. 4. Whether Rulers ought not to prefer Christ's Interest before their own,
and account that their own lies in preferring His; and should not value
conscionable upright Men, though Dissenters in tolerable Cases, and not
encourage their unconscionable Enemies? [ Way of Concord, 3d part, p. 26.] And
whether the chief Work of Rulers be not to promote the keeping of God's Laws,
and the everlasting Good of Men, and the temporal Good in order thereunto? [
Second Plea for Peace, p. 108. col. 1.. 11.] And whether Rulers may command any
thing, which will notably do more Harm than Good; or make an unnecessary thing
a Means or Occasion of excluding the necessary Worship of God, or preaching of
his Gospel [Judgment of Non-conformists, in second Plea, etc. p. 76.. 59.] And
whether is it more to common Good, and the Interest of Honesty and Conscience,
that all the Persons in a Nation be imprisoned, banished, or killed, that dare
not swear, say and practice all that is imposed on them, than that unnecessary
Impositions be altered, or forborne [ Way of Concord, 3d Part, p. 111, 112.]

Q. 5. Though Magistrates may regulate us in the Circumstances of those Duties,
which the Law of Nature or Gospel does command; yet if on such Pretense they
violate, or contradict either the Law of Nature, or the Gospel, and dedstroy
the Duty it self, or its End, whether we are bound in such Cases to obey them?
Or whether it be not enough that we patiently suffer? [ First Plea for P. p.
104.]

Q. 6. Whether the Kings of Israel had Power to forbid the Priests exercising
their Office according to God's Law? Or, whether they could change or abrogate
their Office? [ ibid. p. 20.] Of Solomon's putting out Abiathar, see ( p. 21.)
Whether might they then have put out a lawful Priest, that had not forfeited
his Life, or Office? Or might they have put any one in his Place, that had not
Right from God, or that was unqualified? Or might they have forbidden the
Priests the Work appointed them by God? [ ibid. p. 22.]

Q. 7. Whether such as Christ's Laws empower to ordain others to the Work of
the Ministry, have Power from Christ to hinder the Ordination of such as
Christ's Laws admit into the Ministry? [ ibid. p. 25.]

Q. 8. Whether the Magistrate (besides the Power of the Temples and Tithes, and
public Maintenance and Liberty also) has the Power of Ordination, or
Degradation, that no Man may be a true Minister without, or contrary to his
Consent? [ Sacrileg. Desert. p. 11.] Whether were not many of the
Non-conformist's true Pastors of their several Flocks, before they were
silenced, and cast out? [ ibid.] And whether did the ejecting them from the
Temples and Tithes degrade them, or make them no Pastors to their Flocks?
(Though Prudence may require Minister and People to consent to a Dissolution of
such a Relation, when they cannot hold it without greater hurt than benefit*) [
ibid.]

Q. 9. Though Princes or Patrons may. 1. Offer meet Pastors to the Ordainers
and Consenters to be accepted, when there is just Cause for their
Interposition. 2. And may hinder both Ordainers and People from introducing
intolerable Men. 3. And when a Peoples Ignorance, Wilfulness, Faction, or
Division makes them refuse all that are truly fit for them, may urge them to
accept the best, and may possess such of the Temples, and public Maintenance,
and make it consequently to become the Peoples Duty to consent; Yet whether
Christ and his Apostles have not settled the Right of Ordination on the Senior
Pastors or Bishops, and the Right of consenting in the People? [ First Plea for
P. p. 33.] And whether any Man can be the Pastor of a Church de jure, or truly
de facto, against the Church, or Peoples Will, or without their Consent? [
ibid. p. 25.] As the Saying of Cyprian is well known, that [the People have the
greatest Power both to choose a worthy Priest, and to refuse, or forsake the
unworthy, ibid. p. 77] And when in England it belongs, 1. To the Patron to
present. 2. To the Bishop to ordain and institute, and therefore to approve and
invest. 3. To the People Iure Divino, to be free Consenters, 4. And to the
Magistrate to protect, and judge who shall be protected or tolerated under him;
if these four Parties be for four Ministers, or for three, or two several Men,
and cannot agree in one, Whether the culpable Dissenters will not be the Causes
of Schism? [ ibid. p. 50.]

Q. 10. Whether the Churches and Councils were in the right, or no, which for
700, yea 1000 Years held that the calling of a Bishop was null, that had not
the Clergies Election, and the Peoples Election or Consent? And if Usurpers
should thrust out the Bishops and Conformists, and make themselves our Pastors
against our Wills, what would the Bishops think of such? Would they hold it
unlawful to separate from such, agreeing with them in Doctrine and Worship. [
Ans. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 27.]

Q. 11. If a lawful Magistrate, or Prince put in place of Pastors, Persons of
untried and suspected parts of Fidelity, Whether will his Imposition make such
the true Pastors of that Church before and without the Peoples Consent? [ First
Plea for P. p. 55.] If so, then whether might not one Roman Emperor have
undone all the Churches and Souls in the Empire in a great Degree, by imposing
on them insufficient, heretical, or malignant Pastors? [ ibid. p. 56.] If
People were as much under Princes for choosing Guides for their Souls, as a
Daughter in her Fathers House is under her Father for the choice of an Husband
(which yet we have not seen proved) yet as he can be no Husband to her, without
her Consent, (though She culpably deny Consent, Query, Whether it be not so
here, that they can be no Pastors to People, till they consent? [ Way of
Concord. p. 209.. 18.] But whether has God authorized the Magistrate to choose
what Persons every Man in his Dominions shall entrust his Soul to, as the
Pastor, whose Conduct he is bound in Conscience to obey? ( Ans. to Dr. Still.
Sermon p. 14.)

Whether shall the People have any Judgment of discerning, or not? If yea, must
not the Bounds of it be showed, without denying the thing, (as if that would
bring in all Confusion?) If Usurpers claim the Crown, must not Subjects judge
which is the true King, and defend his Right? Will any say* if the People be
Judges, they may set up Usurpers, and put down the King? When they are but
Discerners of that which is before their Duty, and have no Right to err, or
alter the Law and Right, can any dreadful* Cons^^uence be proved to follow on
it? Or if it be otherwise, must they not be ruled as Brutes? and so must not
^udg so much as whom they are to obey? Is there any Christian that dare say,
that Bishops or Princes are in all things to be obeyed, lest the People be made
Judges? ( First Plea for P. p. 70, 71.)

Q. 12. Whether the Ministerial Office be taken up upon Trial* or for a time;
or during Life (with a Capacity to perform the work?) If the latter be granted,
then whether it be any less than, 1. Horrid Sacriledg, 2. Perfidious
Covenant Breaking, 3. Disobedience to God, 4. Cruelty to Souls, 5. And
unthankfulness for great Mercies, if any of us shall desert our undertaken
Office (yea, tho a silencing Diocesan should forbid us the exercise of it,
unjustly? Sacriledg. Desert. p. 25, 30.]

Q. 13. If Rulers may silence the faithful Ministers of Christ, who knows
where to bound his Obedience to such Silencers? If a 1000 or 2000 faithful
Ministers must cease Preaching, when so forbidden, why not 3000? why not 4000?
If half a Kingdom; can you satisfy the Consciences of the other half, that they
must not do so too; and so all Christian Kingdoms conform to Muscovy, when the
Prince commands it? And if a 1000 or 2000 or 3000 Parishes must choose the
apparent hazard of their Souls, and refuse such helps as Experience certifieth
us they greatly need, in Obedience to Man, why must not the rest of the
Parishes do so also? May I give away the needful helps to my Salvation, because
others have them? should their Salvation satisfy me instead of mine own? [
First Plea for Peace, p. 89, 90.] Whether should Men persuade the poor to
famish, rather than against Law to beg; because if thousands of them dye of
Famine, yet other People are supplied? [ ib. p. 102.]

Q. 14. Whether the ancient Christian Pastors preached not against the Will of
Princes for 300 years; and after that against the Will of Christian Princes (as
Constantius, Valens, Theodosius junior, Valentinian, etc.) And whether not only
Apostles said, that God was to be obeyed rather than Men; but such as Timothy
(who was ordained by Man) were not strictly charged before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and dead at his appearing, and Kingdom,
to preach the Gospel, and be instant in season, etc. [ ib. p. 226, 227.]

Q. 15. Whether any Man has Authority to forbid a Faithful Minister of Christ,
who forfeiteth not his Office-Power, to perform the Office to which he is
ordained? And whether such remain not under a Divine Obligation, which Man's
Law cannot dissolve? Whether it be not right, as Bishop Bilson says, [If
Princes forbid us, we must go on with our work?] What if an Interdict silence
all the Ministers in a Kingdom? Must all obey? What if it silence more than can
be spared without the Churches wrong? And whose Laws be they, that would so
bind? Is it Infidel Princes or only Christians? Is it Papists, etc. or only the
Orthodox? Must God ask leave of Rulers to be worshipped as God? Has God made
Men Judges whether the Gospel shall be preached or not; or whether People shall
be Saved, or left to perish in their Ignorance and Sin? And how comes the
Orthodox to be authorized to do Mischief, or to forbid the needful preaching of
the Gospel, any more than an Heretic? or a Christian more than an Heathen? Is
he not bound to do more good than they, rather than authorized to do more hurt?
[ Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 84, 85. or 78, 79.] See also p. 21.

Q. 16. Where such Sins are made the condition of Ministration by Men in Power,
as that all the whole Ministry of a Kingdom are bound in Conscience to deny
Consent and Conformity thereto, Whether is it not the duty of all the Ministry
in primo instanti to forbear their Ministerial Office, or of none, (the Reason
being the same to all?) Now if all these must forbear or lay down their Office,
because forbidden by Men to exercise it, then is it not in the Power of a
Prince to cast out Christianity when he pleases, and to deny God all public
Worship? And must we not then ask leave of Rulers, that Christ may be Christ,
and Souls may be saved; (as if the Keys of Heaven and Hell were theirs?) [
First Plea for Peace, p. 114, 115.] But whether must not all agree, that to
silence all the Ministers of the Nation, is a thing that God has not given any
Man authority to do; because of the necessity of their Ministry: and
consequently to silence any necessary Ministry at all? [ ib. p. 223.] And if
all must not lay down their Ministry, why must a 1000 or 2000 do it rather than
all the rest? If it be said, the rest are a competent supply to the Churches;
how shall we be sure that other Men's sinning will absolve the Innocent from
their Duty? (As if I were bound to be a Minister only till other Men will Sin*)
And where can the Wit of Man ever set Bounds as to this Matter? Will it not be
granted, that if the most in France conform to Popery, this will not disoblige
all others from the exercise of their Ministry? And who then can say, what
those Untruths and Sins are, which a weak and erring Ministry may be guilty of,
which shall serve to disoblige the rest? And were not this an easy way to
introduce any Error, by forbidding any but the Defenders of it to Preach? [ Ib.
p. 115, 116.]

Q. 17. Whether God has authorized the Magistrate to choose and command in what
Words only every Pastor shall publicly pray to God, and what Books and Words
of Men he shall profess Assent and Consent to, and what dedicating Symbols of
Christianity he shall use as engaging in the Christian Covenant; and to command
Ceremonies and Modes for Dissent wherein he shall deny Baptism and
Church Communion to all Dissenters, tho the things be taken to be indifferent
by the Magistrate, and great Sins by the Dissenters? [ Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon.
p. 14.]

Q. 18. Whether Pastors usurp not Power over one another, when they command all
about them to speak to Men from God, or to God from Men in no other Words, but
what they (the Usurpers) shall write them down, making Ministers but Cryers to
read their Prescripts and Proclamations? [ Second Plea, etc. p. 142.]

Q. 19. Whether any but Volunteers should be taken for true Christians, or
admitted to Holy Communion, to receive the Seals of Pardon and Life? [ Way of
Concord, third Part, p. 27.. 7.] And whether Pastors of the Churches should be
constrained to administer Sacraments to any against their Consciences? Whether
it be not their Office to be Judges, who is to be baptized, and to communicate?
[ Ib. p. 123.]

Q. 20. If any be urged to take a Reordination against their Judgments,
whether Morals must not be preferred before Rituals, and Rituals never set
against them? And whether they should not be of this Mind, that deny the
Scriptures to have unchangeably fixed all Rituals; and yet confess that Morals
are fixedly determined? [ Ib. p. 214, 215.] It is not contrary to the temper of
the Gospel, which ever subjecteth Ceremonies, Rites and External Orders, to
Morals, and to Man's Good, and the great Ends? [ Ib. third Part, p. 81.]

Q. 21. When the most learned, sober, judicious Conformists, differ not at all
from us about the Matter it self, to which we deny Conformity; but confess it
to be unlawful (as to the hardest Points of the imposed Subscriptions, Oaths,
Declarations, and Covenants) and only take the Words in such a Sense, in which
we our selves could take them, were we persuaded that it was indeed the true
meaning of them; Query hereupon, How it comes to pass that they, (who are as
much as we against that Sense which we disown, and agree with us in the Matter)
should deserve Liberty, Honor and Preferment, for otherwise interpreting the
Words of the Law, which the Lawgivers themselves will not interpret; when our
Supposition, that the Lawmakers mean properly as they speak, is taken to
deserve Scorn, Silencing, etc. from them that will not expound their Words to
us? [ Judgment of Non-conformists in Second Plea, etc. p. 116, 117.] And seeing
(as those worthy Conformists must grant) that if the Words of the Laws be
properly to be understood, and not with their Limitations, then the Conformists
are in the wrong, and the Non-conformists in the right; whether it be not
Justice to tell the World, and write it on our Cross, that we are silenced,
etc. because we dare not take Oaths and Covenants imposed in Terms excluding
Limitations and Exceptions, in a limited, excepting Sense, without the
Explication of the Lawmakers? [ ib. p. 120, 121.]

Q. 22. Suppose the Sin were on the silenced Ministers part, yet if their
Error be in a small and difficult Matter, not deserving silencing (as theirs,
Romans 14. about Meats and Days, etc.) whether it may not be a far greater Sin,
and Schism in the Silencers, than in them? [ First Plea for Peace, p. 116.] Tho
the Magistrate ought to silence all Preachers, that after due Admonition, so
grossly misbehave themselves in Doctrine, Worship, or Conversation, as to be the
Plagues of the Churches, and to do apparently more hurt than good; yet as to
all worthy and able Ministers, if they commit any Fault, whether they should
not be punished only as other Subjects, with such Penalties, as shall not by
silencing or restraint, be a Punishment to the Peoples Souls, nor hinder the
preaching of the Gospel of Salvation? Even as if the common Bakers, Brewers,
Butchers, Carpenters perform their Work perniciously (poisoning their Bread,
Beer, Meat, etc.) they should be forbidden their Trade: but should they for
other Faults be so punished, that the People be left without Bread, Beer, Meat,
and Houses for their Faults? [ Moral Prognostication, p. 55. 32.] Are there no
fitter means than silencing, to correct such Ministers? Is it not a Sin to
silence them, when their Ministry is needful [ Ans. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 20,
21.] Had Images been lawfully used in Places, or Exercises of God's Worship;
yet whether was it not Inhuman, and Unchristian in those Bishops and Councils,
who cursed from Christ all that were of a contrary Mind, and ejected, and
silenced the Dissenters? [ Way of ^oncord, p. 89. 25.]

Q. 23. Whether do Men take it to be a Sin, to suffer us to preach the Gospel,
and a greater Sin than to suffer the Inundation of Infidelity, Popery and the
rest, which they say is ready to break in upon us? Or whether do they judge our
not Subscribing, Swearing, etc. so great a Sin in us, that the Punishment laid
on Swearers, Drunkards, or Fornicators, will not serve turn to avenge it on our
selves, nor any other of our personal Sufferings; unless the Souls of many
1000's, and the Protestant Religion, and our Posterity also suffer for it? [
Sacril. Desert. p. 138, 139.]

Q. 24. Whether Magistrates, and Pastors must not distinguish of Errors and
Faults of Subjects? whether some are not tolerable, and therefore to be
tolerated; and some intolerable, and therefore not to be tolerated? Whether
they that cry out, [One and All, why not one as well as another?] will say, If
a Foot must be cut off for a Gangreen, why not for a Corn? [ Second Plea for
Peace, p. 162. 49.]

Q. 25. Whether he that knows himself to be a Man, and a Sinner, and is
penitently conscious what abundance of greater Sins he has than the
conscientious Forbearance of a Ceremony, or needless Oath, or Subscription,
will not be very tender of his usage of others for such Matters? [ Ib. p. 1^3.
52]

Q 26. Whether a tender Conscience be not the same with what God has pro^i^d,
even an Heart of Flesh, a Conscience that has Spiritual Life and Feeling, and
is sensible of the evil of the least Sin? [ Ib. p. 163, 164. 54.] And whether
the imposing of unnecessary Subscriptions, Professions or Oaths, be not the way
to fill the Church with Men that are not troubled with tender Consciences, and
that have no fear of God, or Sin? And whether he that believes, that ever he
shall be judged by the great Pastor of the Flock, should not be as much at
least afraid of letting in such Presbyters into the Church, as of enduring holy
faithful Men, that fear a Lie, or Oath, or Superstition? [ Ib. p. 164. 55.]

Q. 27. Whether every Man has not Sins of Ignorance, and some degree of Error?
And whether have not some Faithful Men more than others? And do they not take
some Sins to be Duties, or no Sins? [ Way of Concord, p. 181.] And whether he
that makes a Canon to Silence, or Excommunicate, or cast out Men for a Fault
common to all Preachers, Christians and Men, does not make a Canon to Silence
or cast out all Preachers, Pastors, and Men? And if we deserve to be cast out
of the Church and Kingdom in the case of Nonconformity to the present
Impositions, whether it be not either because we are weak, or ignorant* or
wicked? And whether we may not here profess to the World our joyful consent to
be silenced and banished, on condition that the Diocesans will effectually
provide, that none more Weak, more Ignorant, and more Wicked, shall be
tolerated in Church and Kingdom when we are gone, and that no detriment shall
befall hi^ Majesty's Dominions by the diminution of his Subjects? [ Second Plea
for Peace, p. 164, 165. 57, 58.]

Q. 28. Whether a diversity of Circumstances and indifferent Modes in diverse
Churches or Parishes, and sometimes in the same Church, be such a dreadful
Mischief, as some frightful Pastors would make themselves and others believe?
Or whether it be to be compared with the consequents of unnecessary
Impositi^ns? [ Second Plea for Peace, p. 158. 44.]

Q. 29. Whether was there no difference in their Forms or Modes of Worship,
between Basil at Caesarea, and the Church at Neocoeserea; and between Rome and
Millane; and between almost all the Catholic Bishops for many hundred years?
And whether is there not so now, one Parish-Minister praying freely in the
Pulpit before and after Sermon; another by a Form; a third bi^ding Prayer
before, etc. [ Sacril. Desert. p. 34.] And is not difference in many points of
Doctrine as great a difference, as using and not using some of the Liturgick
Forms and Ceremonies? [ Ans. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 46, or 48.]

Q. 30. Whether the present full Conformity required, will ever be the Terms of
the full desirable Unity and Concord of the Christian Protestants in his
Majesty's Dominions? Whether it be not morally impossible to bring all good
Christians Judgments to hold all this Conformity lawful? And whether it be not
as impossible to bring them all to conform to that which they judge unlawful? [
Second Plea for Peace, p. 172. 80.] Whether there is a greater difference of
Visages, than of Intellectual Apprehensions? [ Way of Concord, p. 81.] And
while there will be difference in Judgment (even among Christians, and good and
tolerable Christians) whether can other be expected, than that there will be
also difference in Professions, and in Practice? Will not honest Men's
Professions and Practices agree in the main with their Judgments? Whether then
is it to be expected, that if some Men think that long doctrinal Confessions,
formed in Men's private Words, or Liturgies, or other humane Forms have nothing
in them untrue, or evil, or which all Men may not consent to, therefore all
others must think so too, and say as they? Who can think that in many thousand
uncertain Words, all Men can and must be of the same Mind, and approve them all
alike? Or that honest Men can lie, and say that they assent to what they do
not? ( ibid. p. 88.)

Q. 31. If Men in all these must be brought to Uniformity and Practicing in the
same Mode, whether must it not be either by Argument and Persuasion, or by
Force? And whether it be not certain, that the first will never do it? Besides
a multitude of Reasons, whether does not many hundred Years experience prove,
that all Christians will never be in all things of a mind about lawful and
unlawful, Duty and Sin? And whether it be not as certain, that Force will never
do it? Will a sound Believer sell his Soul to save his Flesh, or hazard Heaven
by wilful Sin to save his Interest on Earth? ( ibid. p. 89, 90.)

Q. 32. Whether in regard of the diversity of mental Capacities and
Apprehensions, the best will ever agree in any, but few, plain, and certain
things? ( Way of Concord, 3d Part, p. 109.) And,

Q. 33. Whether universal Concord may not take in most of the differing
Parties, though not as such, by receiving any of their Errors; yet as
Christians, who agree in the common Essentials of Faith and Piety? And whether
we should not hold essential Unity with all that hold the Essentials of
Christianity; though with those that hold Integrals more purely, we are to have
more full and nearer Concord than the rest, that have more Errors? ( ib. p.
72.) Whether Christians ought not to bear with one another (without having
their Affections alienated from, and much more without persecuting one another)
in greater Matters than most of the dissenting Parties disagree in? Whether
Christians of as different Principles may not, yea, and ought not yet to love
each other, and live in Peace? ( Sacril. Desert. p. 7, 8. 9.) Whether the
Novatians for many Ages were not tolerated by the wisest and godliest Emperors
and Bishops? ( ibid. p. 14.)

Q. 34. Whether the Terms of Church Communion must not be such as take in all
that Christ takes in, and would have us take in, ( i. e.) All that are fit for
Church Communion? And whether they should not be such Terms as all true
Christians (fit for such Church Communion) if imposed, would have united in, in
all Ages and Places of the Church since the days of Christ till now? And
whether those Terms that would have divided the Church, are fit means to unite
it? Or can we think that the Church should now unite upon such Terms, as it
never united before? ( Second Plea for P. p. 152, 153.)

Q. 35. Whether Christ himself has not instituted the Baptismal Covenant (
Mat. 28. 19.) to be the Title of visible Members of the Church, and the Symbol
by which they shall be notified? and has not commanded all the baptized, as
Christians, to love each other as themselves; and though weak in Faith, to
receive one another, as Christ receives us, but not to doubtful Disputations,
and so far as they have attained, to walk by the same Rule (of Love and Peace)
and not to despise or judge each other for tolerable Differences? And whether
any mortal Man has Power to abrogate these Terms of Church-union and Concord
which Christ has made? ( First Plea for P. p. 34.)

Q. 36. Whether Christ, who made the Baptismal Covenant, the Test and standing
Terms of Entrance, did set up Pastors over his Churches, to make new and
stricter Terms and Laws; or to preserve Concord on the Terms that he had
founded it, and to see that Men lived in Unity and Piety according to the Terms
of the Covenant, which they had entered? ( Second Plea for P. p. 154.) And when
they have as Ministers, not as Lords, received Men on Christ's Terms, whether
they may excommunicate and turn them out again for want of more, or only for
violating these? ( ibid. p. 155.)

Q. 37. Whether it be not a strange Contrariety of some to themselves, who judge
that all Infants of Heathens, Jews, Turks, or wicked Men, are without Exception
to be taken into the Church, if any ignorant Christian will but offer them, and
say over a few Words; and the Adult also, if they can but say over the Creed by
rote, and a few Words more, (that would fill the Church with Enemies of
Christ;) and yet when Men are in, deny them Communion, unless they will
strictly come up to many humane unnecessary Impositions; as if far stricter
Obedience to Men (perhaps in Usurpations) was necessary, than to Jesus Christ?
( Way of Concord, p. 118.. 10.)

Q. 38. Whether the universal Church had not Unity long upon the Terms of
Baptism and the Creed and Scriptures, without any other Subscriptions, Oaths,
or other Professions made necessary to Communion? And whether it ever had Union
upon such additional Terms of new Professions, Subscriptions and Oaths, as most
Churches now impose* and require? Whether they departed not from Unity and
Concord (and so continue divided to this day) when they departed from the
ancient Simplicity, and the primitive Terms? ( ibid p. 157.. 42.) And whether
those Pastors who will make Canons, that al^ English Protestants shall agree in
Subscriptions, Professions, Oaths, Forms and Ceremonies which they are not
agreed in, nor ever will be; do not in effect say, we will break them more in
pieces, and set them farther from each other than before? ( ibid. p. 183..
100.) Whether the hereticating and cursing Men for doubtful Words, or want of
Skill in aptness of Expressions, yea, or for Errors which consist with having
Faith in Christ, be not so far from being a means of the Churches Good, that it
has been the grand Engine of Satan, to exercise Tyranny, excite Hatred and
Schism, etc. and therefore carefully to be avoided? ( Way of Concord p. 195..
34.) whether anath^matizing Men for doubtful Actions, or for such Faults as
consist with true Christianity and continued Subjection to Jesus Christ, be not
a sinful Church-dividing Means? ( ibid. p. 195, 196.)

Q. 39. Whether Addition to Christ's Terms be not very perilous, as well as
Diminution; as, when Men will deny Church-entrance, or Communion to any that
Christ would have received, because they come not up to certain Terms, which
they, or such as they, devise? And though they think, that Christ gives them
Power to do thus; yet whether their Error will make them guiltless? Or whether
imputing their Error to Christ untruly, be not an Aggravation of the Sin? (
ibid. p. 119.. 1.) Whether it is a small Fault to usurp a Power proper to
Christ? ( ibid.. 2.) Whether it be not dangerous Pride to think themselves
great enough, wise enough, and good enough, to come after Christ, and to amend
his Work? ( ibid.. 3.) And whether this imply not an Accusation against him,
and his Institutions? ( ibid.. 4.) And whether the merciful Lord and Savior of
the Church, that came to take off heavy Burdens and intolerable Yokes, will
take it well to have Men come after him, and as by his Authority, to make his
easy Yoke more strait, and his light Burden heavy, and to cast or keep out
th^se that he has redeemed and does receive, and to deal cruelly with those
that he has so dearly bought, and so tenderly loves? ( ibid. p. 120.. 6.)
When Christ says, Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones which
believe in me, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his
Neck, etc. Whether Bishops may curse such from Christ, and excommunicate them?
(and whether it be safe for them to do so?) ( ibid. p. 144.) And seeing that
spiritual Privileges excel temporal, whether it be not an aggravated Tyranny
to deprive Christ's Servants of Benefits so precious, and so dearly bought? (
ibid. p. 120.. 9.)

Q. 40. Whether Christ be not the Institutor of the Church, and has not
himself made Laws which are sufficient to be at least the Bond of their Unity;
yea, for more than Essentials, even the Integrals, and many Accidents? and has
not he given Laws to regulate all Men's Laws that determine of needful
undetermined Accidents? And whether any Man should be cut off from the Church,
or taken as separated, that breaks no Law of God, necessary to Church-Unity
and Communion? And whether the grand Schismatics of the World are not the
Engineers that fabricate needless, impossible, dividing Terms and Conditions of
Unity and Communion? ( Answ. to Dr. Sill. Sermon. p. 88, or 82.)

Q. 41. Whether it be not enough, that we are united and agreed with those that
differ from us, in more than Circumstances: and that we will hold Concord with
all in Faith, Love, and Communion; (if they will admit us without our sinning)
upon the Terms set down by the Holy Ghost and the Apostles, Acts 15. 28? And if
no Men must be of the same Church or Kingdom, that have any difference; yea, as
great as can reasonably be supposed in the mere Non-conformists, whether any
two Men can be of the same Church, or Kingdom, except you will compose it of
such as hold nothing unlawful, and consequently nothing morally good, which is
no Church? [ Judgment of Non-conformists in second Plea for Peace, p. 85, 86.]

Q. 42. Whether the long and sad Experience of all the Christian Churches,
which have been divided by unnecessary human Impositions, and the Voice of all
wise Peacemakers in all times, who have still called for [ Unity in things
necessary, Liberty in things unnecessary, and Charity in both] do not leave
those that yet will not be persuaded to these Terms, as inexcusable Persons as
almost any in the World; worse than those Physicians, that would use all those
things as the only Remedies, which have killed all that ever took them? [
Second Plea for Peace, p. 155. 34.]

Q. 43. Whether they that confess, that for the Communion of all the Churches,
there are no Terms like these now mentioned, should be more cruel to their own
at home, turning them out of their Father's House for every Ceremonial
Difference? Whether a Pastor should not love his own Flock, as well as the
People of a Foreign Land? [ Ib. p. 155, 156.. 35.] And whether it be not a
Schismatical Opinion, that tho Churches of many Kingdoms may charitably differ
in Ceremonies and indifferent things; yet none in the same Kingdom should be
suffered so to differ? Whether the Apostle Paul gave not the Pastors and People
of the same Church of Rome those Precepts of forbearing and receiving
Dissenters in things indifferent? [ Way of Concord third Part, p. 106.]

Q. 44. Whether Uniformity in Circumstantials, and in External Polity, be any
more than a Carcass or Image of Unity, without uniting Love (which is its
Soul?) Whether all Union in Evil, or in unnecessary Circumstantials, which is
managed to the diminution of Christian Love, are any more to the Church, than
as the Glory of adorned Clothing, or Monuments, or Pictures to a Carcass? [
Ib. p. 66.]

Q. 45. Whether Love and Unity (which the most zealous for human Impositions
cannot but commend) would teach Men to tyrannize over Inferiors, to contrive
the treading down of others that they may rise, and to keep them down to secure
their own Domination; to oppress the Poor, Weak, or Innocent, to make S^ares
for other Men's Consciences, or to lay Stumbling Blocks before them, to occasion
them to Sin, or to drive them on to sin against Conscience, and so to Hell, to
show Men's Authority (about things they call indifferent, or) in a thing of
naught? [ Way of Concord, p. 36.] Would not true love end our greatest
Differences, if Men loved the^ Neighbors without dissembling, as themselves;
and did but as they would be done by? [ Second Plea for Pe^^, p. 156. 37.] Yea,
if many of the Children of the Church were injudiciously scrupulous when fear
of Sin and Hell was the Cause, whether a tender Pastor would not abate them a
Ceremony in such a case, when his abating it has no such danger? [ lb. ^6.]

Q. 46. Whether Unmerciful Pastors do not tempt the People to question, whether
they be sent of God? Whether the People will not judge of Pastors, as Sol^mon of
the true Mother of the Child; that the Merciful and Loving is the true Pastor,
and the Hartful is the Usurper? [ lb. p. 156, 157. 39.]

Q. 47. Whether they that can bear with such as understand not the Essentials
of Christianity, and with Drunkards, Swearers, Fornicators, etc. in their
constant Congregations and Communion; and yet will not bear with an honest
godly Christian, that differs from their way of Worship in no greater matter
than a Ceremony, have not something more amiss within than a Ceremony? [ Ib. p.
162.. 48.] And whether the Souls of such, as some call humorous, peevish, or
wilful, be not worth more than some of that they call their Liberty? worth more
than a needless Ceremony? [ Judgment of Non-conformists in second Plea, p. 66.
q. 5.]

Q. 48. Whether as every Hypocrite would be very Religious, so far as he can
subject the true common Religion to his own Interest and Lusts; so every Enemy
of Peace will not seem zealous for Peace, so that his own Peace be made the
Rule of the common Peace, that all Men be brought to center in his Interests,
and take their Peace on his Terms, from him? [ Second Plea, etc. p. 149.]

Q. 49. Whether all the Arguments for Unity and Peace, which are made use of
against Toleration by Prelatists, and all the mischiefs of division which they
aggravate, do not principally fall on themselves, if it proves that they are
the greatest causes of Division, and hinderers of Church-Concord? [ Ib. p.
180.. 88.] Whether they do not condemn themselves, who cry down Schism, while
they unavoidably cause it? And whether overdoing Terms of Church-Union and
Concord be not the certainest Engines of Schism? [ Way of Concord, p. 121. 11.]
Is it not a shameful thing to hear and read Men's tragical out-crys against
necessary Toleration (which Christianity and Humanity plead for) while they are
the causes of that which they exclaim against? If diversity in Religion be such
an Evil, whether should Men cause it by their unnecessary Laws and Canons, and
making Engines to tear the Church in pieces, which by the ancient Simplicity,
and commanded mutual Forbearance, would live in such a measure of Love and
Peace, as may be here expected? [ Ib. p. 272.]

Q. 50. Tho it be a Sin not to join with a less worthy Minister, and a less
orderly Mode of Worship, when we can have no better; yet whether is it not also
a Sin to tie our selves ordinarily to such, when we may have better lawfully,
that is, consideratis considerandis, upon terms whereon it will not do more
hurt than good? [ Sacril. Desert. p. 76.]

Q. 51. Tho it be granted, that such are justly condemned by God, that repent
not, tho they had but a Reader: And that they should be thankful for so much in
such Churches where they can have no better; yet whether is it in the power of
any Man justly to forbid them better, when God provideth it? And whether must
they obey such a prohibition, as such? (Tho Prudence may discern forbearance to
be a Duty, when the hurt would be greater than the good.) [ First Plea for
Peace, p. 85.]

Q. 52. Whether Parish-Bounds of Churches be of Divine Institution, and
unchangeable, or only of human prudential Constitution? [ Sacril. Desert. p.
10.] Can any Proof be produced, that ever God determined, the Churches should
necessarily be individuated by Parish-Bounds or Limits of Ground; and that Men
in the same Limits might not have diverse Bishops, and be of diverse particular
Churches? [ First Plea, etc. p. 13.] Whether is such a distribution of
Parishes, a thing of absolute necessity to a Church, or only as the general
Rules of Order and Edification do ordinarily in Christian Kingdoms require it?
And whether can we be bound to such humane distribution against any of Christ's
own Laws and Predeterminations; or when any changes turn them against the good
Ends for which they are made? Whether can humane Church-Laws bind to Obedience,
when they are notoriously against the Laws of Christ, or against the Common
Good, or are made by Usurpation without Authority thereto? [ ibid. p. 31, 32.]

Q. 53. Whether are the Bishops that dwell in London-Parishes (or others)
Members of the Parish Church where they dwell? If not, whether dwelling in the
Parish makes a Christian a Member of the Parish Church? If not, what makes a
Member, and how are the Pastors special Flock truly known to him from others?
If the Bishops be Members, Does the Canon that forbids Men to go from their own
Parish-Churches, extend to the Bishop? And to whom shall we present the Bishop
for not coming to Church, or for his Crimes? What? to himself? [ Defense of the
Plea for Peace, p. 110, 111.]

Q. 54. Whether a Ministry be not ordinarily necessary to the propagating of
the Gospel, and the saving of Souls? (See Romans 10. 14, 15.) [ Sacril. Desert.
p. 9.] If Men can spare the Ministry, why are they maintained? If they are
needful for the safety of Men's Souls, must so many thousands hazard their
Souls, for want of needful help? [ Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 52. or 54.] And
whether is there not need of a far greater number of Assistants, than all the
present Non-conformists? [ Sacril. Desert. p. 10.] And what harm is there in
the Non-conformists preaching, where the tenth Person cannot come to Church, if
they would? [ Sacril. Desert. p. 12.] And what may we think of such, as had
rather 10000 Persons stayed idly at home, or went to Sports or Drinking, in
Stepny-Parish, or Giles Cripplegate, or Sepulchers, or Martins in the Fields,
etc. than that any Non-conformists should preach to them? (See 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15,
16.) [ ib. p. 13.] When in London it is conjectured that not above the 7 th or
8 th part of the Inhabitants can come to hear in the outer Parishes, and if the
other 6 or 7 parts should seek for room in the emptier Churches within the
Walls, it cannot be supposed that above one part of those 6 or 7 would find
room: and so if all be set together, it may be supposed that there is place but
for about the 5 th or 4 th part at most of all the People in all the
Parish-Churches within and without the Walls: and London is to be denominated
rather from three, four, or five parts than from one of these: and the great
Parishes, where one of twenty cannot hear, are far off from the Churches that
have room, and those that have most need, have least desire of the Means;
Quaere, Whether the famousest and happiest City for Religion in the World
should thus be left to turn Infidels, Pagans, Atheis^s, or be kept from all
public Worship of God? [ First Plea, etc. p. 230.] And whether most great
Parishes (especially in Cities and great Towns) have not more Souls which call
for ministerial help, than Conformists and Non-conformists, if they lovingly
joined, are well able to afford necessary help to? [ ib. p. 229.]

Q. 55. Whether many in place are not grossly defective in the necessary
Qualifications for their Office, (and consequently in the discharge of the
same?) [ Sacriledg. Desert. p. 10.] And can any Man prove, that if the
Parish-Minister cannot, or will not baptize his Children, he must not get
another to do it, yea, a prohibited Minister, rather than they should be
unbaptized; and yet that if the Parish Church cannot receive him, or the Pastor
cannot* or will not do the Office of a Pastor for him, he must be without
Preaching, Worshipping God, and Pastoral oversight? [ First Plea, etc. p. 103.]
And when the Bishops hold it a Duty to avoid a Nonconformist that has not
their License; is there not as much to be said for avoiding a wicked Priest,
who (it is sure) has not Christ's License, and is a Nonconformist to his
Laws? [ Ib. p. 111.] When Pope Nicholas and some of the Popish Councils forbad
all Men to hear Mass from a fornicating Priest, Whether should not Protestants
be as strict? And whether is it not as lawful to depart from the Parish Priest
for being a Drunkard, a Scorner at Godliness, a Persecutor, an insufficient
Guide of Souls, as for being a Fornicator? And whether many Councils do not
forbid hearing Heretics? [ Way of Concord, third Part, p. 8.. 20.]

Q. 56. Whether this Argument be not good, our necessity requires Pastoral
oversight, and Christ commands us to use it, when we may have it: But from
this public Minister we cannot have it: Therefore we must seek it where we
can? [ First Plea, etc. p. 100.] And whether People are not deprived of
Pastoral oversight as from the allowed Minister, 1. When public Pastors are at
so great a distance from them, as that such Pastors cannot come to them, nor
they and their Families go so far, without such cost and pains and loss of time
as will deprive them of the Benefit. 2. When Parishes are so great that the
allowed Pastors cannot preach to half, or a fourth, or tenth part, and cannot
visit half the sick, etc. 3. Where the allowed Pastors are so slothful or
proud, that they will not condescend to such Offices of personal Help as the
People have need of, especially to the poorer sort. 4. Where they are young,
raw, or ignorant, unable to counsel People, as their necessities require in
order to their Salvation. 5. Where they are so profane and malignant, that if
poor People come to them with Cases of Conscience, or for Counsel what they
must do to be Saved, they will but deride them, and would make them believe
that to be sollicitous about Salvation, and afraid of Sinning, and seriously
Godly, is but to be Hypocrites, Melancholy or Mad. 6. Where they are
Heretical, and not to be trusted in point of Faith? When in any of these Cases
the People, or part of them are deprived of that Pastoral Help, which their
necessity requires, and God commands, whether may they not seek it where
they can best have it? [ Ib. p. 100, 101, 102.] Whether many Souls are not like
to be fed, or famished, and consequently to live or die, as Non-conformists do
their Duty, or neglect it? [ Sacril. Desert. p. 84.] And whether if the poor
were famishing about us, any Law of Man's can disoblige us from relieving them?
[ Ib. p. 85.]

Q. 57. If they that are vowed to the Ministry, are bound to exercise the
Ministry (and otherwise would be sacrilegious and cruel to Souls) can they
preach without Auditors? And can those Auditors be no Congregation? [ Ib. p.
70.]

Q. 58. Where both the ejected and imposed Minister are fit Persons, whether
may not the People take them both conjunctly for their Pastors, each
administering to the same Church according to their various Liberties and
Capacities? [ ib. p. 11.]

Q. 59. If Conformists generally would set themselves to preach and pray in a
sound and serious, holy manner, and encourage and promote Piety in the People,
and willingly accept of all the Help they could get here; if they endeavored
to do God and his Church more Service than those that went before them, whether
they would not be more honored, at least by the better sort (and that
deservedly) than ever they must look to be for Rigidness about Ceremonies, etc.
Whether Godliness be not that which godly People most care for? [ ibid. p. 126.]

Q. 60. Whether would they have People taught, reformed, saved, or not? If yea,
would they not have necessary help to do it? (If not, are such fit to be
Ministers of Christ?) And does that Man truly know what it is to be a Minister,
or a Christian, that perceives not a necessity of Help, if he can have it? (
ibid p. 129.) And if things in England were once brought to that pass, that
really our Labor would be unnecessary in the Judgment of those that are not
Infidels, Ignorants or malignant Enemies of an holy Life, whether need any fear
coming to loss, if they were bound for us, that we would presently gratify all,
that desire our Silence, or Banishment, rather than trouble Men with needless
Work? [ ib. p. 134.]

Q. 61. Whether is it the Paucity of ignorant and ungodly Souls, or the great
Number, Ability, Zeal, and Diligence of the Conformists, that makes the Labors
of others needless? Or what are their Thoughts of Souls, of Sin, of Repentance*
of Holiness, and of their own Sufficiency and Labors? [ Ib. p. 57.] As of old
every single Church had usually many Presbyters and Deacons with the Bishop; so
is it not undeniable, that many of our Parishes have Work enough for many
Ministers? And whether the only thing pretended for our present Paucity be not
the want of Maintenance (with the want of worthy Men?) [ First Plea etc. p.
227.]

Q. 62. Whether then might it not have been expected of such as needed and
desired the help of their Brethren, that long ere this they should have
petitioned Rulers for the Liberty of their Ministry (when all knew that there
was no Hope their own petitioning should have Success?) Whether might they not
have humbly acquainted our Rulers, That all our Labors conjoined are too
little; that they needed our Help, and the ignorant our Teaching; that their
Judgment was, our Ministry is more necessary than our personal Conformity? And
whether should not Ministers of all Men have been most sensible of the Churches
Breaches, Loss and Danger, and most compassionate over Peoples Souls? [ Sacril.
Desert. p. 135.] And whether had they not healed all our Breaches, if they had
petioned, and prevailed but for these two things, viz. 1. That the door of
Entrance might not have been barred by any other Subscriptions, Professions or
Oaths, than what were used in the Churches of Christ, till the Exaltation of
the Papacy (for 600 Years) besides the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
the subscribing the Doctrine of the Church of England in the 39 Articles,
according to the 13th of Queen Elizabeth. 2. That those (so subscribing) who
dare not use the Liturgy and Ceremonies, might have leave to preach in the
Churches which use them, under Laws which shall restrain them from all
unpeaceable Opposition to what they dare not use, or to the Government of the
Church? [ ibid. p. 136, 137.] And what but a spirit of Envy, or a carnal
Interest, cross to the Interest of Christ and Men's Salvation, should grudge at
their Preaching, while they are responsible for all they say, or do amiss? [
First Plea, etc. p. 249.]

Q. 63. Whether the Accusers of the Non-conformists, who feign strange things
of them relating to Doctrine and Government (which they do not own) do not, 1.
Hereby render them contemptible and odious, as brainsick Persons, who keep up
a dividing Faction, in spite of the Light and Obligation of the common
Principles of Humanity and Society? 2. And do they not hereby imprint the Stamp
of Satan, viz. the hatred of their Brethren on the minds of such Hearers as
will believe them, and receive the Impress? 3. And do they not hereby fill
Families, Cities and Countries with all that Spawn of ugly Sins, which are the
Genuine Fruits of such Hatred and Contempt; and keep Men also from Repentance
for any thing that they have said or done (how cruelly soever) against such
Ministers and others, that are represented as so odious to them? 4. And do they
not hereby fortify the Peoples Souls against receiving converting, or edifying
Instruction by such accused Ministers? 5. And do they not thus furnish Papists,
Infidels, and other Adversaries with matter of Accusation against one part of
the Ministers and Servants of Christ etc. [ Judgment of Non-conformists in
Second Plea for Peace. p. 21, 22.] And whether is it not diabolical, for any to
be angry, if (as we have Opportunity) we so f^r undeceive the People, as to
acquaint them with our Judgment, and the Untruth of what they have believed of
us? [ ibid. p. 85.] And whether we may not suppose, that Satan is afraid of
their Ministry who has stirred up so much Opposition against it? [ Sacril.
Desert. p. 84.]

Q. 64. Whether Popery will come in ever the more for Non-conformist's
Preaching? (Whether such will preach for, or against it?) Or ever the ^ss, if
they renounce their Ministry? [ ibid. p. 82.] Whether they that cry out of the
danger of Popery, Infidelity, Profaneness and Heresies; and yet had rather let
them all in, then give us leave to exercise that Ministry to which we were
consecrated, in Poverty and Subjection; and while they cry out of Divisions,
will not lay by the dividing Engines; should rather accuse us, or themselves,
if the Evils overwhelm us, which they seem to fear? [ ibid. p. 137, 138.]

Q. 65. When any are unjustly cast out of their Parish-Churches, whether all
Ministers are thereupon obliged, or allowed to desert, or neglect them? [ ib.
p. 21.]

Q. 66. If a Patient would not take a Medicine from one Man's hand, whether
would not the Physician consent that another should give it him? Whether would
the Father let the Infant famish, if it would take Food from none but its
Mother? And whether would there be need of the best Conformists, as Ministers,
if the People had no Faults, or Weaknesses? [ ibid. p. 125, 126.] What if they
culpably would hear no other? Is it better to let them hear none at all, than
that we preach to them? [ Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 59. or 61.]

Q. 67. Whether it be not one thing to deny total Communion with a Church, and
another to separate but secundum quid, for some Act, or Part? Whether it be not
one thing to separate locally by bodily Absence, and another mentally by
Schismatical Principles? Whether it be not one thing to depart wilfully, and
another to be unwillingly cast out? Whether it be not one thing to depart
rashly and in have, and another to depart after due Patience, when Reformation
appears hopeless [ First Plea, etc. p. 38, 39.]

Q. 68. When the public Good requires Non-conformists to hold distinct
Assemblies, for Assistance in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as near as
they can according to the Will of God, to further, not to disgrace or hinder
the honest Parish-ministers, whether are these separate Churches, any more than
Chapels be? Or distinct Churches, more than secundum quid, holding personal
Communion in a godly Conversation with the rest of the Christians in the
Parish, and also sometimes assembling with them? [ Sacril. Desert. p. 22, 23.]
Or whether those that do their best to keep up the Reputation of the public
conformable Ministry, to further Love and Concord, and the success of their
Labors with the People; and profess to take their own Assemblies but as
Chapels, and not as distinct, much less as separated Churches; yea, and those
who do administer Sacraments and do that which is like the Separatist's Way;
yet do it not on their Principles, but pro tempore, till God shall give them
Opportunity to serve him in the established Way (it being reformed, or
well-ordered Parish-Churches, under the Government and Countenance of the
Christian Magistrates, which are most agreeable to their Desires) whether such
(I say) are justly accounted Separatists? [ First Plea etc. p. 246.]

Q. 69. Whether we may not set up other Churches, when we are necessarily kept
from those established by public Power? [ Ib. p. 77.]

Q. 70. Whether it be Schism to preach, and gather Churches, and elect and
ordain Pastors, and assemble for God's Worship against the Laws and Will of
Heathen, Mohammedan, or Infidel Princes that forbid it; as the Christians did
for 300 Years? And if there be the same Cause and Need, whether it be any more
Schism to do it against the Laws and Will of a Christian Prince? For, 1. Are
not Christ's Laws equally obligatory? 2. Are not Souls equally precious? 3. Is
not the Gospel and God's Worship equally necessary? 4. And does his
Christianity enable him to do more Hurt than a Pagan may do, or more Good? [
Ibid. p. 51, 52.]

Q. 71. If Competent Pastors be set over half the Parishes in a Kingdom, and
the other half has incompetent Men; or if nine Parts of a Kingdom were
competently supplied, and but the tenth Part had not such set over them, to
whom the People may lawfully commit the Pastoral Care of their Souls, whether
is it Schism, or whether is it not a Duty for those that are destitute, to get
the best Supply they can? And whether is it Schism, or whether is it not a Duty
for faithful Ministers, though forbidden by Superiors, to perform their Office
to such People that desire it? [ Ibid. p. 83.] If the Magistrate appoint 20000,
or 10000, or one half of a Parish to be excluded for want of Room, and
Teachers, is it not ill supposed that the Gospel is truly and sufficiently
preached to them, to whom it is not preached at all? Or does it prove it not
necessary to them, that it is preached to others? [ Ans. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p.
22.] And whether is not the general Ordination of Ministers with the Peoples
Necessity and Consent, added to God's general Commands to all his Ministers, to
be faithful and diligent, a sufficient obliging Call to such Ministration,
without the Will of (prohibiting) Superiors, yea, against it? And otherwise
does it not follow, that it is at the Will of a Man, whether Souls shall be
saved or damned? (for how shall they believe, unless they hear? And how shall
they hear without a Preacher?) and at the Will of Man, whether Christ shall
have a Church, and God be publicly worshipped, or not? [ First Plea, etc. p.
48.] And whether does not the indispensible Law of Nature oblige every Man
according to his Place and Calling, his Ability, and Opportunities, to do his
best to propagate Christ's Gospel, and to save Men's Souls, as much and more
than to feed Men's Bodies and save their Lives? And whether are not Ministers
specially obliged to do it (by their Calling) as Ministers of Christ, thereto
devoted? [ Ibid.]

Q. 72. There being so many sorts of Churches in the World, (as Universal,
National, Patriarchal, Provincial, or Metropolitical, Diocesan, Classical,
Parochial, Congregational) whether must it not be hard to give a just Decision
of the Question, [From which of these, and when it is a Sin to separate?] till
it be first known, which of those is of Divine, and which of Humane
Institution? and which Humane Churches are necessary, which Lawful, and which
Sinful? ( ibid. p. 7.) How is it proved, and how comes it to be any great
matter to separate from a Church-^orm which God never made? [ Answ. to Dr.
Still. Sermon. p. 33.]

Q. 73. Whether they that say those Species (National, Patriarchal, Provincial,
Diocesan) are of God, must not prove that God instituted them in Scripture; or
else that he gave some Men power to institute them since Scripture-times? And
till the same be proved, whether are any bound to obey them, at least when they
overruled Christ's own Institutions? ( Way of Concord, p. 111.. 15.) And
whether to devise new Species of Churches without God's Authority, and impose
them on the World (in his Name) and call all Dissenters Schismatics, be not a
far worse Usurpation, than to make and impose new Ceremonies, or Liturgies? (
ibid.. 16.)

Q. 74. Whether a Society of Neighbor-christians associated with a Pastor, or
Pastors, for personal Communion in holy Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, be
not a Church Form of Divine Institution? ( First Plea, etc. p. 8.) And whether
any Proof has ever been produced, that many Churches of this first Rank, must
(of Duty) make one fixed, greater, compound Church by Association, as Diocesan,
National, etc. and that God has instituted any such Form? Whether the greatest
Defenders of Prelacy do not affirm such to be but humane Institutions? ( ib. p.
12, 13.) Whether ever any satisfactory Proof has been brought, that ever
Christ or his Apostles did institute any particular Church (taken in a
political Sense, as organized, and not merely for a Community) without a
Bishop, or Pastor, who had the Power of teaching them, ruling them by the Word,
and Power of the Church-keys, and leading them in public Worship? ( ibid. p.
13.) And whether has it yet been proved that any one Church of this first Rank
(which was not an Association of Churches) consisted in Scripture-times of many
(much less of many scores or hundreds) such fixed Churches or Congregations? Or
that any one Bishop of the first Rank (that was not an Apostle, or Bishop of
Bishops) had more than one of such fixed Societies, or Churches under him; or
might have more stated Members of his Church than were capable of personal
Communion, and mutual Assistance at due Seasons, in holy Doctrine, Discipline,
and Worship? As now there are many Chapels in some Parishes, whose Proximity
and Relation to the Parish-Churches make them capable of personal Communion in
due seasons with the whole Parish (at least per vices) in those Churches, and
in their Conversation; and as a single Congregation may prudently, in
Persecution, or foul Weather, meet oft-times in several Houses; so why might
not the great Church of Jerusalem (which yet cannot be proved a quarter so big
as some of our Parishes) hold their public Meetings often at the same time in
diverse Houses, when they had no Temples, and yet be capable of personal
Communion, as before described? [ ibid. p. 13, 14.] And when the learned Dr.
Hammond on 1 Timothy 3. says, The Church of the Living God, was every such
regular Assembly of Christians under a Bishop (such as Timothy was) an
Oeconomus set over them by Christ, etc. does he not here suppose (as he
elsewhere shows) that de facto, Episcopal Churches were in Scripture-times
but single Congregations? Then whether is the new Form of Congregations jure
divino, when they become but parts of a Bishops Church? And may we not query
the same of the new Form of a Diocesan Church? ( ibid. p. 5, 6.) And does not
Ignatius expressly make one Altar, and one Bishop with Presbyters and Deacons,
to be the Note of a Church's Unity and Individuation? (Whence learned Mr.
Joseph Mede does argue it, as certain, that then a Bishop's Church was no other
than such as usually communicated in one place) ( ibid. p. 17.) And see ( Answ.
to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 75. or 69.)

Q. 75. And seeing it cannot be proved, that God has instituted any other than
Congregational, or Parochial Churches (as for present Communion) whether must
it not follow, that none of the rest instituted by Man, have Power to deprive
such single Churches of any of the Privileges granted them by Christ? And
whereas Christ has made the Terms of Catholic Communion himself, and has
commanded all such to worship him publicly in holy Communion under faithful
Pastors, chosen, or at least consented to by themselves (which was the Judgment
of the Churches many hundred Years) whether can any humane Order or Power
deprive them of any of this Benefit, or disoblige them from any of this Duty,
by just Authority? ( Way of Concord, p. 111.. 13.)

Q. 76. Then if any Prince would turn his Kingdom, or a whole Province into one
only Church; and thereby overthrow all the first Order of Churches of Christ's
Institution, which are associated for personal present Communion, allowing them
no Pastors that have the Power of the Keys, or all essential to their Office;
though he should allow Parochial Oratories, or Chapels, which should be no
true Churches, but parts of a Church; Whether were it Schism to gather Churches
within such a Church, against the Laws of such a Prince? ( First Plea, etc. p.
52.) Or whether has God made such proper Judges, whether Christ should have
Churches according to his Laws, or whether God should be worshipped, and Souls
saved, or his own Institution of Churches be observed? ( Ibid. p. 53.)

Q. 77. And if any Persons shall pretend to have the Power of governing the
Churches, and Inferior Pastors, as their Bishops, who are obtruded on those
Churches, without the Election, or Consent of the People, or inferior Pastors,
and these Bishops shall by Laws, or Mandates forbid such Assembling, Preaching,
or Worship as otherwise would be Lawful and a Duty; whether is it Schism to
disobey such Laws, or Mandates, as such? ( ibid. p. 80.) Bishop Bilson (of
Subject. p. 399.) grants, [The Election of Bishops in those days belonged to
the People, and not to the Prince; and though Valens by plain force placed
Lucius there; yet might the People lawfully reject him, as no Bishop, and
cleave to Peter their right Pastor.] ( ibid. p. 79.) And however in some Cases
the Advantages of some imposed Persons may make it an Act of Prudence, and so a
Duty to consent; yet whether are such truly the Bishops of such Churches, till
they do consent? ( ibid. p. 80.) Has not this been taken for their Right given
them by God? And does not Dr. Blondel (de jure Plebis in Reg. Eccl.) beyond
Exception prove it, with more? ( ib. p. 81.) Therefore if Bishops that have no
Foundation of such Relative Power, shall impose inferior Pastors on the
Parish-Churches, and command the Peoples Acceptance and Obedience; whether are
the People bound to accept and obey them by any Authority that is in that
Command, as such? Or whether is it Schism to disobey it? ( ibid. p. 82.)

Q. 78. Whether does it not follow from the Principles of the Diocesan, that
holds a Bishop is Essential to a Church, and consequently that we have no
more Churches than Diocesses, That he who separateth from a Parish Church,
separates from no Church? ( Sacril. Desert. p. 24.)

Q 79. Whether we should not more justly deserve the term of Schismatics, if
we renounced Communion with all other Churches, except Parochial and
Conformists? And whose Conscience should sooner accuse him of Schism? Whether
ou^s, that resolve to hold Communion seasonably with all true Christian
Churches among us, that teach not Heresy, nor preach down Holiness, etc. and
deny us not their Communion, unless we will sin? or a Conformists, that will
hold Communion with none but his own Party, but separates from all other
Churches in the Land? [ Ib. p. 41.] Is he a greater Separatist that confesses
them to be a true Church, and their Communion lawful; but prefers another as
fitter for him: or he that denies Communion with true worshipping Assemblies,
as unlawful to be communicated with, when it is not so? If the former, then
will it not follow, that condemning them as no Church, is a Diminution, or no
Aggravation of Separation, and the local presence of an Infidel, or Scorner,
would be a less separate state, than the absence of their Friends? If the
latter (which is certain) then will it not follow, that if we can prove the
Assemblies lawful which they condemn, they are the true Separatists that
condemn them, and deny Communion with them, declaring it unlawful? [ Answ. to
Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 47, or 49.]

Q. 80. And whether is not the Separation of whole Churches much worse than of
single Persons from one Church, when it is upon unwarrantable Cause, or
Reasons? [ Ib. p. 31.] (Now, how many of the Dissenters frequently communicate
with them, while they generally refuse, shun, and condemn our Assemblies?) Are
there no true Churches to be found in the World, that have no Bishops (of a
superior order over Pastors?) And were there not true Churches in England in
that long Interval of Episcopal Government? And are not they as justly to be
charged with Schism, and Separation from those true Churches, which were before
the re-establishment of Episcopacy, as they that are commonly charged by those
Encroachers, and Invaders of other Men's Rights? [ Vid. Sacril. Desert. p. 60.]

Q. 81. Seeing the Universal Church is certainly the highest Species, whether
have any Authority, on pretense of narrower Communion in lower Churches* to
change Christ's terms of Catholic Communion, or to deprive Christians of the
right of being loved and received by each other, or to disoblige them from the
duty of loving and receiving each other? Whether can humane Power made by their
own Contracts, change Christ's Laws, or the Privileges or Forms of Christ's
own Churches? [ Way of Concord, p. 111.. 14.]

Q. 82. Whether the greatest and commonest Schism be not by dividing Laws and
Canons, which causlessly silence Ministers, scatter Flocks, and decree the
unjust Excommunication of Christians, and deny Communion to those that yield
not to sinful, or unnecessary, ill-made Terms of Communion? [ ibid. third Part,
p. 13.. 43.] And if any proud, passionate, or erroneous Person do, as
Diothrephes, cast out the Brethren undeservedly, by unjust Suspensions,
Silencings, or Excommunications, whether this be not tyrannical Schism? [ First
Plea, etc, p. 41.] And as we say of the Papists, that they unjustly call those
Men Schismatics, whom they first cast out themselves by unjust
Excommunication; may we not say so of any others? especially if either for that
which is a Duty, or for some small mistake, which is not in the Persons power
to rectify, no greater than most good Christians are guilty of, their
Church-Law says, he shall be excommunicate ipso facto? (ibid. p. 104.) See also
[ Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon. p. 47. or 49.. 8.]

Q. 83. Whether making sinful Terms of Communion, imposing things forbidden by
God on those that will have Communion with them, and expelling those that will
not so sin, whether this be not heinous Schism? [ First Plea, etc. p. 41, 42.]

Q. 84. Whether all those would not be deeply guilty of such Schism, who by
talk, writing or preaching justify and cry it up, and draw others into the
Guilt, and reproach the Innocent as Schismatics for not offending God? [ Ib.]

Q. 85. If any will confine the Power or Exercise of the Church-Keys into so
few Hands, as shall make the Exercise of Christ's Discipline impossible; or
shall make Churches so great, or Pastors so few, as that the most of the People
must needs be without Pastoral Oversight, Teaching and public Worship, and
then will forbid those People to commit the care of their Souls to any other,
that would be Pastors indeed, and so would compel them to live without Christ's
Ordinances, true Church Communion, and Pastoral Help, whether this would not be
Schismatical, and much worse? [ Ib. p. 44.]

Q. 86. When able faithful Pastors are lawfully s^t over the Assemblies, by
just Election and Ordination, if any will causlessly and without Right silence
them, and command the People to desert them, and to take to others (for their
Pastors) in their stead, o^ whom they have no such knowledge, as may encourage
them to such a change; Whether this can be defended from the charge of Schism?
(As Cyprian in the case of Novatian says, that he could be no Bishop, because
another was rightful Bishop before.) ^ Ib. p. 49, 50.]

Q. 87. Whether the way to heal us be not, 1. To approve the best, 2. To
tolerate the tolerable, 3. To have Sacraments free, and not forced, 4. To
restrain the Intolerable, 5. This to be the Test of Toleration, Whether such
tolerated Worship do more good or hurt, in true impartial Judgment, 6.
Magistrates keeping all in Peace? [ Way of Concord, third Part, p. 144.]

Q. 88. Whether it be not a weakening of the King's Interest, to divide his
Subjects, and build up unnecessary Walls of Partition between them, and to keep
them in such Divisions; seeing a Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand?
And whether it be not unsafe and uncomfortable to a Prince to rule a divided
mutinous People; but sweet and safe to rule them that are united in mutual
Love? Whether they that would lay the Peoples Concord upon incapable Terms,
would not bring the King's Interest in his Peoples Love, and willing Obedience,
and ready Defense of him into too narrow a Bottom, making him the King of some
causlessly divided and espoused Party, which must be set up to the Oppression
of all the rest, who are as wise and just, and loyal as they? [ Second Plea,
etc. p. 76.. 24.] Si in necessariis sit Vnitas,
In Non-necessariis Libertas,
In u^risque Charitas,
Optimo certe loco essent res nostrae.
To make a rounder number I may add, from Mr. M. Godwyn his [ Negro's and
Indians Advocate] pleading for the Instructing of them, and so admitting them
into the Church (a Book lately Printed, and Dedicated to the Arch Bisho^ of
Canterbury.)

Q. 89. Whether Is the wilful neglecting and opposing of it, (as he says in the
Title Page) no less than a manifest Apostasy from the Christian Faith? Can no
Christian ever justify his omitting any possible lawful Means for the
Advancement of his Religion? (as he says, p. 91.) Are all professed Christians
absolutely boun^ in their Places to endeavor the same, by their Vow in
Baptism, and their very Profession?

Q. 90. Then are they not bound in their Places to endeavor the Advancement of
Religion, as well at home, as abroad? And do they not owe as much Service
herein (for Christ's sake) toward their own Countrymen, as toward Strangers?
Should not Englishmen be as well concerned for Englishmen, as for Indians?
And when the State of Religion is so visibly declining in England (Atheism,
Ignorance, Error, Profaneness, Popery and Superstition increasing and getting
up so fast amongst us) is he for any great Advancement of Religion, that would
send away all Non-conformists (if there be thousands of them) to his Negro's
and Indians, for this wise Reason, that There is no want of their Labors at
home?

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Readers is desired to take notice that these Papers were sent to London,
by the Author, on the latter end of February, or beginning of March last, but
by reason of the multitude of Pamphlets, they could not get through the Press
sooner.

The Ingenuous Reader is ^^so desired to pass by the Errata, the Author being
remote from the Press, these few he has observed in some of the Sheets he has
seen, viz.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. l. 6 r. above. P. 20 l. 24. r. do you not. P. 21. l. 12. r. Wages. P.
22. l. 22. r. Contrariwise. P. 23. l. 24. r. and. P. 24. l. 18. dele, down. P.
28. l. 1. r. Triarios. P. 57. l. 6. r. single-soal'd. P. 62. l. 29. r. excite
greater. P. 63. l. 24. r. Church* P. 70. l. 30. r. Inobedientia. P. 72. l. 19,
20. r. betray. P. 81. l. 35. r. for. P. 83. l. 36* r. did he at all.


