THE Additional Articles IN Pope Pius's Creed, NO ARTICLES OF THE CHRISTIAN
FAITH. BEING AN ANSWER To a Late PAMPHLET, Entitled, Pope PIUS his profession
of Faith Vindicated from Novelty in Additional Articles. AND The PROSPECT of
POPERY, taken from that Authentic Record, with short NOTES thereupon, DEFENDED.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Luke Meredith, at the Angel in Amen-Corner,
MDCLXXXVIII.

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Needham, R. R. in Christo P. ac D. D. Whilhelmo Archiep. Cantuar. a
Sacr. Domest.
Mart. 22. 1677/8.
THE ADDITIONAL ARTICLES IN Pope Pius's Creed, NO ARTICLES OF THE CHRISTIAN
FAITH.
AMONG those many and great grievances which we complain of in the Church of
Rome, the Additional Articles of Pope Pius IV. are none of the least. We look
upon them as Additions to the ancient Faith, imposed with great severity, and
as Novelties introduced into the Church, without any Authority. But the
Vindicator tells us, That though we of the Church of England be the most
forward; yet we, of all sorts of Christians, have the least reason to condemn
this Prelate for this Addition; who, for XXIV. Articles in his Profession, have
XXXIX. in our own. If this were true, or the Additions were of the same kind,
this Remarque of his might pass among thinking Men, as very considerable. But
had this Gentleman been so Thinking a person as he would make the World believe
he is, he would not have been guilty of so great a Blunder; he would have seen
a vast difference between Articles of Faith, and Articles of Communion. We do
not find fault with the Church of Rome, or any particular Church, or any
Society of Men, whether Sacred or Civil, for making Laws and Rules to govern
themselves by, or framing Articles, upon compliance wherewith they will admit
into, or acknowledge any one to be a Member of their Society; provided they be
such as may be complied with, without Sin and Danger. But we deny, that the
Church of Rome, or any particular Church, or the Catholic Church it self has
any Authority to make new Articles of Faith, or declare any thing as necessary
to be Believed in order to Man's Salvation, which was not so antecedent to such
Declaration. And this I take to be the true state of the Question between us
and the Church of Rome; and not as the Vindicator states it, Whether there be
Authority in the Catholic Church of Christ, whichsoever it be, to make any
Addition of Articles to the Apostles Creed, and require other terms of
Communion, besides the assenting to what is expressed in that Symbol? Upon this
mistaken Question the Vindicator proceeds, and all along fights with his own
shadow, nor with us; for all that we say is only this, That no new Articles of
Faith ought to be added to the Apostles Creed; but we never denied, That other
terms of Communion, besides the assenting to what is expressed in that Symbol,
may, by any Church, be required of Her Members. Unless therefore the Vindicator
do make it appear, That new Articles of Faith, de jure, may be, or, de facto,
have been, by consent of the Catholic Church, added to the Apostles Creed; he
will not at all impugn the Church of England, nor will the Church of Rome be
much indebted to him for his Vindication. Now, whether he does, or has made
this appear, will best be seen, by taking his Instances into Consideration, by
which he pretends and endeavors to do it. But before I do that, it may be
convenient to acquaint you what is the just and true differences between
Articles of Faith, and Articles of Communion.

Articles of Faith, I take to be certain Propositions, containing such divine
Verities as are necessary to be believed and assented to by all Christians, in
order to their Salvation.

Articles of Communion, I take to be some certain Laws or Rules agreed upon and
established by some particular Society of Christians; a compliance wherewith is
necessary to the admittance of any one as a Member of that Society, and an
Observance whereof is necessary to the Peace, Order, and good Government of
that Society.

The former of these are certain Fundamental Verities, taught us by God,
revealed in the holy Scriptures, and summarily comprised in the Apostles Creed.
For this we have the Authority of the Trent Catechism, Catech. ad Parochos par.
1. Tit. de 12. Symboli Articulis, n. 1.
and therefore may reasonably suppose that it will not be disowned by those of
the Roman Communion. And if this be granted, then methinks the Consequence is
plain, That whatsoever is not contained in the Apostles Creed, is not to be
admitted as an Article of Faith. For there are many Truths revealed by God in
holy Scriptures, all which, when known to be so revealed, are necessary to be
believed; yet are they not all of equal necessity to Salvation, and
consequently not to be admitted as Articles of Faith in the strict and proper
acceptance of the Word.

The latter are things of a quite different nature, respecting principally the
Peace, Order, and good Government of some particular Society, necessary to be
assented to and observed by all the Members thereof, but not by all Christians.
For there are great Numbers of Ecclesiastical Societies in the World, all or
most of which have different terms of Communion, which the Members of every
particular Society are obliged to comply with; but the Members of one Society
are not under the same Obligation to observe the Constitutions of another, as
they are to do those of their own.

The Catholic Church, we know, is divided into several particular Churches,
differing in the terms of their Communion; and yet none will deny, but that the
terms of Communion in each particular Church are to be observed, in order to
those ends before mentioned, by the respective Members of those several
Churches. It Is true indeed, that all those particular Churches are Members of
the Catholic Church, and do, or ought to hold Communion with her in Faith and
Worship, and upon the same terms with one another: But as to what relates to
the admitting of Members into, or casting them out of their Society, they have
different terms, and always have had without blame, and without any the least
breach of that general Communion.

But to bring the Instance a little nearer, the Church of Rome, which calls her
self Catholic, has many particular Societies within her self, as the
Benedictines, the Franciscans, the Dominicans, the Jesuits, etc. all which have
particular Laws and Rules, and those different from one another, which are the
Bands and Ligaments of their several Societies. And yet the Vindicator will not
deny, but that they are all true Members of the Church, and do hold Communion
with her, and with one another, notwithstanding those different terms of
Communion among themselves.

By what has been said, you may easily observe a vast difference between these
two sorts of Articles, which difference I shall briefly recapitulate to you in
these Four particulars.

I. Church Communion, it is plain, is of two sorts, either with the Catholic,
or with a particular Church. Now it must be acknowledged, That Articles of
Faith properly so called, are really terms of Communion with the Catholic
Church; for by our Profession of them it is, that we are looked upon as
Christians, and owned as members of the Catholic Church. But they are not, nor
cannot be the only terms of Communion with any particular Church; for it is not
by owning and assenting to the terms of Communion with any particular Church,
that we are called Christians, but only Christians of such or such a
Denomination, (i. e.) We are upon our compliance with such terms, looked upon
as Members of such a particular Society of Christians.

II. Articles of Faith properly so called, are certain Fundamental Verities,
revealed by God in holy Scripture, and summarily comprised in the Apostles
Creed: But mere Articles of Communion with any particular Church, are no
fundamental Verities of Religion, though they may be fundamental Constitutions
of a Society; nor is it necessary that they should all be revealed by God, but
may be invented by Men; and certain it is, that all of them never were
comprised either in the Apostles, or any other ancient Creed.

III. Articles of Faith are the same to all Christians, being such fundamental
Verities as all ought to believe and assent thereunto. But Articles of
Communion are various, each Community having different terms of Communion from
another; so that the Members of one Society, though they stand obliged to
comply with, observe, and assent unto the terms of Communion established and
required of them by their own Body, yet are they not any way obliged to comply
with, observe, or assent unto the terms of Communion required in another.

IV. Articles of Faith are certain fundamental Verities, necessary to be
believed and assented to by all Christians, in order to their Salvation. but
Articles of Communion, as such, are not necessary to the Salvation of Men, but
only to the Peace, Order, and good Government of a Society. For a Member of one
Society may be safe and saved at last, without complying with the terms of
Communion established by another.

Having thus represented to you the difference between these two sorts of
Articles, I shall now proceed to consider the Vindicator's Instances, by which
he endeavors to prove, That it is in the power of the Church to add unto the
Apostles Creed, not only other Articles of Communion, besides the assenting to
what is expressed in that Symbol, but also other Articles of Faith.

His first Instance is, The acknowledged practice of the Primitive Church, in
the time of her confessed Purity. This is a mighty Instance, and if he can make
any thing of it to evince the Addition of any new Article of Faith to the
Apostles Creed in that time, he will do a great Work; for we own there is a
great deal of difference due to the practice of the Primitive Church in that
time. But instead of so doing, he acknowledges that the Apostles Creed was the
only summary of the Christian Faith known in the first Three hundred Years. And
if so, then the Church, in all that time, never thought it necessary to add any
new Article thereunto. But after this time, says he, upon occasion of the
Arian Heresy, another Creed was composed by the Council of Nice, with an
express condemnation and detestation of that new broached Error, in the
Addition of these Words, in relation to the Divinity of the Son; I believe in
one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, For begotten.
born of his Father before all Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of
very God, begotten not made, consubstantial to the Father. And without the
express assenting to this Addition, none could be admitted to Ordination, or be
acknowledged as Members of the Church. Which Creed, with this Addition, was
received by the whole Church, and Subscription to it is required by the Church
of England, Art. VIII.

Here this Gentleman, as he thinks, has found a considerable Addition to the
Apostles Creed, and that made by no less Authority than that of the Famous
Council of Nice. But certainly never any Thinking Man besides himself ever
thought this to be an Addition to, but only an Explication of the Apostles
Creed, or a Declaration of what was the Sense of the Church in those Three
hundred Years preceding, touching that Article of the Apostles Creed. And
whereas he says, That without the express Assenting to this Addition, (as he
calls it) none could be admitted to Ordination, or be acknowledged as Members
of the Church: It is very true, but little to his purpose; for what does this
import? but only that an Assent to this Explication was required as a term of
Communion, but not that it should be owned as a new Article of Faith. And
whereas he further says, That this Creed, with this Addition, was received by
the whole Church, and a Subscription to it is now required by the Church of
England, Art. VIII. It is very true, and the Church of England in the same
Article will tell him upon what Grounds she now does, and the Church then did
receive this Creed. The Three Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius's Creed, and that
which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and
believed; for they may be proved by most certain Warrants of holy Scripture. So
that upon the whole matter, it is very evident, That the Council of Nice makes
no new Article, but only explains an old one.

The same Answer may serve to his two next Instances out of the Athanasian and
Constantinopolitan Creeds, in which, upon like Occasions, we meet with
Explications of some other Articles of the Apostles Creed; but no Addition of
any new Article thereunto.

But our Vindicator, being a mighty Thinking Man, has found out a way not only
of confounding Articles of Faith with Articles of Communion, but also of
jumbling Additions and Explications together, as if they were one and the same
thing. And if you will allow this Issue of his so pregnant Thoughts, you shall
not want a Vindication of the most absurd Doctrines, and irregular Practices in
the Church of Rome; but if you deny him this, you take away the Foundation he
is to build upon, and then it would be unreasonable for you to expect any good
and durable Superstructure from him.

This is plain from his next Instance, which is taken from the XXXIX. Articles
of the Church of England, in which (he says) are many particular Points not
found in the Symbol of the Apostles, nor yet in any of the forementioned Creeds
of the Primitive Church. Whence he concludes, That the Church of England has
greater variety, and a greater number of Additional Atticles than the Church of
Rome. To make good which conclusion, he must, according to his new way of
Thinking, take all the Articles of our Church to be Articles of Faith strictly
and properly so called, as necessary to be received and believed by all Men, in
order to their Salvation, (as the Articles of Pope Pius IV. Bulla Pii 4ti. apud
Council. Trid.
are declared to be) or else the force of his Argument is quite lost. For if
they be only Articles of Communion, such as are necessary only for our
admittance into, and our peaceable and orderly living in that Society, of which
we are Members; then are they no Additions to the Apostles Creed, which only
contains Articles of Faith. And that they are so, will evidently appear, if the
Church of England may be but allowed to speak for her self. Art. VI.
She will tell us, That the Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to
Salvation; so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of
the Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation. Art. VIII.
And she will further tells us, That the Three Creeds, the Nicene, the
Athanasian, and that commonly called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be
received and believed; for they may be proved by most certain Warrants of holy
Scripture. But when she speaks of her own Articles, she tells us, they were
agreed upon, and designed for this end and purpose, viz. For the avoiding of
diversities of Opinions, and for the establishing of Consent touching true
Religion. It is a scandal therefore upon the Church of England, to say, that
she ever thought it lawful to add to the Apostles Creed; or that it was in
hers, or in the power of the Church of Rome, or of all the Churches in the
World to make or coin any one new Article of Faith. Which if it be true, then
will it be a very hard task indeed to justify Pope Pius IV. who has added
XII. new Articles, as necessary to be received and believed by all Men in order
to their Salvation. To bring off this Prelate as well as he can, our Vindicator
tells us, That these Articles were collected by him at that time in opposition
to the then broached Errors of Luther and Calvin; that in so doing he is
warranted by Primitive practices; and that the Articles do not contain any new
Doctrine, but only a Declaration of that, to be the true and Orthodox Doctrine
of the Church, which was really so antecedent to that Declaration. And
therefore (says he) We have now only to enquire, Whether the Doctrine proposed
in the profession of Pius IV. be according to Scripture, and the sense of the
Primitive Fathers? if it be not, they do well that reject it; but if it be, the
noise of Additional Articles will be but a weak justification of those, that
have made a breach in the Church on this score.

That these Articles were collected in opposition to some pretended Errors of
Luther and Calvin, and that it was the practice of the Primitive Church, when
any Error or Heresy was raised against any point of received Doctrine, to
condemn the Error or Heresy and the Abettors of them, and to declare the
opposed Doctrine to be Orthodox, is readily granted: But Whether the Doctrine
delivered in these Articles be new or old, is the thing now in question. The
Vindicator undertakes to prove that it is according to Scripture, and the Sense
of the Primitive Fathers; which, if he do, then we must own our selves to
blame; but if he fail in it, then, notwithstanding this his Vindication, he
must, if he be ingenuous, acknowledge that we have just cause to withdraw from
their Communion upon that score.

The Profession of Pope Pius IV.
I steadfastly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and
other Observances and Constitutions of the Church. IN this Article there are
III. things which we are required to admit and embrace: I. Apostolical
Traditions. II. Ecclesiastical Traditions. III. Other Observances and
Constitutions of the Church.

As for the first of these, viz. Traditions truly Apostolical, and universally
owned for obligatory through all ages, we are ready with all due Veneration and
profound Reverence to admit and embrace them. We are well assured that the
Apostles were Men divinely inspired, and whatsoever Doctrine was delivered by
them, or whatsoever Rules of practice they, did prescribe to be perpetually
observed in the Church, were no less than the Dictates of unerring Wisdom; and
therefore to contravene or not comply with them, if they be sufficiently
propounded to us, would be great impiety. But if we do not receive every thing
as a Tradition truly Apostolical, which is pretended to be so, we ought to be
excused by the Imposers. If we are told, as we have been by some of the Romish
Writers, That the whole Canon, word by word, as it is now used in the Mass,
came directly from the Apostles: Or, That the Apostles appointed their Orders
of Monks: Or, That Christ was the Captain and Standard Bearer of Monastic
life: Or, That private Mass, Half-Communion, Purgatory, Pardons, Indulgences,
and I know not what else, are all from the Apostles: This will want a
confirmation, and till we have it, we must beg leave to suspend our belief; and
crave their pardon if we do not admit or embrace it as a Tradition truly
Apostolical.

The next thing we are required to admit and embrace, are, Ecclesiastical
Traditions. Now those are either such as have been universally received by the
Church in all Ages; or are recommended to us by the present Church only. The
former of these we have a very great regard and reverence for, are willing to
admit and embrace them, Sess. 4. de Canon. Script. Contra Crescon. Gram. l. 2.
c. 31. Aug. ad Hieron. Epist. 19.
and to give them the next place in our esteem to Scripture Tradition. But we
cannot be so complaisant, nor so far comply with the Council of Trent, to
receive them with equal affection and reverence. We think with St. Aug. That it
is no injury to St. Cyprian to distinguish his Writings from the Canonical
Authority of the holy Scriptures. And with the same holy Father, We think, That
the Jugdment of St. Paul alone, is to be preferred before that of all the
Fathers taken together.

The latter of these, viz. The Traditions of the present Church, though we have
a very great esteem and value for them, yet without a strict examination how
far they agree with Scripture and Universal Tradition, we cannot so readily
admit and embrace them. For as St. Hierom in his time said, so we say now,
Those things which Men invent of themselves, Hieron. in 1. c. Agg. Proph.
as it were by Apostolical Tradition, without the Authority and witness of the
holy Scriptures, are confounded by God.

The third thing we are here required to admit and embrace, are, All other
Observances and Constitutions of the same Church. If by Church here, be mean
the Catholic Church of all Ages, whatsoever is made appear to have been an
Observance or Constitution thereof, we shall have a mighty regard for it; but
how shall we know what the Observances and Constitutions of the Church have
been, if they be not conveyed unto us by an uninterrupted and unquestionable
Tradition? and if we do not know them, how can we admit or embrace them? But it
is remarkable, That the Observances and Constitutions mentioned in this
Article, are things different from what has been delivered to us, either by
Apostolical or Ecclesiastical Tradition; else, why are they called other? And
it is as observable, That by Church here, he does not mean the Church of all
Ages, but the present Church only; not the Catholic, but the Roman Catholic
Church, whose Observances and Constitutions we are required to admit and
embrace; Otherwise, why does he restrain it to the same Church? which word,
same, the Vindicator has thought fit to leave out.

Now there are many Observances and Constitutions in the Church of Rome, which
we think she has no authority to impose upon other Churches, nor have they any
reason to admit and embrace.

But notwithstanding all this our Vindicator has undertaken to prove, That,
not only this, but all the Articles in the Profession of Pope Pius IV. are
according to Scripture, and the sense of the Primitive Fathers. How well he
has acquitted himself in this undertaking, I shall now examine; and observing
his own method, shall consider his proofs of every Article severally.

He begins his proof of this Article by Scripture, and then fortifies it by the
Testimony of the Fathers. His first Scripture proof is taken out of 2 These.
2.15. Where St. Paul says, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions,
which ye have been taught, whether by word, or our epistle. Here he observes,
That there are two ways of delivering the sacred Truth, one by writing, the
other by Word of Mouth; and that the Doctrine is to be held fast, whether it be
delivered the one way, or the other. All which we readily grant him, provided,
it be made appear, That the Tradition as it stands distinguished from the
written Word, be Apostolical; or that what is so delivered be Truth; or a
Doctrine agreeable to the written Word. For certainly St. Paul did not preach
one thing and write another; and if he did not, then all that can be made of
this Text, will amount only to this, Hold fast the self same substance of
Religion and Doctrine, that I have taught you either by Word or Writing, i. e.
either by preaching unto you in person, when present; or instructing you by my
Epistle, Niceph. l. 2. c. 45.
when at a distance. Thus Nicephorus understands it, telling us, That those
things which St. Paul had plainly taught by preaching, when present; the same
things, being absent, he was desirous to recall to their memories, by a
compendious recapitulation of them in Writing. Hieron. in 2 Th. 2.
And the Annotator under St. Hierom's name, says, Quando sua vult teneri, non
vult extranea superaddi. And if thus we are to understand this place, it will
do but little service for the support of Romish Traditions: Many, I wish I
might not say, most of which are besides, if not against, the written word. But
does not St. Chrysostom understand this place of Scripture otherwise?
Chrysostom. in 2 Th. 2.15. Hom. 4
the Vindicator thinks he does, and therefore has produced him as an evidence
against us; Well, let us hear what he says, They (the Apostles) have not
delivered all in their Epistles. (who denies it?) but many things also without
writing. (who doubts of it?) which are likewise to be believed, (yes, if we
knew what they were;) But all things worthy of belief, and which ought to be
believed when known, are not necessary, nor indeed possible to be believed,
before they are known. John 21.25.
Those many other things which Jesus did and were never written, of which St.
John speaks, would all be worthy of belief, and ought to be believed, if they
were known; but not being known, they are not necessary to be believed; nor are
we obliged to believe any one, who tells us This or That was one of them, the
Scripture being silent therein.

But St. Chrysostom adds, Let us therefore esteem the Tradition of the Church
worthy of Credit. It Is a Tradition, enquire no farther. We grant the Tradition
of the Church is worthy of Belief, and when any is made appear to be so, we
will seek no farther. But then it must be the Tradition not of the present
Church only, but of the Church in all Ages, and such a Tradition as from hand
to hand, and Age to Age, brings us up to the times and persons of the Apostles,
and our Savior himself, and so is confirmed by all those Miracles and other
arguments, whereby they convinced their Doctrine to be true.

But I know none can better acquaint us with the mind and meaning of St.
Chrysostom, than St. Chrysostom himself, who, in the same Homily out of which
these words are taken, Chrysostom. ibid.
has these other, All those things that are in the holy Scriptures are right
and clear, all that which is necessary, is therein clear and manifest. And if
so then those Traditions that are not in the Scripture, are unnecessary things.
In Ps. 95.
And the same Father, in another place tells us, When we say any thing without
the Scripture, the thoughts of the Hearers are uncertain. The Traditions
therefore which St. Chrysostom here speaks of, are such as are either
contained in, or may be warranted by the written word, and if so, then he will
stand the Vindicator in little stead.

His next Scripture Proof is taken out of 2 Timothy c. 2. v. 2. where St. Paul
thus directs Timothy, The things that thou have heard of me among many
Witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach
others also. Whence he observes, That St. Paul takes care, that what he had
taught the faithful, though only heard from him, might be observed, and
conveyed down to Posterity, by their teaching of others. How well this Gloss
does agree with the Text, needs no other evidence, than comparing the one with
the other. But if we would know St. Paul's design in these words, let us
consider for what end he besought Timothy to abide still at Ephesus, when he
himself went into Macedonia, which he tells us was, That he might charge some
to teach no other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. i. e. None other but what he himself
had delivered to the Ephesians; for there were certain false Apostles which did
endeavor to draw the Ephesians to the observation of Legal Rites, and Jewish
Traditions, as necessary to salvation, says their own Lyra upon the place. The
business therefore which Timothy had to do, as Governor of that Church, was,
That none but only faithful and able men should be admitted by him to preach
unto them. And this is that which St. Paul again charges him to do in this
place; so their own Lyra upon the place informs us; for, says he, St. Paul
here stirs up Timothy to be solicitous in preaching himself, and to make choice
of others who were fit for that work: and therefore he says, The things that
thou have heard of me among many Witnesses (i. e. confirmed by the Law and the
Prophets, and the Hagiographa, or other sacred Writings) the same commit thou
to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. (i. e. to Men of a
sound Faith, who shall be fit by the example of holy life, by their Knowledge
and by their Eloquence to teach others also.) Now what relation this has to
Traditions, or why this Gentleman brought it in as a proof of them, I cannot
devise.

These are all the Scripture proofs which he offers for Traditions, but he has
a Reserve of two passages out of two of the Fathers to make good the Rear.

The first of which, he tells us, is to be found in Epiphanius, Haer. 61. in
these words, It Is necessary to admit of Traditions, for all things cannot be
found in Scripture; and therefore the holy Apostles delivered some things in
writing, and some by Tradition. How far this will serve the end he aims at, is
now to be considered. That in some cases it is necessary to admit of
Traditions, was never denied by us; nor did we ever affirm, That all things are
to be found in Scripture, nor do we deny, but that the Holy Apostles did
deliver some things in Writing, and some by Tradition, i. e. by word of Mouth.
But we deny that it is necessary to admit of Traditions, i. e. unwritten
Traditions, in all cases; or indeed in any, unless it can be made appear that
they have been universally received by the whole Church in all Ages. And we do
affirm, that though the Scriptures do not contain all things, yet they do
contain all things necessary to be believed by us in order to our Salvation.
And though we do not deny, but that some things were delivered by the Apostles
in Writing, and some by word of mouth; yet we do deny, that what was delivered
by word of mouth was either besides or against what was written by them. What
was delivered in writing has been carefully preserved, we have it before our
eyes, and are sure of it; but of those things which were delivered by word of
mouth, some we are sure have been lost; as for instance, Those many other
things which Jesus did, mentioned by St. John c. 21. v. 25. and the cause of
the hinderance of the coming of Antichrist, mentioned by St. Paul 2 Th. 2.
That Records are a much more faithful keeper than Tradition, appears by these
instances; those few that were written being still preserved and believed, and
those infinity that were not written being all lost and vanished out of the
memory of Men. And seeing God in his providence has not thought fit to
preserve the memory of them, he has freed us from the obligation of believing
them: for every obligation cease, when it becomes impossible. You will not,
you dare not say, that God would suffer any thing to be lost that was necessary
to Salvation, nor can you deny but that he has suffered these Traditions to be
lost; and therefore the Knowledge or Belief of them, though it were a
profitable thing, yet is it not necessary. And if so, then with what face can
you require us to assent unto this Article upon pain of damnation; when we have
no footsteps or print remaining, which with divine Faith we may rely upon? All
which considered, may we not truly say, That Epiphanius here, if rightly
understood, is neither for them, nor against us? For we say with him, that it
is necessary to admit of Tradition in some, but not in all cases; We
acknowledge also, that the Holy Apostles delivered some things in Writing, and
some by Tradition; and when any thing is made appear to us to be of Apostolical
Tradition, and delivered by them as necessary to Salvation, we will enquire no
farther, but will readily admit and embrace it.

His next Authority is taken out of St. Gregory Nyssen. l. 3. contra Eunom. p.
126. where he tells us these words are to be found, It Is a sufficient proof of
our Doctrine, that we have received it by Tradition from our Ancestors; it
having been left us, as an Inheritance, by the Apostles; and conveyed down to
us, by a continued Succession of the Faithful in all Ages.

I see nothing to all this, but what without any scruple we may readily assent
to. Gregory Nyssen says, It is a sufficient proof of our Doctrine, that we have
received it by Tradition from our Ancestors. And who these Ancestors were, he
tells us in the next words; It having been left us, as an Inheritance, by the
Apostles: So then the Ancestors here spoken of were the Apostles, and the
Tradition here mentioned, was, what was left us, as an Inheritance, by them.
Now what was it that was left us, as an Inheritance, by the Apostles, but only
the Doctrine of Christianity contained in their Writings? which Doctrine has
been conveyed down to us by a succession of the Faithful in all Ages i. e, by
Universal Tradition.

That this is the sense of this Father in this place, is plain from his own
words, and is agreeable to the way and manner of speaking among the Fathers; by
whom the Gospel it self, and the whole Religion of Christ is frequently called
A Tradition. De praescription. advers. Haereticos. Council. Constantinop. 6.
Act. 4. Eadem Action. Basil. de Spiritu Sancto. 2 Th. 2.15.
So the Articles of our Faith are by Tertullian called An old Tradition. So the
Faith of the Holy Trinity in the Council of Constantinople is called A
Tradition. And the Faith of two sundry Natures in Christ, in the same Council
is called The lively Tradition of the Apostles. So St. Basil calls it A
Tradition, To believe in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And in this
sense St. Paul calls the Apostolical Doctrine, A Tradition. This is all that he
produces in the behalf of Traditions. Now whether he has hereby proved that
the Romish Doctrine of Traditions is according to Scripture, and the Sense of
the Primitive Fathers, I leave the Reader to judge.

His next Effort is to make good the latter part of this Article touching all
the other Observances and Constitutions of the Church. And here we might
reasonably have expected, that he should have told us, what those Observances
and Constitutions are, which we are required to admit and embrace. But that is
not the way of the Church of Rome, she expects that her votaries should rely
upon her guidance and conduct with an implicit Faith, and observe her Dictates
with a blind Obedience. And therefore the Vindicator here like a dutiful Son of
such a Mother, never stops to us what is required of us; but, without more ado,
goes about to prove, That, whatsoever those Observances and Constitutions are,
it is our duty to admit of them, and embrace them. And this he pretends to do
both by an Apostolical Precept, and Apostolical Practice; Two mighty arguments,
if they be apposite to the thing in hand, and well managed; which whether they
be or no, I shall now examine.

The Apostolical Precept which he produces, is in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
c. 13. v. 7, 17. in these words, Remember them, which have the rule over you,
etc. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account, etc. In the former of
these Verses (as their own Lyra upon the place tells us) we are taught how to
behave our selves toward our Spiritual Rulers that are dead: Lyra in Hebr. c.
13. v. 7.
We ought to remember them, by following their Faith, and imitating their good
Examples. And lest we should be at a loss to know who they are whom we are to
remember, and whose Faith and Virtue we are to follow, the same Lyra tells us,
They were the Apostles and other Disciples of Christ. In the latter place, the
same Lyra tells us, we are taught how to behave our selves toward our
Spiritual Rulers who are alive, viz. by obeying their Commands, and giving due
Reverence to their Persons. That obedience is due from Inferiors to their
Superiors, we readily grant. But then, I. They must be such Superiors as not
only pretend to have, but really have a right to rule over them. Now we do not
think, that any particular Church, no not the Church of Rome it self, has any
authority to give Laws to another Church; for it is a certain Rule, Par in
parem non habet imperium, Equals have no power over one another. And if so,
then the Church of Rome has no reason to expect our compliance with every
thing, which she thinks fit to require of us. II. As they ought to have a right
to rule over us, so their commands ought to be such as we may without sin obey
them; otherwise the rule of the Apostles will dispense with us, Act. 4.19.
Whether it be better to obey God or Man, judge ye. Now whether they be so or
no, how can we tell, if we are not allowed beforehand to know what they are?
These things being thus premised, I dare now venture any unbyassed Reader to be
the Judge, whether by virtue of this Precept the Church of Rome may justly
challenge a power to impose what Observances and Constitutions she pleases
upon the whole Christian World? For that is truly the question between us.

Having considered the Precept by him procured, and found him mistaken in it;
Let us now consider his argument from Primitive Practice, and see whether that
will stand him in any more stead. This he tells us, was the practice of the
Apostles, even of St. Paul himself and Silas, who, as they went through the
Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the
Apostles and Elders, which were at Jerusalem. And so were the Churches
established in the Faith, Acts xvi. 4, 5. The Apostolical Council held at
Jerusalem, having finished their Decrees, commissionated Paul and Barnabas,
with Judas and Silas to publish the same among the Brethren that were of the
Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia, Acts c. xv. v. 22, 23. These Men
faithfully discharged their duty, in performing their Commission, and their so
doing had a good effect; for thereby the Churches were established in the
Faith, and increased in number daily. Now what is all this to the Vindicator's
purpose? Will it necessarily follow, That because Paul and Silas published the
Apostles Decrees in these places, Therefore the Church of Rome may impose what
Ordinances and Constitutions she will upon all Christians? If not, I do not see
what good this instance of Apostolical Practice will do the Vindicator.

I also admit the Holy Scripture according to that Sense, which our Holy
Mother, the Church, has held, and does hold; to whom it belongs to judge of the
true Sense and Interpretation thereof. Nor will I ever admit or interpret it
otherwise, than according to the unanimous consent of the Holy Fathers. WHAT
Tertullian said merrily of the Heathens in his time; Tertul. in Apologetico.
Unless God please Man well, He shall be no God, (and so now Man must be
friendly and favorable unto God) may with a little variation be here applied
to the Church of Rome, Unless the Holy Scriptures please Her well, they shall
be no Scriptures. For unless they speak according to Her Sense, they are not to
be admitted, it belonging to Her to judge of the true Sense and Interpretation
of them. For I do not at all doubt but it is of that Church that this Article
speaks, and which it styles Our Holy Mother, the Church. And for this, I have
the warrant of Pope Pius himself, who in his XXIII. Article styles it, The
Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches. Nor indeed can it be otherwise understood, for if the true Sense of
Scripture must depend upon the Judgment of the Universal Church, i. e. of all
the Christians, or at least of all the Bishops and Pastors in the World; how is
it possible to get them together to declare the Sense thereof? or must we
reject all Scripture, till we have such a Declaration? If you tell me, that we
must look for it in the unanimous consent of the Holy Fathers. I answer, I.
That this is an impossible task for all sorts of Christians; for Women and
unlearned Men can never perform it: if therefore their Salvation depend
thereupon, they must inevitably be damned. II. Those that are learned and able
to read and understand the Fathers, do not find any such unanimous consent
among them; so that if according to this Article we must not admit the
Scripture, till they are all agreed about the Sense of it; both learned and
unlearned will for ever want a Rule to govern themselves by, in the eternal
concerns of their immortal Souls.

To avoid these difficulties, The Church of Rome, by Catholic, understands the
Roman Catholic Church; and by Our Holy Mother the Church, the Church of Rome;
which they call, the Mother and Mistress of all Churches. But will this make
the business ever a jot the more easy? Must all the Christians in the World,
out of Greece, Egypt, and many other more remote parts, repair to Rome, to
receive the true Sense and Interpretation of the Scriptures? Or if they do, are
they sure to meet with it, when they come there? Will they not find as much
difference in opinions between the Doctors of that Church, as of any other?
Will they not find, that Councils have contradicted Councils, and Popes
condemned Popes? And if so, where then can they hope to meet with an infallible
Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures? To this may be added, That if it belong
to the Church to judge of the true Sense and Interpretation of Scripture, and
we are not to admit of it but according to Her Sense; then it will be necessary
to know which is the Church, and whether that which pretends to be so, be
indeed the true Church; for without that we cannot with any certainty depend
upon Her Judgment. But how shall we know that but by the Scriptures? Nullo modo
cognoscitur quae sit vera Ecclesia Christi, nisi tantummodo per Scripturas.
Chrysostom. in opere imperfect. Hom. 49.

Ecclesiam Christi sicut ipsum Caput Christum, in Scripturis Sanctis Canonicis
debemus agnoscere. Aug. de Vnitat. Eccl. c. 66.


St. Chrysostom says, It is impossible to know it otherwise. And St.
Augustine, for the discovery of the true Church, directs us to the sacred
Scriptures. And indeed, how is it possible to know this or that to be a True
Church, i. e. of a sound Judgment, and pure in the Faith; unless we first know
the Rule of Faith, which is the Word of God? But how shall we know either the
one or the other, but by making use of our own Reason, and judging for our
selves of those Evidences which are produced? So that in fine, If we should
grant all that the Church of Rome requires of us, yet must we make use of our
own Reason to understand that Sense and Interpretation which she gives us of
the Holy Scriptures. Which is no more, nor less, than resolving all at last
into a private Judgment. And that all Christians not only may, but ought, in
this manner, and in these cases, thus to judge for themselves, we have good
warrant and Authority from the Word of God; in which we are advised, Not to
believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits whether they be of God; because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John iv. 1. And to prove all
things, but to hold fast that which is good, 1 Th. v. 21. And to be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that
is in us, 1. Pet. iij. 15. And our Savior tells us, If the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Matthew. xv. 14. And he severely reproves
those who did not receive his Doctrine, saying, And why even of your selves
judge ye not what is right? Luke xij. 57. But notwithstanding all this, and
much more, which has been told them oftentimes oyer and over; yet the
Vindicator like a stout Champion of his Church, undertakes to prove, That this
Article and every Branch of it, is according to Scripture, and the Sense of the
Primitive Fathers. Let us see now, how he acquits himself in this undertaking.
This, he tells us, is founded upon the Doctrine delivered by St. Peter, 2 Ep.
i. 20. No Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation. From
whence he thus argues, And if it be not of private Interpretation, private
persons must apply themselves for the true Sense of it to some others; and to
whom, but unto those whom God has put over them; whom he has commanded them
to hear, to submit to and obey? etc.

When Men, by their own diligence and industry, cannot attain to the true sense
and meaning of Holy Scripture, or after all their care and pains in the use of
all proper means, are not satisfied therein; that in such a case they should
apply themselves to those whom God has set over them, as their Spiritual
Guides, we think to be a method, not only safe and reasonable, but very
necessary. But whether this be deducible from, or can be built upon this Text
of Scripture, I take to be very questionable; or rather that it is out of
question, that it cannot. And therefore before we proceed any farther, let us
make a stand a while, and take a view of the Apostle's design in this place,
and of the full and genuine importance of these words. St. Peter having
faithfully discharged his duty in preaching the Gospel, and now finding the
time of his departure hence near at hand, he commits to writing the substance
of what he had preached, that so those to whom he had preached might always
have it in remembrance; so little did he rely upon Tradition. That this was his
design appears plainly from the 12, 13, 14, and 15 Verses of this Chapter. And
that he might not burden their memories too much, he gives them a short
Summary of what he had preached unto them, viz. The power and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, v. 16. And to assure them of the truth and certainty
thereof, he lays before them two undeniable Arguments; I. A voice from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. This was at his
Transfiguration in the Mount, at which time Peter, James and John were with
him, and were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty, and Ear-Witnesses of that Heavenly
Voice, verse. 16, 17, 18. II. But lest they should distrust them, or look upon
this as an illusion, or a dream and fancy of their own; he furnishes them with
another Argument, which he was well assured would not be rejected by them; and
that is taken from the Prophetical Writings, for which those of the Dispersion,
viz. the coverted Jews had a mighty regard; saying, We have also a more sure
word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, etc. v. 19. meaning
that Prophecy of holy David, Ps. ij. 7. Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. And then he adds, Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the
Scriptures (i. e. no Prophecy contained in the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
to distinguish it from the dreams of those Men, who pretended to prophecy, but
had neither Mission nor Commission from God so to do) is of any private
Interpretation, (i. e. proceeds from any private or uninspired person, or is an
invention of Man.) And that this is the full importance of this Expression, the
Apostle himself seems plainly to intimate in the very next words, where he
says, For the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man; (i. e. The
Prophets of old did not prophecy either what they pleased, or when they
pleased) but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (i. e.
they published nothing but what was dictated to them by the Holy Ghost, nor at
any time but when they were moved by him) v. 21. And if we consult the Original
words, they cannot well be construed otherwise; for what in the 20 verse is
rendered, Of any private Interpretation, in the Greek is, (...), and may be
rendered thus, All Prophecy of the Scripture is not made of their own
Explication; which is the same which the Apostle afterward says, (...).
That the Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man. And for this sense
of the Words, if that will weigh any thing with them, we have the Authority of
their own Lyra upon the place. Now, if this be, as undoubtedly it is, the sense
of the Apostle here; let us see what consequence the Vindicator can draw from
hence to favor his undertaking. The Apostle here assures those to whom he
wrote, That all Prophecy of Scripture is not made of their own Explication, i.
e. (as he explains himself) Prophecy of old came not by the Will of Man.
Therefore (says the Vindicator) it belongs to the Church (i. e. the Church of
Rome) and her only, to judge of the true sense and interpretation of Scripture
for all Christians. If you can swallow this consequence, I do not see what you
need to stick at. One would have thought, the more natural consequence had been
this, Therefore trust not every thing that pretends to come from a Prophetical
and infallible Spirit, but try whether it do so, or no.

Thus you see what a firm foundation this Gentleman has laid, which thus
failing him, his Superstructure thereupon, must needs be in a very tottering
condition.

His next Scripture is Acts xx. 28. Where St. Paul charges the Elders of
Ephesus, To take heed to themselves, and to all the flock, over which the Holy
Ghost had made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he had
purchased with his own blood. To these St. Paul says, he had declared all the
Counsel of God, v. 27. and then bids them to take heed to the flock, etc. i. e.
to instruct those committed to their charge in that Doctrine which they had
learned of him. That by a parity of reason, all Pastors and Teachers are to
feed the flock committed to their care, we willingly grant; but how he will
hence infer, That all Christian People are to receive the true sense and
Interpretation of Scripture from the Church of Rome, I cannot imagine.

His next is, 1 Timothy III. 15. Where St. Paul directs Timothy, how to behave
himself in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar
and ground of the Truth. There is an excellent Treatise lately printed at
London, entitled, The Pillar and Ground of Truth, to which (if this Gentleman
be permitted to read it) I would referr him, for his better understanding of
this Text.

His next is, Matthew. xxviij. 20. Where our Savior having given his Apostles
his last and largest Commission, promises, to be with them always even unto the
end of the World. This promise was made to the Apostles, and not only to them,
but to the whole Church of God in all Ages; but how the Church of Rome comes to
claim a Title to this promise, more than any other, I know not; or if she had
it, I do not see what service it would do her in this case; For, that Christ
will be always with his Church, so to preserve it as it shall never cease to be
a Church, we do not doubt; but to preserve it from all error, as he never
promised it, so we have no reason to expect it.

His next is, John xvi. 13. Where our Savior tells his Disciples, When he, the
Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth. This promise was
not made to the whole Church, but to the Apostles; whose case was so peculiar
and extraordinary, that the Church now has no ground upon which to hope for
the same Assistance which they then had, and which indeed was then necessary
for them to have. That Christ will assist his Church in all Ages by his Grace,
we do not deny; but that that Assistance implies Infallibility, we cannot
grant; for then every private Christian, who is assisted by Divine Grace, would
be infallible: But if it did, why the Church of Rome should put in a peculiar
claim to this privilege, more than the Church of England, or any other
particular Church, I see no reason. But it seems the Vindicator found great
reason for it; for thus he argues, Christ promised his Apostles, when he, the
Spirit of truth, came, he should guide them into all truth. Therefore it
belongs to the Church of Rome, to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
Scripture. Just as if one should argue, Christ promised that these signs should
follow them that believe, In his name they should cast out Devils, They should
speak with new Tongues, They should take up Serpents, and if they drank any
deadly thing it should not hurt them; They should lay hands on the sick, and
they should recover, Mark c. xvi. v. 17, 18. Therefore all that believe in
Christ at this day shall do the same things.

His last Scripture proof is, Matthew. xviij. 17. Where our Savior says, If he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a
Publican.

To this I answer, I. That our Savior in this place does not speak of
Controversies in Religion, or points of Faith; but of quarrels between
neighbors; as is plain from v. 15. where our Savior says, If thy Brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him
alone, etc. II. By Church here, we cannot understand either the Catholic, or
that which they call the Roman Catholic Church. Not the former, for that would
make the thing not only impracticable, but altogether impossible; for when a
quarrel happens to arise between two Neighbors, if they must stay for the
Decision of it, till the Universal Church is assembled for that purpose, their
quarrel may last long enough. Nor the latter; for that would be as
impracticable as the former; for if two Christians have a quarrel in Syria, or
in Aethiopia, must they go to the Roman Church to end their difference? III. By
the word, Church, therefore in this place, we must understand any particular
Church, or Society of Christians, of which the the two quarrelling Neighbors
are Members. Now it is confessed on all hands, that any such Society, in giving
Admonitions, and using of Censures, may err; being subject to be mislead either
by passion, or prejudice, or ignorance. It Is plain therefore that this
Scripture is not at all to his purpose, or if it were, it would do him no
service.

Thus have I considered his Scripture proofs, and now let us see what the
Fathers will say for him. He produces two passages, both out of one and the
same Father, viz. St. Aug. His first Authority is taken out of his first Book,
contra Crescon. Gram. c. 33. Then, says he, we follow the truth of the
Scriptures, when we do that, which has seemed good to the whole Church, which
Church is commended to us by the Authority of the Scripture; To the end that
because Holy Writ cannot deceive, whosoever is afraid of being deceived by the
difficulty of this question, may consult the Church concerning it; which
without leaving room to doubt, the holy Scripture demonstrates. I cannot
imagine what was in this Gentleman's mind, when he picked up this passage of St.
Aug. for a proof of this Article. St. Austin indeed says, Then we follow the
truth of the Scriptures, when we do that, which has seemed good to the whole
Church. And who denies it? We have too great a Veneration for the Doctrine and
Practice of the Universal Church, to suspect that there can be any ill in them;
let but any thing be made appear to have been universally received, or
universally practiced by the Church in all Ages, and we will readily admit and
embrace it, we will acquiesce in it, and seek no farther. Thus far do we
perfectly agree with this holy Father, nor do we dissent from him in the rest.
Which Church, says he, is commended to us by the Authority of the Scriptures.
Well then, by his Rule we must understand the Scriptures before we can know the
Church. Now the Scriptures, they themselves confess, do not consist in the
Letters and Words, but in the Sense and meaning: And if so, then we must
understand the sense and meaning of Scriptures antecedent to the Churches
Interpretation of them. But he goes on, To the end, says he, that because Holy
Writ cannot deceive, whosoever is afraid of being deceived by the difficulty of
this question, may consult the Church concerning it; which, without leaving
room to doubt, the holy Scripture demonstrates. And here I cannot but remarque,
I. That, according to St. Austin, Holy Writ is the only infallible rule to
judge by, for it cannot deceive. II. That by this rule we are to find out the
true Church, for, without any ambiguity, or leaving room to doubt, it plainly
demonstrates it to us. III. That having by this means found out the true
Church, we ought, in all questions which are too hard and difficult for us, to
consult her about them. All which we readily agree to. Now let the Vindicator
once more put on his spectacles, and seriously review this place of St. Austin,
and I dare appeal to himself, or any man of sense, whether it do not directly
conclude against this Article, which he undertakes to prove by it.

But perhaps he may have better luck with his next Authority, let us therefore
consider that too; which he cites out of the same Father, de Vnitat. Eccles. c.
19. whence he quotes these words; If we had any wise man, whose Authority was
recommended to us by Christ himself; we could no ways doubt of following his
judgment, having consulted him upon this point; lest in refusing, we should not
so much seem obstinately to withstand him, as Jesus Christ our Lord, by whose
testimony he was recommended to us. Who doubts of all this? If it had pleased
our Blessed Savior to have given such testimony to the Church of Rome, or any
other Church, we should never have doubted to follow the judgment of that
Church; and when they can make it appear that he has done so, we shall,
without any the least scruple, submit to it. But St. Austin goes on, Christ
has given testimony of his Church, (True, but where? is it not in the holy
Scriptures? and if so, then we must understand them, before we can be satisfied
concerning this Testimony) and as this Church directs, you ought with all
readiness obey. (Right, but first we must know which is this Church, and that
according to St. Austin we cannot do, but by the Scriptures.) And if you will
not, it is not to me you are disobedient, or any man; but most perversely to the
prejudice of your own Soul, you withstand Christ himself, because you refuse to
follow the Church, which is recommended by his Authority, whom you judge it a
wickedness to resist. All this we can readily subscribe to, for when by the
Holy Scripture, we have once found out which is the true Church, we ought with
all readiness to yield obedience thereunto; because it is recommended to us by
the Authority of Jesus Christ, whom to resist in any thing, we account a great
wickedness. But where shall we meet with this Authoritative Recommendation,
except in the holy Scriptures? So that still we must understand the Scriptures,
before we can know which is that Church, that is recommended to us by Christ.
And now, pray'e, what is all this to the proof of this Article; That it belongs
to the Church to judge of the true sense and interpretation of Scripture, and
that we are not to admit Scripture to be Scripture, but according to that
sense, which she gives of it. And yet, all this while, we cannot, according to
St. Austin, know the Church, but by the Scripture.

I do also profess that there are truly and properly seven Sacraments of the
new Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ, and necessary for the salvation
of Mankind; though all be not necessary for every one; to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony; that
they conferr Grace, and that three of them, Baptism, Confirmation and Order,
cannot be reiterated without Sacrilege. HERE the Vindicator tells us, That the
holy Scripture no where assigns the number of the Sacraments, either of their
being two or seven. Neither does it give us the definition of a Sacrament, and
the word is not so much as named in the English Translation, and only once in
the Vulgar, viz. Ephesians. v. 32. speaking of Matrimony. All that we believe
therefore in this point, we receive from the Church, as it has been delivered,
founded upon the Doctrine of the Fathers, and the Sense of the Scripture. To
this I answer, That it is not more plain that in Scripture there is no mention
of Sacraments, than that in the Fathers there is no mention of seven. The
determination of the number is of so late a date, Cassand. Consult. Art. 13. de
numero Sacram. An. 1439.
that their ingenuous Cassander freely confesses, That it is not easy to find
any man before Peter Lombard (who lived in the twelfth Century) which has set
down any certain and definite number of Sacraments. The Council of Florence
indeed insinuates this number of seven Sacraments, as Suarez contends. But it
was never determined till the late Council of Trent in the last Age; and
therefore must needs be a great Novelty. An. 1546.
But to vindicate the Doctrine of seven Sacraments, as it is now taught in the
Church of Rome, and summed up in this Article, from the imputation of Novelty;
This Gentleman undertakes to prove, that it is founded upon the Doctrine of the
Fathers, and the sense of the Scripture; wherein, how well he acquits himself,
we shall now consider. But because he tells us, that the Holy Scripture gives
us no definition of a Sacrament, It will be necessary to state the notion of
the thing, and to agree what it is, before we dispute how many of them there
be. To the constitution of a Sacrament properly so called, we say that these
three things must of necessity concur, viz. the word of Institution, a visible
Sign, or outward Element; Aug. in Joan. Tract. 80.
and a promise of invisible Grace annexed thereunto. Which is the same that St.
Austin says, Accedat verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum.

And now let us see, Catech. ad Parochos pars 2. Tit. de Sacram. n. 5. p. 113.
Aug. l. 10. de civ. Dei. c. 5. And Epist. 2.
how far they agree with us in this notion of a Sacrament. The Trent Catechism,
which always speaks the sense of that Council, gives us this definition of a
Sacrament, It is a visible Sign of invisible Grace, instituted for our
Justification, which it grounds upon the Authority of St. Austin, and the
compliance of all the School Doctors with him therein.

The Doway Catechism says, P. 49.
A Sacrament is a visible sign of invisible Grace, instituted by Christ our
Lord, for our Sanctification.

And their P. 4, 5.
Sum of Christian Doctrine, etc. printed at London, 1686. says, A Sacrament
is a visible Sign instituted by Jesus Christ, to convey his Grace into our
Souls, and to apply unto us the merits of his death.

So then it is agreed between us, that these three things, viz. The word of
Institution, a visible Sign, and a promise of invisible Grace, are absolutely
necessary to make and constitute a Sacrament. And it is acknowledged on all
hands, that these three are to be found in the Sacrament of Baptism and the
Lords Supper. The dispute therefore between us is, concerning the Five
additional Sacraments of the Church of Rome. Of which we say, That they want
either the Word, or the Element, or both. Matrimony, Order, and Penance, have
the word of God, but they have no outward Element; Extreme Unction, and
Confirmation have neither Word nor Element. But this Gentleman contends, That
these Five, as well as the other Two, are founded upon the Doctrine of the
Fathers, and the Sense of the Scripture. And here, I confess, the Vindicator
has taken a great deal of pains, but to little purpose; he has sweat and
toiled, and at last found out a great many Fathers, who have called them
Sacraments; which is a thing that no body would have denied him upon his own
bare word. For, That many things, which indeed, and by special property, are no
Sacraments, may nevertheless pass under the general name of a Sacrament, he
must be a very great stranger to the Writings of the Fathers, who will not
acknowledge it. We very well know that it was usual with the Fathers, to call
any sacred Sign, or Mystery in Religion, or any holy significant Rite, by the
name of a Sacrament. And in this Sense he might reckon not only seven, but
seventy, or more if he pleased, for he may furnish himself with great variety.
Tertullian calls the Stick which Elisha cut down, cast into the water, Tertul.
advers. Judaeos.
and made the Iron swim, Sacramentum Ligni, the Sacrament of Wood. And the same
Father calls the whole State of the Christian Faith, Contr. Marcion, l. 4.

Aug. in Sermon de Sanctis 19.

Leo de Resurrect. Domini, Sermon. 2.

Hieron. ad Oceanum.

Inter Decreta Leonis, c. 14.

Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 2.


Religionis Christianae Sacramentum, The Sacrament of the Christian Religion.
And St. Austin speaks of the Sacrament of the Cross. And Leo calls the Cross of
Christ both a Sacrament and an Example. And St. Jerome calls the Water and
Blood which issued out of the side of the blessed Jesus, the Sacraments of
Baptism and Martyrdom. And Leo calls the vow of Virginity, a Sacrament. And St.
Austin calls the Bread that was given unto the Novices or Beginners in the
Faith called Catechumens, before they were baptized; a Sacrament. And if he
will but consult St. Hilary he may find in him these expressions, Hilar. in
Matthew. Canon. 11, 12, 23.
The Sacrament of Prayer, the Sacrament of Hunger, the Sacrament of the
Scriptures, The Sacrament of Weeping, and the Sacrament of Thirst. Bern. in
Sermon de Coena Domini.
And St. Bernard calls our Savior's washing of the Disciples Feet, the
Sacrament of daily sins. I suppose he will not call all these Sacraments of the
new Law instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ; and if not, then must he
aknowledge, that there are Sacraments to be found in the Fathers, besides those
that are properly so called. The truth is, the Fathers sometimes spoke
Metaphorically, and sometimes properly; sometimes they spoke more loosely, and
sometimes more closely; sometimes they spoke of things as they were in
themselves, and by specially property such, and sometime by way of allusion,
and as in a general sense they might be called such. And if we be not careful
to difference these several ways and manners of speech in the reading of them,
we may unawares fall into great errors and mistakes. This is plain in the
matter now before us. All are not Sacraments properly so called, which they
call so; we are therefore to distinguish between their expressions when they
speak of a thing obiter, and by the bye, and when they treat of it designedly
and on set purpose. And if we consider their Writings, when in the latter way
they treat of this subject, we shall find that they mention no more Sacraments
but only two. St. Cyprian says, Then may they be thoroughly sanctified, Cypr.
l. 2. Ep. 1. ad Steph.

Aug. de Doctrina Christiana l. 3. c. 9.


and become the Children of God, if they be newborn by both the Sacraments.
And St. Austin says, Our Lord and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few
Sacraments instead of many, and the same in doing most easy, in signification
most excellent, in observation most reverend, as is the Sacrament of Baptism,
and the Celebration of the Body and Blood of our Lord. And again the same holy
Father speaking of Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, says, Aug. de Symbolo
ad Catechumenos.

Paschasius de Coena Domini.

Bessarion de Sacrament. Eucharistiae.


These be the two Sacraments of the Church. And Paschasius says, These be the
Sacraments of Christ in the Catholic Church, Baptism and the Body and Blood of
our Lord. And Cardinal Bessarion says, We read, that these only two Sacraments
were delivered us plainly in the Gospel. Here you have Both the Sacraments, and
the Two Sacraments, and the Only Two Sacraments of the Church. Whence it is
plain, that though the Fathers sometimes, either in heat of this discourse, or
for a Rhetorical flourish, might call those Sacraments, which properly
speaking, were not so; yet when they did designedly and on set purpose speak of
them, they mentioned only Two, which, I think, may be a sufficient answer to
his Authorities. But he has yet another Reserve to bring up, and that is, That
all these are founded upon the sense of the Scripture. Let us see how, whether
this will any more avail him, than the Authority of the Fathers has done.

Of the pretended Sacrament of Confirmation.
TO establish this, he produces Acts viij. 17, 18. where it is said, Then laid
they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. And when Simon saw
that through laying on of the Apostles hands, the Holy Ghost was given, he
offered them money. Here we have a narrative of matter of Fact, but nothing
that looks like a Sacrament in it; for, here is neither any word of
Institution, nor any outward Element; which are things agreed to be absolutely
necessary to the making or constituting of a Sacrament. Here is no mention of
Chrism, or Unction, or of the blow on the Ear, or of the Head-band, which are
looked upon as things necessary, and of the Essence of the pretended Popish
Sacrament of Confirmation. Besides, the Imposition of hands by the Apostles in
this place, was not to celebrate a Sacrament to perfect or strengthen Baptism,
but to conferr miraculous and extraordinary gifts, i. e. to give the Holy
Ghost. This Simon Magus saw, and therefore offered money for that gift, which
he would never have done for Popish Confirmation. To this I may add the
testimony of their own Alexander de Hales, Alex. Hales. part 4. qu. 24. memb. 1.
who says, The Sacrament of Confirmation, as it is a Sacrament, was neither
instituted by our Lord himself, nor by his Apostles, but was afterward
instituted in the Council of Melda. So that though this may be an ancient Rite,
it can be but a new Sacrament, i. e. no Sacrament.

Of the pretended Sacrament of Penance.
TO prove this, he produces, John xx. 22. Where it is said, He breathed on
them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, and v. 23. Whosesoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whosesoever sins ye retain,
they are retained.

Before I give a direct answer hereunto, let me premise; That the difference
between us and the Church of Rome in this point is not, Whether Penance be
necessary to Salvation, or whether men ought to confess their sins, amend their
lives, and turn unto God by true Repentance; but whether this Penance be a
Sacrament, wherein a contrite sinner ought punctually to confess his sins to a
Priest, and from him to receive judicial Absolution, upon condition to make
satisfaction unto God by Corporal or Pecuniary Penance, which whosoever does
not accomplish in this life, shall suffer for it in Purgatory?

The former of these we willingly assent to, as being founded on the Word of
God; but the latter we reject, as having no foundation either in this, or any
other Text of Scripture.

That our Savior here does commit to his Church the power of the Keys i. e.
of public Discipline, by virtue whereof she has Authority to admit into, or
cast out of the Church, such as she shall judge worthy of it; we readily grant,
and do heartily bewail the want of it. But that it is of such absolute
necessity, that the truly penitent sinner cannot receive Pardon of sins without
it, we cannot subscribe to. Lyra in loc.
And this is all that their own Lyra can find in these words.

But the Vindicator, in compliance with the Council of Trent, Council. Trid.
Sess. 14. cap. 1. and Can. 1.
(which teaches, That those who fall from Grace after Baptism, have need of
another Sacrament to restore them, and therefore our Savior instituted this of
Penance, and Anathematizeth all those who deny this Doctrine) has found out a
Sacrament in these words. But if our Savior did by these words Institute a
Sacrament, I would fain know, which is the Element or Visible Sign Instituted
by Christ; for this, on both sides, is acknowledged to be a necessary part of a
Sacrament. According to the Church of Rome, this Sacrament consists of Four
Parts, viz. Contrition, Confession, Absolution, and Satisfaction. Contrition of
the Heart can be no sensible nor visible Sign. Nor can Confession pretend to
it; for, 1. Confession is so far from being a Sign of the Grace of God, that it
is a declaration that we are unworthy of his Grace. 2. It is designed not to
signify the Grace of God, but to ask it. 3. The sacred Signs ought to be
administered by the Priest, but Confession is made by the Penitent. Nor can
Absolution lay any claim to it; for, 1. Absolution, if it be good and
available, is the Grace of God; and therefore cannot be a Sign of it. 2. If it
could be a Sign, yet can it not be a Visible Sign, for the words are not
Visible. Nor can Satisfaction pretend to it, for that is accomplished by the
Sinner, and not administered by the Priest. So that in all these we can find no
outward Element, or Visible Sign of Invisible Grace, Instituted by Christ; and
without that it cannot be a Sacrament.

There is one thing yet which may make some colorable pretense to it, and that
is, The Imposition of the Priest's Hands. This we confess is a Visible Sign:
But, 1. It is no Element, but an Action; as the distribution of the Bread in
the Lord's Supper is not the Element, but the Bread sanctified. 2. This
Imposition of Hands is not of Christ's Ordination or Institution, and therefore
cannot be a Sacramental Sign: He did never command, That the Priest should lay
his Hands on any one to conferr Sacramental Absolution. If he did, let them
produce the command.

But if we review these words, we shall find, that they were spoken to the
Apostles after that Christ was risen again from the Dead. And if so, then
Repentance preached before, whether by the Prophets, Matthew. iij. Mark i. 15.
Acts ij. 38. Council. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 1.
or by St. John Baptist, or by Christ himself, was no Sacrament; nor that
preached by St. Peter after the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, because the
persons to whom he preached were not then Baptized. For thus the Council of
Trent has determined the point; Repentance was not a Sacrament before the
coming of Christ, nor after his coming, is so to any one before Baptism.

And yet all good Christians in the Primitive and purest Times of the Church,
for many hundred Years after Christ, never knew, nor dreamed of any other
Penance, than what had been preached either by the Prophets, or by St. John
Baptist, or by Christ himself, or by his Apostles; nor ever doubted of
obtaining Pardon thereby. The truth is, Anno. 1215.
till the Council of Lateran, we do not find, that ever Penance, as it is now
used in the Church of Rome, was determined to be of necessary Observance. Anno.
1546.
Nor till the Council of Trent, that it was required to be received as a
Sacrament of divine Institution, and absolutely necessary to Salvation.

All which considered, notwithstanding this Gentleman's Vindication, I think we
may safely conclude, That though Repentance be an old Duty, yet it is but a new
Sacrament; and that Penance, as it is now used in the Church of Rome, is
neither a Duty nor a Sacrament.

Of the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction.
TO prove this, he produces James v. 14, 15. where it is said, Is any sick
among you? let him call for the Elders of the Church; and let them pray over
him, anointing him with Oil, in the Name of the Lord: And the prayer of Faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him.

This place of Scripture has been often enough brought upon the stage by one
or other of the Roman party; and as often considered, and the Arguments drawn
from it baffled by some of our Men. And therefore when I met with it here, I
did expect that this Gentleman, who is so brisk at a Vindication, had found
some new Matter in it, and thereby cut us out some new Work; but instead of
that, he only quotes the place, transcribes the words, and leaves them to shift
for themselves.

What therefore is here to be done by us, save only to consider the design of
the Apostle in these Words? Which is plainly this; St. James directs the sick
person, to call for the Elders of the Church, to assist him in that condition.
The means by which they were to assist him are Two, 1. They were to pray over
him. And, 2. To anoint him with Oil, in the Name of the Lord. And that in order
to Two ends, 1. The Recovery of the Sick. 2. The Remission of Sins. Of these
Means and Ends, the one is Perpetual, viz. Prayer and Remission of Sins; the
other Temporary, viz. The Anointing with Oil, and the Recovery of bodily
Health. That the Apostles had the Gift of Healing, we grant; and that in order
to the working of their miraculous Cures, they did use the Ceremony of
Anointing with Oil, we deny not; but the Gift of Healing being now ceased in
the Church, that Ceremony is become useless and unprofitable, and for that
reason laid aside; for God loves no unprofitable Signs. Whilst it was in use,
it was used only in Order to bodily health, but now, in the Church of Rome, it
is not to be used whilst there are any hopes of Recovery, but only in Articulo
mortis, when Men are at the point of Death, as a viaticum into the other World.

That this was designed and used only in order to bodily health, is plain from
the Ancient Rituals of the Roman Church, for above Eight hundred Years after
Christ. And Cardinal Cajetan freely confesses, Annot. in loc.
that this was the only use of it, for says he, These words of St. James speak
not of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme Unction, whether we consider the
words or the Effects of them; but rather of the Unction, which the Lord Jesus
ordained in the Gospel, to be used by his Disciples to the Sick. For the Text
says not, Is any sick to Death? but absolutely, Is any sick? Nor does it
assign any other use of anointing of the sick person, but only the recovery of
bodily health. And the Ingenuous Cassander, Cassand. in Consult. Art. 22.
without any hesitation, freely delivers his Opinion, saying, It is no
Sacrament properly so called, because it has neither Word of Institution, nor
outward Element.

The eldest Evidence that we meet with for this pretended Popish Sacrament of
Extreme Unction is, the Council of Chalons, Anno. 813.
which was held above Eight hundred Years after Christ; and was but at best a
National Synod neither. So that though we do not deny, but that Anointing the
Sick with Oil, was a very Ancient Rite; yet we cannot but look upon it as a
very New Sacrament, and one that was never advanced to that honor by any
Appointmant of our blessed Savior.

Of the pretended Sacrament of Orders.
TO evince this, he produces 2 Timothy i. 6. where St. Paul says, I put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift of God, which is in thee, by the
putting on of my Hands.

St. Paul here admonishes his Son Timothy to a vigorous exercise of that Power
and Authority, which, by the Imposition of his Hands, he had received, to
Preach the Gospel. Lyra in loc.
And this is all that their own Lyra can find in this place.

But the Question between us is not, Whether the Office of a Priest ought to be
conferred upon him by the Imposition of Hands; but whether such Ordination be a
Sacrament of the new Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ.

To this I answer, That if by the word, Sacrament, they only mean any sacred
Sign, or Mystery in Religion, (in which sense it is frequently used, especially
by the Latin Fathers) we can very willingly and readily admit this Imposition
of hands to be called a Sacrament. But if they would advance it higher, and
have it called a Sacrament in the same sense, as Baptism and the Supper of the
Lord are; or as this Article requires, That we should receive it as a Sacrament
of the New Law, instituted by Jesus Christ, and necessary for the Salvation of
Mankind; we cannot in this consent with them, and that for these Reasons: I.
Because Imposition of hands, though it be a Sign, yet is it not a sacred Sign
of the Covenant of God in Jesus Christ. II. Because it is not common to all the
Faithful, but confined to a certain order of Men only. III. Because there is no
express Institution of it to be found in the Holy Scriptures of the New
Testament, and consequently no promise of Grace annexed to it. IV. Because it
is well known, that many of the Roman Communion, do not think Imposition of
hands to be Essential to Holy Orders, and if not, then can it be no outward
Sign of a Sacrament in them: Nor can Ordination it self be a Sacrament, seeing
there is no outward visible Sign of it ordained by God. For these Reasons,
Though we acknowledge the Conferring of Orders by Imposition of hands, to have
been a very ancient usage in the Church, and of Apostolical practice; yet we
think it to be a very new, i. e. no Sacrament.

Of the pretended Sacrament of Matrimony.
AS an evidence of this, he produces Ephesians. v. 31, 32. where St. Paul says, For
this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and shall be joined to his
Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak
concerning Christ and his Church.

The Church of Rome calls the marriage of Priests, Sacrilege; and yet will have
the Marriage of Laymen to be a Sacrament, which conferrs justifying Grace. And
to prove this the Vindicator alleges this Text of Scripture, as many others
before him have done, and have received their answer; but as if there had been
no such thing, this Gentleman with sufficient confidence, barely cites it, and
so leaves it.

To which however I shall return this answer, The Apostle in this place (as is
plain to every considerate Reader) speaks of the sacred Union between Jesus
Christ and his Church; which Union he illustrates by that of Marriage between
the Husband and the Wife. His intent was not to exalt the Mystery of Marriage,
but the Union of the Church with Jesus Christ. This Mystery then whereof he
speaks, is the Mystical Union between Jesus Christ and his Church, and not
the Union between the Husband and the Wife. For having said, This is a great
Mystery, that we might not think that he spoke of the Mystery of Marriage, he
adds, But I speak concerning Jesus Christ and his Church.

But the Vulgar Translation of this Text calls it, a Sacrament; we grant it,
but does this prove Marriage to be a Sacrament? Will the Vindicator own all
those things, which in the Vulgar Translation are called Sacraments, to be
Sacraments of the Church of Rome? Then the great Whore mentioned in the
Revelations, must be one of their Sacraments, for so the Vulgar Translation
calls her, Rev. xvij. 7. And the seven Stars, mentioned Rev. i. 20. must be
another, for so they are there called. And Dreams and Visions must be a third,
for so they are three times called, Dan. ij. 18, 30, 47. And Piety is called a
great Sacrament, 1 Timothy iij. 16. I suppose he will not own these to be
Sacraments of the Church of Rome, and yet in their Authentic Translation, they
are called Sacraments, as well as Marriage.

But that Marriage is no Sacrament of the New Law, instituted by Jesus Christ;
among many others, we have these reasons to satisfy our selves: I. Because it
was not instituted by Jesus Christ, for it was in the World before his time. If
after his coming, the blessed Jesus did change the nature of it, and make it a
Sacrament, then let them show us when and where he did it. II. Because, as it
has no word of Institution, so neither has it any visible Sign or outward
Element; for neither the words, nor the actions are Elements; and unless there
be an Element, to which the word of Institution is joined, it can be no
Sacrament. III. Because there is no promise of Grace annexed to any outward
Element; for, though the state of Matrimony be a sign of that Mystical Union
between Christ and his Church, having some Analogy with it; ye we do not know,
that the entrance into this state has the promise of any Grace, to join, or
preserve us in that Union with Christ and his Church. And for these reasons, we
exclude it from the Sacraments of the New Law, instituted by our Lord Jesus
Christ, with all the requisites of a Sacrament properly so called. And for our
so doing, we do not want Authorities among the eminent Doctors of the Roman
Church. I shall only give you two instances. Their own Durandus delivers his
opinion in plain terms, telling us, Durand. in sentent. l. 4. Did. 26. q. 3.
Cajetan, Annot. in loc.
That strictly and properly speaking, Marriage is not a Sacrament. And Cardinal
Cajetan, upon this place of Scripture cited by the Vindicator, has these
words, Prudent Reader, thou learnest not here of St. Paul, that Marriage is a
Sacrament; for he says not, This Sacrament, but this Mystery is great; and in
truth the Mystery of those words is great.

Thus it appears, that neither from Antiquity, nor the written Word of God, any
of these five Additional Sacraments of the Church of Rome, viz. Confirmation,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, and Matrimony; can with any justice plead the
same title to be Sacraments of the New Law, instituted by Christ, and necessary
for the Salvation of Mankind; as it is confessed on all hands, Baptism and the
Lord's Supper may.

I do also receive and admit of all the received and approved Ceremonies of the
Catholic Church, used in the Administration of the abovementioned Sacraments.
1 Cor. xiv. 40.
THAT all things are to be done decently and in order, we own to be an
Apostolical precept, and that in point of duty we stand obliged to yield
Obedience thereunto. We also acknowledge that the Superiors in every Society
are the proper Judges of that Decency and Order. And that it always has been,
and still is the practice of all well-ordered Societies, to submit to the
Determination of their Superiors therein. And that to invert this Order, or for
private persons to take upon them to dictate to their Governors in this case,
is the only way to introduce Anarchy and Confusion. Which is all, or at least
the substance of all, that the Vindicator here offers in behalf of this
Article. But after this Concession, there are some things still stick with us,
which will not suffer us to subscribe thereunto; viz. I. Because we are
required to receive it, not only as an Article of Communion but as an Article
of Faith; under the penalty of an Anathema, though it only concern Ceremonies,
which are things mutable at the pleasure of the Church. II. Because the
Ceremonies here spoken of, or some of them, neither are, nor ever were
received, nor approved by the Catholic Church. III. Because the Roman
Catholic Church (as they call it) is but a particular Church, and has no more
power to impose Ceremonies or Usages upon any other Church, than that other
has to impose upon Her. For, Par in parem non habet imperium. IV. If any
Ceremonies imposed by the Church of Rome; or any other Church, be such, as that
the Members of that Church cannot comply with them without sin and danger; the
general rule of the Apostle does not in that case bind to blind Obedience. For
then there is an Apostolical pattern, which must take place, Whether it be
better to obey God, or man, judge ye, Acts iv. 19.

I embrace and receive all and every thing, which in the Holy Council of Trent
has been defined, concerning Original Sin, and Justification. IN defense of
this Article, and to persuade us to a compliance therewith, the Vindicator
proceeds in this method. I. He undertakes to give us an account of what the
Council has defined in these two points. And II. To vindicate those their
Definitions. Now whether he has been faithful in his account, or whether the
Definitions of the Council, or his Vindication of them be such, as may oblige
us to comply with him and the Council therein, are the things we are now to
enquire into.

I. As touching Original Sin, it must be acknowledged that the Vindicator has
faithfully set down the Doctrine thereof, as it is defined by the Council of
Trent. But notwithstanding the Authority of this Council, or the strength of
the Proofs (which indeed are weak enough) whereby he endeavors to defend its
Definition of this point; yet there are some things we cannot comply with, and
till we are convinced by better Arguments than are here offered, we cannot
embrace all and every thing, which in the Council of Trent has been defined in
this point.

But because the difference here is not very great, and no new matter offered,
but only such as has been over and over again considered and refuted; and
because there are matters of greater moment still behind, Council. Trident.
Sess. 5. Decret. de peccat. Origin. Can. 5.
I shall only desire the Vindicator once more to read over that very Decree
upon which this part of the Article, which he is here defending, is founded,
and consider one passage therein, which perhaps he might before overlook. And
then I shall proceed to conder the latter part of this Article.

The Passage is this; the Council does there declare, That Concupiscence does
still remain even in those that are baptized, and does further declare, that
St. Paul did sometimes call this Concupiscence, Sin. But though the Apostle did
so, yet the Council tells us, That the Catholic Church (no doubt the Roman
Catholic) did never think it to be so. And if any one think otherwise, let him
be Anathema.

In the beginning of this Decree the Council pretends to have the assistance of
the Holy Ghost; whether they had or no, is not easy to be granted; but it is
confessed on all hands, that St. Paul was inspired from above; and if so, then
how comes the Council and he to be at odds in this matter? Either the Apostle
or the Council were in the wrong, for both parts of a Contradiction cannot be
true. Now whether the Authority of St. Paul, or that of the Council of Trent be
the better, one would think were no very hard Question. St. Austin, I am sure,
did not think it was; for if he had, he would not have been so positive as he
was, Aug ad Hieron. Epist. 19.
when he said, The Authority of St. Paul is to me instead of all the Fathers,
and above all the Fathers; to him I flee, and to him I appeal from all other
Doctors whatsoever.

II. Concerning Justification, he gives us an account of what the Council of
Trent has defined in Four particulars:

1. That Men are justified by an intrinsecal Justice. And this he founds upon
Two places of Scripture, viz. Tit. iij. 7. where it is said, That being
justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the hope of
Eternal Life. Which Grace, says he, is in Men. And for this he quotes, 2 Timothy
i. 6. where it is said, I put thee in mind to stir up that Grace which is in
thee. So he renders it; but it is more properly translated, I put thee in
remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift, of God, which is in thee, by the
putting on my Hands. Which last words he leaves out.

To this I answer. What St. Paul here means, by being justified by his Grace,
he himself very well explains in another place, where he says, Romans iij. 24.
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ. Where to be justified Freely, and to be justified by Grace, are
Synonymous Expressions, and imply no more, but that God did freely, and without
any merit of ours, send his Son to die for sinners; and by his Death to make
satisfaction to divine Justice for our sins; and by that means to obtain such
Grace and Favor with God, that our Sins might be Pardoned, and we Justified
before him. whence it is very plain, That by the Grace of God, we are not to
understand any intrinsecal Righteousness of our own, but the free Grace and
Favor of God, in accepting the Righteousness of Christ, instead of ours, and
imputing the same to us, through Faith, for our Justification. And therefore
St. Paul after he had a little more Explained himself, Verse. 28.
concludes, saying, Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law.

As for his other Scripture, which he brings in as an Auxiliary Proof, it is
quite foreign to the matter in hand; for the Apostle there does not speak of
Justifying Grace, nor indeed of any Grace, if we take the word strictly; for
the word there is not (...), as in the other, but (...), which signifies not
Grace, but a Gift. And the Gift which he there puts him in mind to stir up, was
the Gift of preaching. As if he should have said, Be sure courageously to
preach the Gospel, and exercise that Ministerial Function, which thou have
received by the Imposition of my Hands.

But I find this Gentleman is under a great mistake, he takes Justification and
Sanctification to be one and the same thing; but I cannot much blame him for
it, because I know he is led into it by an Authority, which he thinks, to be
Infallible, and consequently Indisputable, viz. the Council of Trent, which
teaches him, Sess. 6. c. 7.
That Justification consists not only in Remission of Sins, but in
Sanctification also and the renewing of the inward Man, by a voluntary
susception of Grace and Gifts; by which, of Unrighteous a Man is made
Righteous, and of an Enemy a Friend, that he may be an Heir according to the
Hope of Eternal Life. This is a far different Notion from that which the Church
of England, and the Holy Scriptures give us of Justification. They teach us,
That by Justification we are to understand only Absolution, or Remission of
Sins; but the Church of Rome confounds Justification with Sanctification, and
the Remission of Sins with the Renovation of our Minds. And indeed in this
Channel runs the main difference between us and them through the whole
Controversy. The Church of England delivers her Sentiments touching
Justification thus: Art. 11.
We are accounted Righteous before God only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own works or deservings.
Wherefore that we are justified by Faith only, is a most wholesome Doctrine,
and very full of comfort. And for a farther Explication thereof, she refers to
the Homily of Justification; where she declares, That by Justification, 2 Hom.
of Justificat. part 1.
she means the Forgiveness of our Sins and Trespasses. That this being received
of God's Mercy and Christ's Merits, embraced by Faith, is taken and allowed of
God for our perfect and full Justification. That nothing on the behalf of Man,
does contribute to this Justification, but only a true and lively Faith, which
Faith is also the Gift of God: Yet does not this Faith exclude Good-works, nor
the necessity of them in Justified Persons, but only shuts them out from the
Office of Justifying. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England; and for
this she has good Authority both in Scripture and Fathers; but I must not now
enter upon this Controversy, lest I lose the Vindicator therein. I shall
therefore proceed to his next particular.

2. He tells us, That the Council of Trent has defined, That all Works of the
Just are not Sins. This, says he, is evident in Scripture, as Luke i. 6. where
it is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth, They were both Righteous before God;
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless. And 1
John v. 18. Whosoever is born of God, sineth not. Which likewise proves, That
the Commandments are not impossible to be kept, as the same Council declares.

To this I answer, If the Premises be good, the Inference therefrom, I
confess, is natural; For if Justified persons be so Righteous, as to be void of
all Sin, they may, no doubt, keep all the Commandments. But if the Foundation
which he builds upon happen to fail him, all his Superstructure will fall to
the Ground. Let us therefore Examine that, whether it be firm and good.

In order whereunto let me premise, That there is a Legal and Evangelical
Righteousness: The former of which consists in a perfect and unsinning
Obedience to the whole Law: And the latter in a sincere desire and endeavor to
keep all God's Commandments. The former of these, it is not in the power of
fallen Man, to attain unto: And to justify this Assertion, we have good
warrant from the Holy Scriptures; The wise Soloman, in his Prayer at the
Dedication of the Temple, humbly confesses, There is no Man that sins not,
1 Kings viij. 46. And St. Paul tells us, The Scripture has concluded all under
Sin, Gal. iij. 22. And St. James says, In many things we offend al, Jam. iij.
2. And if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is
not in us, says the Apostle, John 1 Ep. c. i. v. 8. I might add many more
places of Scripture to this purpose, but these may suffice to show us, how far
it is out of the power of fallen Man, to perform a perfect and unsinning
Obedience to the Law of God. But the latter, viz. an Evangelical Righteousness,
we acknowledge to be attainable in this Life. It is possible for a good Man
sincerely to desire, and honestly to endeavor to keep all the Commandments of
his God; and though he fail in the attempt, by reason of the corruption and
depravation of his Nature; yet God, for Christ's sake, will pardon those
Failings, and accept of those his honest Endeavors For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a Man has, and not according to
that he has not, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. viij. 12 And according to this Notion
of Righteousness it is, Hierom. ad Ctefiphon. Aug. ad Bonifacium, l. 3. c. 7.
that holy and good Men are said to be Just and Righteous. So St. Hierom says,
Men are called just, not because they are void of all Sin; but because in the
main they are Virtuous. And S. Aug. says, The Virtue that is now in a just
Man, so far forth is called perfect, that it pertains to the perfection
thereof, both in Truth to know, and in Humility to confess, that it is
imperfect. And the same St. Aug. in another place says, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l.
19 c. 26. Ipsa nostra justitia, quamvis vera sit propter very boni finem ad
quem refertur, tamen tanta est in hac vita, ut potius peccatorum remissione
constet, quam perfectione virtutum.
Our very Righteousness it self is such in this life, that it stands rather in
the Remission of Sins, than in the perfection of Righteousness. Thus Job, by
the Mouth of God himself, is styled, A perfect and upright Man, one that feared
God, and eschewed evil, Job i. 8. and yet he cursed the day of his Birth, c.
iij. And thus Zacharias and Elizabeth are said to be both Righteous before God,
and to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances blameless, i. e. Their Lives
and Conversations were so good and virtuous, that no Man had any just cause to
blame them. But that they were without sin, does not appear; but the contrary
is very manifest, for not long after we find Zacharias punished for his
Unbelief, Luke i. 20.

His other Scripture Proof (which is 1 John v. 18. Whosoever is born of God,
sins not,) will do him no better service than his Former. For the same
Apostle in the same Epistle, c. i. v. 8. says, If we say, that we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. If therefore the Text by him
alleged, be so to be understood, as if the Regenerate were free from all
manner of sin; then must he say that St. John, and those he speaks of in the
other Text, were not born of God, or else that he contradicts himself in these
two places; neither of which, I presume, they will dare to say. We must
therefore find out another sense of these words, which methinks is very
obvious. Whosoever is born of God, sins not, i. e. He does not make a trade
of sin, or he does not deliberately, and on set purpose sin against God. This
their own Lyra, if he had consulted him, would have told him; for he says,
Lyra in loc.
That the intention of the Apostle in this place, is not to secure the
Regenerate from all sin, but from that sin unto death, of which he speaks, v.
16.

Thus have I examined his proofs, and find them to fall far short of proving
what he pretends to prove by them. But if I should grant his Proposition, which
he calls a Definition of the Council, to be true; yet I do not see how the
possibility of keeping the Commandments can thence be inferred. All works of
the just, he says, are not sins. What then; does it necessarily follow, That
it is possible for the Regenerate to keep all the Commandments? No surely; for
though all be not, yet if any of them be, it will be a sufficient bar to this
Inference; So St. James thought, or else he would not have said, Whosoever
shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of all,
Jam. ij. 10. Unless therefore they will understand, a possibility of keeping
the Commandments, Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 19.
in the same sense that St. Austin does (who tells us, All the Commandments of
God are accounted to be done, when that thing that is not done, is forgiven) I
do not see how it can be asserted, much less defended. And if thus they
understand it, we shall not quarrel with them about it.

III. He tells us, That the Council has defined, That a man justified, truly
deserves life everlasting by his good works. And this he undertakes to prove
both by Scripture, and the Testimony of St. Austin.

Before I come particularly to examine his Proofs, the force of all which
stands in a misunderstanding of the Words, Merit and Reward; It will be
convenient, for a more clear decision of the difference between us, to state
the true notion of those words; for Ambiguity of Words often has been, and
still is, not only the occasion of hot and fierce Disputes among men, but of
their continuance also.

That the word, Merit, is frequently used by the Fathers we own; but that they
used it in that sense, in which the present Church of Rome does, we deny; and
thence arises the difference between us. The Holy Fathers understood no more
by it, than Obtaining or Impetration; but the Romanists would now have it to be
understood of Earning or Deserving in the way of Condign Wages; Bellarm de
Justificat. l. 5. c. 17.
as if there were an equality of due proportion between our Works and Heaven,
without any respect had to Pact, Promise or Favor.

To make a work truly meritorious, it must have these five Qualifications:

1. The work that is done, must not be a work that is due to be done. For it is
no merit for a man to pay his debts. Now our Savior tells us, When we have
done all those things which are commanded us, we are still but unprofitable
Servants, having done only that which was our duty to do, Luke xvij. 10.

2. The thing we offer must be our own. For to present any thing to another
that belongs unto him, is no merit in us. Now St. Paul. tells us, We are not
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but all our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. iij. 5.

3. The work that a man does to merit of another, must be profitable to that
other, of whom he designs to merit. For no man will pretend to merit by an
unprofitable service. Now holy David freely confesses, That his Goodness did
not extend to God, i. e. was no way profitable or advantageous to him, Ps. xvi.
2.

4. The work we do to merit withal, must not be defective. For if there be any
thing in it that wants a pardon, it can never truly merit. Now St. John tells
us, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us, 1 John i. 8.

5. There must be some proportion between the Work and the Reward. Otherwise we
cannot be said to deserve it. In St. Paul's account, The afflictions of this
present time (and certainly Suffering is more than Doing) are not worthy of the
Glory which shall be revealed in us, Romans viij. 18.

These are the requisites of Merit, which if well attended to, may be very
useful in deciding this Difficulty, and determining this matter in difference
between us. Let us now consider the other word, viz. Reward.

That the Word, Reward, is frequently used both in Scripture, and by the
Fathers, we own; and that the strict and proper notion of it, is a Debt due to
man for the work he has done, we deny not. But that it was ever used in this
sense with respect to God, or that ever any man, according to this notion of
the Word, can be said to deserve a reward at God's hands, we can by no means
grant. And hence arises the difference between the Church of Rome and us; in
order to the deciding of which, let us consider that there is a twofold Reward,
the one due, the other not due; the one given as a just retribution for the
work done, and the other freely, or, at most, according to Pact and Promise.
This distinction is fairly founded in Scripture, where St. Paul says, To him
that works, the reward is not accounted to be of grace, but of debt, Romans iv.
4. Which plainly implies, that a free gift bestowed out of mere bounty and
liberality may be called a Reward, as well as that, which by the strict rules
of Justice is due to Merit. And thus we find it in Scripture sometimes given to
the one, and sometimes to the other: For, that which in Matthew. v. 46. is called
(...) a Reward, in Luke vi. 32. is called (...) a Grace, or Free Gift. And the
penny given to the labourer who came in at the last hour is called (...) a
Reward, though much above his desert, Matthew. xx. 8. Ambr. l. 1. Ep. 1.
Upon which St. Ambrose very well observes, There is a kind of Reward, which is
given of liberality and of Grace, and another which is the wages of Virtue, and
the recompense of a man's labor.

Having thus stated the true notion of these two words, Merit and Reward, upon
which depends the whole Controversy between us; I shall now take a more
particular view of his Proofs.

His first Scripture proof is, Rev. iij. 4. From which he thus argues, Thou
have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments (there is
Purity and Justice) and they shall walk with me in white, (there is the Reward,
and the reason follows) for they are worthy.

The whole stress of this Argument lies in the word worthy, a right
understanding whereof, will facilitate our answer thereunto.

St. Paul expressly says, I reckon that the afflictions of this present time
are not worthy Condignae ad futuram Gloriam. Vulg. Lat.
((...)) of the glory, which shall be showed unto us, Romans viij. 18. The Glory
which St. Paul here speaks of, and the White Array, which St. John mentions, do
certainly import one and the same thing, viz. Eternal Life. Of which St. Paul
says, all our Sufferings, (and certainly they are more valuable than our
Doings) are not worthy. And yet those who had not defiled their garments, are
said to be worthy ((...)) to walk in white, i. e. to be made partakers of Life
and Glory.

This looks like a perfect contradiction, which we cannot suppose these two
holy and inspired Men could be guilty of: for, as they were both taught by the
same Spirit, so, no doubt, they both spoke the same thing. To reconcile them
therefore, we must find out another sense of the Word, Worthy, than this
Gentleman puts upon it; and, I think, it is no difficult matter so to do. For a
Man may be said to be worthy of a Reward either upon his own account, or upon
the account of another; either for the sake of his own deservings, or for the
sake of another's merits. To be worthy in the former sense, a Man must have all
those Requisites and Qualifications, which are required to make up a Merit
strictly so called; but to be worthy in the other sense, requires no more but
only to be fitted and disposed to receive those favors, which are merited for
him by another. That according to the latter of these notions we are to
understand the worthyness here spoken of, will appear plainly; if we consider,
That the word (...) which is here rendered Worthy, may be, and often is rendered
fit or meet; as for instance, St. John Baptist warns the Pharisees and Sadduces
which came to his Baptism, To bring forth fruits ((...)) worthy of, Matthew. iij.
8. Luke iij. 8.
or meet for, repentance, that so they might escape the wrath to come. i. e.
Let your Reformation declare your Repentance to be such, as may fit you to come
to this Baptism, and consequently to escape wrath; let your Repentance be
according to the measure of your sin, if your Sins have been great, Lyra in
^oc. ^ed. apud ^l. Ord. in ^oc.
so must your Repentance be too. So their own Lyra understands it. And the
venerable Bede gives this reason for it, Because the same measure of Repentance
is not required of him who is guilty of little or no Sin, as of him who has
more grievously offended. By fruits worthy of Repentance, we are therefore to
understand such fruits as are meet to testify the truth of our Repentance, and
fit us to receive Grace and Favor offered. And if we consider the following
words, they will farther confirm us herein; for it is added, v. 5. He that
overcomes, shall be clothed in white array, etc. Whence it is evident, that to
walk in white, or to be worthy to do so, was not a privilege peculiar to those
few names in Sardis which had not defiled their garments, but to all others,
who by Faith are armed with the power of Christ, and by that means obtain a
Victory over the World and the Devil; for they also shall be clothed with
white array. This well represents that Righteousness wherewith all the blessed
ones shall stand clothed and covered before God; which is not their own, but a
Righteousness given unto them by another, and put upon them. And is the same
spoken of by holy David, and quoted by St. Paul, when he had occasion to treat
of this argument. (...). xxxij. 2. ^om. iv. 7, 8.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is the man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin. To be worthy therefore
imports not, that Men do merit eternal life by their works, but it imports a
fitness and capacity in them to receive it, being justified by Faith in Christ
Jesus, as their holy and godly life did declare.

His next Scripture proof is, Matthew. v. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for
great is your reward in Heaven: Whence he inferrs, that Heaven is given as a
reward for their suffering, and good Works.

That Heaven is a Reward, we grant, but it is a Reward of Grace, not of Debt;
That it is given to those that suffer for Righteousness sake and do well, we
deny not; but it is not given them for their suffering or well-doing. And we
acknowledge, that it is a great Reward, so great, that it far exceeds the merit
of all that we can do or suffer; For our light afflictions which are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding ((...)) and eternal weight of glory,
says St. Paul, 2 Cor. iv. 17.

His last Scripture is, Matthew. xxv. 34. where our Savior is giving an account
in what manner he will proceed in the last Judgment. What inference the
Vindicator would draw from hence, he leave us to divine; for he only quotes it,
and so leaves it; and so shall I too, till he thinks fit to form his argument,
and bless the World with the sight of it. But he closes up his Scripture
Arguments with this Salvo, All this as supposing and built upon the promise of
Christ, and his assisting grace. Which, if I mistake not, is a full confutation
of all that he has been endeavoring to prove: For if our good works be done
by his assisting grace, (as undoubtedly they are) then are they not so our own,
as to merit by them; and if our deserving life everlasting must suppose, and be
built upon the promise of Christ, then is it not a Reward of Debt, but of
Grace, or by Pact and Promise; which is the thing we contend for.

And now I come to examine his Authorities, which he brings out of two Epistles
of St. Austin, viz. the 105. and the 118. ad Sixth. I have carefully read over
these two Epistles, which, I question, whether the Vindicator has done; for if
he had, he would not have been guilty of so great a mistake; for, the 118
Epistle is not directed to Sixtus (as he says it is) but to Januarius; nor is
there one word in it of all that he here quotes out of it, nor any one Syllable
relating to that matter; it being wholly spent in directing him how to conform
himself to the Customs of any particular Church where he came, provided they
were not contrary to Faith and good manners, especially in the business of
Fasting, and the Eucharist. The 105. Epistle is indeed directed to Sixtus,
(though he does not tell us it is) and in that I meet with what he here sets
down; which makes me conjecture that he has taken it from some other upon
trust; for if he did consult the Author himself, he betrays a great want either
of honesty or ingenuity or both. For it is not honest in any man to curtail his
Author's Sense, nor is it very ingenuous by that means to endeavor to impose
upon unwary Readers. All therefore that I have here to do, is, to bring St.
Austin to speak for himself, and so leave the unbyassed Reader to judge between
us. The design of St. Austin in this Epistle is to instruct Sixtus how to
answer the Arguments of the Pelagians, who were then the great Advocates for
Free Will and Merits, by advancing the Free Grace and Mercy of God against
them. St. Austin in this Epistle has these words which the Vindicator sets
down, viz. As death is rendered to the Merit of sin, as the pay; so everlasting
life is rendered as the pay, to the merit of Justice. But he does not tell you
what goes before, nor what follows after those words in that place; If he had
you would more clearly have understood St. Austin's meaning, than perhaps he
desired you should. To undeceive you therefore I stall give you the passage
entire as it is in the Author. When St. Paul (says he) in Romans vi. 23. had
said, The wages of sin is death, who would not have expected that he should
have added; and the wages of righteousness is eternal life? And truly it is so,
for as death is rendered to the merit of sin, as the wages; so eternal life, as
the wages, is rendered to the merit of Righteousness. But the blessed Apostle to
repress the pride of Men, says, The Wages of Sin is Death. Truly Wages,
because due, because worthily deserved, because rendered to Merit. But then to
prevent the exalting of our selves upon the account of our own Merit or
Righteousness, he does not say, The Wages of Righteousness is eternal Life; but
the gift of God is eternal Life. And that we may not seek it in any other way,
he adds, In Christ Jesus our Lord. As if he should have said, O Humane, not
Righteousness, but Pride in the name of Righteousness, why do thou begin to
exalt thy self, and to require eternal Life, as Wages due to thee? It is true
Righteousness, to which eternal life is due; But if it be true Righteousness,
it is not of thy self, but is from above, coming down from the Father of
lights. Wherefore, O Man, if thou art about to receive eternal Life, it is
indeed the Wages of Righteousness, but to thee it is a Grace, to whom
Righteousness it self is a Grace.

In the same Epistle, I also meet with these words, Are there no Merits of the
Righteous? surely there are, because they are Righteous. But they had no Merits
by which they became Righteous. For they are made Righteous, when they are
justified, but as the Apostle says, They are justified freely by his Grace,
Romans iij. And to explain himself, a little after he adds, That Grace would not
be Grace, if it were not given freely, but rendered as a due Debt.

In the same Epistle, I find also these words, It is not therefore in vain that
we sing unto God, His mercy shall prevent me; and His mercy shall follow me.
Whence life eternal it self, which in the end shall be enjoyed without end, and
therefore is rendered to precedent merits, yet because those merits to which it
is given, are not prepared by any ability of ours, but are wrought in us by
Grace, even Life eternal it self is called Grace, for no other reason but
because it is given freely, not therefore because it is not given to Merits,
but because those very Merits to which it is given, are themselves a gift.

These words are an Inference from what went before, where St. Austin argues
against Merit, either before, to obtain Grace; or after, to deserve a Reward.
These are his words, What is the Merit of Man before Grace, by which he may
deservedly obtain Grace, when as all our Merit is from Grace, and when he
crowns our Merits, he crowns nothing else but his own Gifts? And from hence he
inferrs in the words before cited, Whence I observe, 1. That all that is good
in us here, is owing to Divine Mercy preventing us. 2. That all the good we can
expect hereafter, must be from the same Divine Mercy following us. 3. That Life
eternal, which is the great Reward of Virtue and Goodness, is called Grace. 4.
That though it be said to be given to Merits, it is not said to be given for
the sake of those Merits. 5. That those Merits to which it is given are
themselves the gift of God, and therefore not Merits in the strict sense of the
word. It is not Righteousness, but Pride in the name of Righteousness, that
expects eternal Life as a Reward due to its deserving: These are St. Austin's
own words in the next page, which directly contradict this Definition of the
Council of Trent, viz. That a man justified truly deserves Life everlasting by
his good works. And now if the Vindicator can make any advantage of these words
of St. Austin either to himself, or to his cause, I shall not envy him.

IV. He tells us, that the Council has defined, That by works a Man is
justified, and not by Faith only. And to prove this he alleges, Jam. ij. 24.
where it is said, ye see then, how that a man is justified by works, and not by
faith only.

This place of Scripture has been so often urged, and all the Arguments raised
therefrom so often, and so miserably baffled; that I wonder with what
confidence this Gentleman could bring it upon the stage again. They have been
often told, that St. James here does not speak of Justification before God, but
before Men. That as Faith only (though that Faith be not alone) justifies us
before God, so good Works do justify the truth of that Faith, and evidence the
reality of our Justification thereby unto Men. Which Interpretation is well
warranted by St. Paul, when he says, If Abraham was justified by Works, then
has he whereof to glory, but not before God, Romans iv. 2.

I likewise profess, That in the Mass is offered a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice, for the Living and the Dead. TO persuade us to a
compliance herewith, the Vindicator advances both Scripture and Antiquity; Two
great Arguments if well managed. Which whether they be or no, I shall now
Examine.

1. He begins with Scripture, and by way of Preface thereunto tells us, That
our blessed Savior being a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedeck, did
at his last Supper offer his Body and Blood after an unbloody manner, for the
Remission of Sins.

This is unhappily to stumble at the Threshold. For, 1. How his Consequent
comes to be tacked to his Antecedent is past my capacity to understand. Our
blessed Savior was made a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck:
Therefore at his last Supper he did offer his Body and Blood after an unbloody
manner, for the Remission of Sins. What Logic there is in this, I am yet to
learn. 2. If he did offer himself at his last Supper, to whom did he do it? For
we do not find that he did address himself, or offer any thing to any, but only
to his Disciples; and surely he will not say that he offered himself as a
Sacrifice unto them. 3. If he did offer his Body and Blood, then was it not an
unbloody Sacrifice, as they say it was. 4. If it was an unbloody Sacrifice,
then could it not be propitiatory; For without shedding of Blood, there is no
Remission of Sins, Heb. ix. 22.

But the Vindicator has good Scripture for all this, viz. Luke xxij. 19. 1
Cor. xi. 24. Matthew. xxvi. 28. In all which places the Words of Institution are
recited, with some variation; St. Matthew says, This is my Body, verse. 26. St.
Luke adds, Which is given for you. And St. Paul says, Which is broken for you.
His whole Argument there depends upon the Words of Institution: Before
therefore I meddle with his reasoning therefrom, it will be convenient to
consider and explain them. And, 1. Our Savior says, This is, not, This is
Transubstantiate, or, wonderfully converted into another substance, viz, the
substance of my Body. 2. If when he said, This is, he meant Transubstantiation,
then his Body must be Transubstantiate before he spoke; and if so, then the
Conversion does not depend upon the Words, as they affirm; For, This is,
implies a thing already done. 3. When he said, This is my Body, it is evident,
that his true, natural, humane Body was there with them, took the Bread, brake
it, gave it, eat it; now if that which he took, brake, gave and eat, was then
the Body of Christ; either he must have two Bodies there at that time, or else
the same Body was by the same Body taken, broken, given and eaten; and yet all
the while neither taken, broken, given nor eaten. 4. When he says, This is my
Body which is given for you, as St. Luke, or, Which is broken for you, as St.
Paul; if it be understood literally, then must it be either his natural or his
glorified Body; if they say the former, then we urge them again with the
preceding Observation; the latter they will not dare to say, because his Body
was not then Glorified. 5. If these words be to be literally and strictly to be
understood, then the substance of Bread must be Christ's Body at that time; for
what can any Man living understand by, This, but only this Bread? For, what he
took he blessed; what he blessed, he brake; what he brake, he gave to his
Disciples; what he gave to them, he bad them take and eat; and what he bad them
take and eat, of that he says, This is my Body; and all this he himself tells
us was Bread. And that it did not receive any such wonderful Conversion or
Change as they believe it did, by the pronouncing of those words, St. Paul, who
may be presumed to understand the mind of his Master, as well as any of them,
is a very good Evidence; who after the Words of Consecration, by which they
pretend the Change is made, does over and over again call it Bread; as you may
read, 1 Cor. xi. 26, 27, etc. 6. When he says, Do this in remembrance of me,
it implies an Absence; for we can no more be said to remember that which is
present, than to see that which is absent. 7. When it is said, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you, and for many, for the
remission of Sins; Are these words to be understood literally too? Must we
believe, that by the pronouncing of these words, there is a substantial Change
made? If so, then it must not be of the Wine, but of the Cup; and that not into
the Blood of Christ, but into the New Testament, or New Covenant in his Blood,
which none of them as yet have been so bold as to affirm. 8. If we consider
that our Savior celebrated this Sacrament before his Passion, and said, This
is my Body which is broken, and, This is my Blood which is shed, it cannot be
literally true of his natural, humane Body, for that was then whole and
unbroken, and his Blood was not then shed. And indeed it was impossible that
the Disciples should understand these words literally, because they not only
plainly saw that what he gave them was Bread and Wine, but they saw likewise as
plainly that it was not his Body which was given, but his Body which gave that
which was given; not his Body broken and Blood shed, because they saw him alive
at that very time, and beheld his Body whole and unpierced.

Having thus considered the words of Institution, and made some Remarks upon
them, let us now see how the Vindicator argues therefrom.

His first Remark is, That the words of Institution are spoken in the present
Tense, whence he thus argues, That it is certain, that then, before the Passion
on the Cross, the Body was given, and broken Mystically, and the Chalice shed
for the Remission of Sins.

To this I answer, 1. That if the Vindicator had consulted the Romish Bible, or
the Mass, he might there have found Tradetur instead of Traditur, shall be
given, instead of is given; and Effundetur instead of Effunditur, shall be
shed, instead of is shed. Which words were likewise long ago used by Origin and
St. Chrysostom; Origin in Matthew. Tract. 35.

Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.

Sa in verb. Matthew.

Cajetan in Luc. 22.


and the Jesuit Sa would have told him, in Greek it is said, Which is shed, the
time present for the time to come. And Cardinal Cajetan would have informed
him, even as the Evangelists by the time present have expressed the future
Effusion of Blood, saying, is shed; St. Paul likewise saying, is broken,
signifies by the present time, the breaking of his Body, which was after to be
done upon the Cross. Barrad. Harmon. Evangeilst. Tom. 4. l. 3. c 4.
And Barradius the Jesuit says, The Lord uses the time present instead of the
future time, which then approached; for the words ought to be understood of his
future passion, which then drew near; in this sense, This is my Body which
shall shortly be given for you, to suffer and to die. So that though the words
were really spoken in the present Tense, yet did not that hinder either the
Primitive Fathers, their own Translators of the Bible, the Compilers of their
Mass, or their own Eminent Doctors, from understanding them of the time to
come. Nor is it to be wondered at, for they well knew that it was our Savior's
way and manner of speaking: As for instance, before any of the Jews were come
to lay hands on him, he said, Behold the Son of Man, (...), is betrayed, or
given, into the hands of Sinners, Matthew. xxvi. 45. Therefore does my Father
love me, because, (...), I lay down my Life, that I may take it again, John x.
17. And in another place, I am no more in the World, John xvij. 11. And St.
Paul in conformity to his Master's way and manner of speaking, says, (...), I
am already offered up, 2 Timothy iv. 6. All which considered, it will not appear
to be so very certain, as this Gentleman thinks it is, That the Body of Christ
was given and broken before his Passion on the Cross. But 2dly. He seems to
qualify the rigor of his Assertion, by telling us, That all this was done
Mystically. To which I answer, That if by Mystically he mean Sacramentally, i.
e. That our blessed Savior, by what he did at his last Supper, intended to
signify to his Disciples what he was about to do and suffer for them, and the
rest of Mankind, the day following, we shall not differ with him about it. But
if by Mystically he mean Really, though Invisibly, (as undoubtedly he does) we
cannot agree with him; for in a true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice, (as
the Article which he here undertakes to defend calls it) the thing offered
ought to be visible, and there ought to be a Destruction of it in the
Sacrifice; none of all which appears to be in this Action of our Blessed
Savior.

But he proceeds, Which (says he) being done in an unbloody manner, and
offered to God, we call it an unbloody Sacrifice; and it being for the
Remission of Sins, it is likewise propitiatory.

To this I answer, 1. The Vindicator here takes that for granted, which we can
by no means allow him, viz. That the Body of Christ was given and broken
Mystically, and the Chalice shed for the Remission of Sins, before his Passion
on the Cross. And why we cannot admit of this, I have given you an Account
already. 2. He contradicts himself, for he tells us, This was done in an
unbloody manner; and yet he had before told us, That the Chalice was shed, by
which I suppose he means (if he have any meaning in it) the Blood in the
Chalice: Now if Christ's Blood was shed, how could it be done in an unbloody
manner? Or how could it be called an unbloody Sacrifice? 3. He tells us, It was
offered to God, but how does that appear? That our Savior in his last Supper
did indeed offer Bread and Wine to his Disciples, is very plain and evident;
but that he offered either them or any thing else to God, the Words of
Institution give us no account. 4. That it being for Remission of Sins, it was
likewise propitiatory. And here he is under a great mistake, for every thing,
that is for Remission of Sins, is not a propitiatory Sacrifice. The Baptism of
John, and his Preaching, was for the Remission of Sins, Mark i. 4. And so
likewise is Baptism and Repentance, Acts ij. 38. And yet, I suppose, the
Vindicator will not say, That either Baptism, or Preaching, or Repentance are
propitiatory Sacrifices. But perhaps he will say, That all shedding of Blood
made for Remission of Sins, is a propitiatory Sacrifice. I cannot consent to
him in this neither, for there is a shedding of Blood sacramental and not real,
which is made to represent the shedding of Christ's Blood upon the Cross, and
that is no propitiatory Sacrifice. But what if it be real? Though it be, yet
will not the proposition be universally true; for the Blood of our Lord was
really shed, and for Remissions of Sins too, at his Circumcision; and yet
Circumcision was no Sacrifice. In a true propitiatory Sacrifice three Things
are required. 1. There must be a real Effusion of Blood. 2. That real Effusion
of Blood must be for the Remission of Sins. 3. That Effusion of Blood must be
by the Death of the thing offered. None of which are to be found in this Action
of our Blessed Savior at his last Supper, and therefore it could not be a
true, proper, and propitiatory Sacrifice.

But if we should grant (which we cannot do) that this were a Sacrifice, and a
propitiatory Sacrifice too, will it by a necessary Consequence follow, that
every Mass-Priest at this day does in the Mass offer a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice, for the Living and the Dead? Yes, says the Vindicator,
For, though Christ was offered but once upon the Cross, (of which St. Paul
speaks, Hebr. vij. 27.) yet in this manner, as Christ offered himself at his
last Supper, we believe that the Apostles and their Successors were commanded
to repeat it, in a perpetual memory, and representation of his Death and
Passion, by Christ's own Institution, when he said to them, Do this in
remembrance of me; in which words he gave them power of doing the same that he
had done. To this I answer, That in the same manner as Christ offered himself
at his last Supper, he is offered still; i. e. Sacramentally; and that by the
command of Christ we are obliged often to celebrate or repeat this Sacrament in
memory of his Death and Passion upon the Cross: And that by virtue of those
Words, Do this in remembrance of me, Power was give to the Apostles and their
Successors to do the same thing he did, i. e. to celebrate this Sacrament in
memory of his Death and Passion on the Cross. All this we readily grant, but
what is all this to the Priest's Offering in the Mass, a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead?

Those of the Roman Communion do indeed lay great stress upon these words, Do
this in remembrance of me, pretending to find therein a power given to every
Mass-Priest to offer up the Son of God as a true, proper, and propitiatory
Sacrifice, for the Living and the Dead. But if they would but consult St. Paul,
he would better inform them what the importance of these words is: For after he
had recited the words of Institution, and in the close thereof these very
words, Do this in Remembrance of me; in the very next words he tells them what
it was they were to do in remembrance of him, saying, As often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. xi.
26.

2. Having gone as far as he can with his Scripture proofs, he calls in the
assistance of Antiquity, telling us with sufficient confidence, That this (i.
e. the matter contained in this Article) is the Sense of the Primitive Fathers.
Whether it be or no, is the thing we are now to consider; and for that purpose
I shall examine his Quotations out of them.

His first Witness is St. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. (I suppose he means 17.) in Ep. ad
Hebr. where it is said, We still offer the same Sacrifice, etc.

To this I answer, What St. Chrysostom meant by those words, I know no body can
better inform us, than St. Chrysostom himself, who immediately subjoins, (...):
Or to speak more properly, we make a commemoration of the same Sacrifice. And
in the same Homily, had the Vindicator carefully perused it, of been so honest
as to have noted it, he might have found such Expressions as these, We offer
indeed, but it is in remembrance of his Death. This Sacrifice is an Example of
that Sacrifice. This which we now do, is in commemoration of that which has
been done. But that which the Vindicator seems to lay the great stress upon,
is, That St. Chrysostom in this Homily, and likewise, l. 6. de Sacerd. calls
the Eucharist a Sacrifice. We grant it, but if he will let him explain himself,
he will tell him upon what account he so calls it in this Homily, Because it
represents the Sacrifice of our Lord's Death, and therein we commemorate the
same till his coming again. And in the other place, Because we pray unto God,
that he would receive the Sacrifice of his Death as a satisfaction for our Sins.

His next Evidence is St. Ambrose, sup. Ps. 38. Where he speaks of the Priest's
offering Sacrifice for the People, and of Christ's being offered up upon Earth,
when his Body is offered. St. Ambrose in the same place explains himself,
saying, The Shadow went before, the Image followed, the Truth shall be. The
Shadow in the Law, the Image in the Gospel, the Truth in the Heavens. O Man, go
up into Heaven, and thou shall see those things whereof here was an Image and a
Shadow. Where he plainly tells us, that what is done here upon Earth, is only
an Image or Representation. And in another place he says, In Luc. l. 5. c. 7.
We have seen him and looked upon him with our Eyes, and we have thrust our
Fingers into the print of his Nails. For we seem to see him, that we read of,
and to have beheld him hanging upon the Cross, and with the feeling Spirit of
the Church to have searched his Wounds. Now as St. Ambrose here says, We see
him hanging on the Cross, etc. In like manner does he say, He is offered up
upon Earth, when his Body is offered. For as their own Gloss upon the Sentences
of Prosper says, Christ is Sacrificed, i. e. his Sacrifice is represented, and
a commemoration is made of his Passion.

His next Authority is Cyril. Alex. Anath. 11. We celebrate in our Churches an
Holy, Life-giving, and Unbloody Sacrifice. What St. Cyril. meant by this
Unbloody Sacrifice, he himself will best inform us, if we consult him about it;
for in another place he says, Cyril. contr. Julian. l. 10.
We having left the gross Ministry of the Jews, have a commandment, to make a
fine, thin, and spiritual Sacrifice. And therefore we offer unto God for a
sweet smelling savor all manner of Virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity. And in the
same sense that he calls these Sacrifices, does he call the Eucharist an
unbloody Sacrifice i. e. A Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

His last Reserve is St. August. who l. 9. Confess. c. 13. speaks of his Mother
Monica desiring to be remembered at the Altar after her death; because she knew
that thence was dispensed the Holy Victim, by which was cancelled the
Handwriting, which was contrary unto us. And Sermon. 32. de Verb. Apost. where
he speaks of a propitiatory Sacrifice, and Alms offered for Souls departed; and
of commemorating the Dead at the Sacrifice; and of a Sacrifice being offered
for them.

That Christians did usually meet to celebrate the memorial of Holy Martyrs,
and others departed in the Faith of Christ; and that some kind of prayers were
in St. Austin's time used for the dead, we deny not. But these are not the
things in question, but whether in the Mass there be offered a true, proper and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and the dead. To prove this he produces
these passages of St. Austin, wherein he seems to call the Eucharist, the holy
Victim, and the Sacrifice. Now what St. Austin meant by these words he himself
shall tell you.

In his Book of Faith he calls it, A Sacrifice of Bread and Wine offered in
Faith and Charity, August. ad Petr. Diac. c. 19.
and A Commemoration of the Flesh of Christ which he offered for us, and of the
Blood which he shed for us. Id. de Civ. Dei l. 17. c. 17.
And in another place, To eat the Bread in the New Testament, is the Sacrifice
of Christians. And again, This Flesh and Blood of Christ was promised before
his coming, Id. contr. Faustum, l. 20. c. 21.
by the resemblance of Sacrifices; in the Passion of Christ it was truly
exhibited; After the Ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by the Sacrament of
Commemoration. Id. Epist. ad Bonifac. 23.
And again, Was not Christ once sacrificed in his Body? and yet he is
sacrificed to the people in a sacred sign every day. Id. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c.
5.
And again, That which we call a Sacrifice, is a sign or representation of the
true Sacrifice. Thus does St. Austin explain himself, and if thus explained,
the Vindicator can any way avail either himself or his cause, by his testimony,
he has free liberty so to do.

I believe and profess, That in the Holy Sacrament of the Eucharist is truly,
really, and substantially, the Body and Blood together with the Soul and
Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that there is a change or conversion of
the whole Substance of the Bread into the Body, and of the whole Substance of
the Wine into the Blood; which Conversion or Change the Holy Church calls
Transubstantiation. THIS Doctrine, he says, is founded in the express words of
Christ, who said, This is my Body, This is my Blood. To this I answer, These
and the other words of Institution having been considered already, and no new
matter here offered, I shall not need to trouble my self, nor the Reader, with
the Repetition of what has been already said. And this being the only
Scripture proof he here alleges, I shall only referr you to what I have said
of it in the foregoing Article, and so wait upon the Vindicator to his
Authorities.

The Authorities which he here produces (if they be any thing to his purpose)
must be acknowledged to be ancient, and the Authors of good Credit. Whether
therefore they will serve the end which he aims at, we shall now enquire.

His first Evidence is, St. Ignatius Martyr in Ep. ad Smyrn. where speaking of
some Heretics of his time, he says, They do not allow of Eucharists and
Oblations, because they do not believe the Eucharist to be the Flesh of our
Savior Jesus Christ, which suffered for our Sins, and which the Father in his
mercy raised again from the dead.

These words are indeed thus cited by Theodoret Dial. 111. (...). They do not
receive the Eucharists and Oblations. But in the Copy of this Epistle, which is
to be seen in the Florentine Library, and is generally thought to be the most
genuine, we find this passage thus worded, (...). They recede or abstain from
Eucharists and Prayer.

But this only by the bye; the stress of his Argument lies not in this, but in
the reason of their recession and refusal, which was, Because they did not
confess that the Eucharist was the Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which
suffered for our Sins, and was raised again.

These words at first sight to an unthinking Man, may seem to conclude the
point; but if we consider who they were that refused the Eucharist for this
reason, it will much abate the force of them. That they were Heretics the
Vindicator owns, and what their Heresy was, Ignatius will tell us; They denied
Christ to be a perfect Man, they held that he had not a true humane, but only a
fantastical Body; That he did not really, but in appearance only, suffer upon
the Cross, and rise again from the Dead. Against these the holy Martyr, in the
beginning of this Epistle, bends his whole discourse; his whole business being
to make it appear, That Christ was truly born of the Virgin Mary, truly
baptized of John in Jordan, truly suffered under Pontius Pilate, and was truly
raised again from the Dead.

Now what wonder is it, that those who did believe that he never had any real
Body, should refuse and reject with scorn his Sacramental Body, when offered to
them? For, what Sacrament, what Sign, what Remembrance, what Representation can
there possibly be of that, which in truth never had any Being? The whole
importance therefore of these words is only this, These Heretics would not
believe the Eucharist to be the Sacramental Body of Christ, because they did
not believe that ever he had any real Body. St. Chrysostom speaking of some
such in his time, who would not believe that Christ really suffered; Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Hom. 83.
tells us in what manner they used to convince them; When they say, How may we
know that Christ was offered? bringing forth these Mysteries, we stop their
mouths. For if Christ died not, whose Sign and Token is this Sacrifice? Where
he calls the Eucharist a Mystery, a Sign, and a Token, i. e. A Representation
of the Death of Christ; and in this sense are we to understand the Holy Martyr
Ignatius in this place.

His next witness is St. Hilary l. 8. de Trinit. where he says, My Flesh is
Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. There Is no place left for doubting
of the Reality of his Flesh and Blood; for now, both by the Profession of
Christ himself, and by our Faith, it is truly Flesh, and truly Blood. Is not
this Truth? It may indeed not be true to them, who deny Christ to be God.

To this I answer, That the words which St. Hilary here quoteth are in John vi.
55. In which whole Chapter our Savior speaks not one word of the Eucharist,
that not being instituted till two years after, or thereabouts. Nor does he
there speak of a Corporal eating, which is done by the Mouth of the Body; but
of a Spiritual eating, which is done by Faith. For He is there speaking to the
Capernaitan Jews, who followed him for the Loaves, and takes occasion from
their gluttonous Appetite, to instruct them better; to acquaint them with
another kind of Food, a Celestial Bread, of which whosoever eats, lives
eternally; and that Bread is Himself. And of this it is that he says, My Flesh
is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. And lest they should understand
him carnally, he closes up his Discourse with these words, The words which I
speak unto you are Spirit and Life, v. 63. And that in this sense St. Hilary is
here to be understood, I do not doubt; for in these very words he says, It is
so by our Faith, i. e. to them that believe; and the truth of it will not be
denied by any, but those who deny the Divinity of Christ, i. e. who deny him to
be the Bread which came down from Heaven, v. 50. For it was not his Flesh and
Blood, but his Divinity that came down from Heaven.

But if we should grant that St. Hilary in this discourse had an eye to the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, as I do believe he had, yet does he very well
explain himself, and give us to understand, that he does not speak of Bodily
but Spiritual Meat, not of Corporal but Spiritual eating, not of receiving
Christ by the Mouth of the Body, but by the Mouth of the Soul, which is Faith.
For in the very same Book that is here quoted, he says, Christ is in us (not
bodily, Hilar. in Matthew. Can. 30. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 83.
but) by the Mystery of the Sacraments. And again, We receive Christ truly (not
substantially, but) under a Mystery. And in another place he speaks of drinking
of the Fruit of the Vine. Which, as St. Chrysostom says, Does certainly
produce Wine, not Water: And I may add, nor Blood.

His next Quotation is out of St. Chrysostom, l. 3. de Sacerd. where that Holy
Father in an Ecstacy cries out, O Miracle! He that sits above with his Father,
at the very same instant of time is here in the Hands of all; he gives himself
to those that are willing to receive him.

To this I answer, That it was usual with the Ancient Fathers, by vehement
Expressions, and Rhetorical Amplifications, to ravish the Minds, and inflame
the Devotions of their Hearers, we very well know; and that it was as frequent
with St. Chrysostom as any other, cannot be unknown to any who have been
conversant in his Writings. I shall only trouble you with one Instance, which
the Vindicator may find in the same Book which he here quotes, Christ is
Crucified before our Eyes, his Blood gusheth out of his side, and streameth,
and flows over the Holy Table, and the People are therewith made red and
bloody. Did St. Chrysostom intend to be understood plainly and literally here?
Surely the Vindicator will not say so, nor, if he well consider, will he think
it fit to understand him so in the place by him alleged; for if so, then must
he grant, That the People do verily and indeed see Christ's very Body, and
handle and touch it with their Fingers; which some of his own Doctors will be
ready to tell him is not only false, but a worse Heresy than ever was defended
by Berengarius. The Miracle therefore which St. Chrysostom here speaks of, is
not the fleshly or bodily presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but the
wonderful Effects that God works in the Faithful, in that dreadful time of
the Holy Communion, wherein the whole Mystery of our Redemption, by the Blood
of Christ, is expressed.

But if this place of St. Chrysostom does not so fully express the bodily
presence of Christ in the Eucharist, the Vindicator has another, which he
thinks will sufficiently do it; and that is in his 83. Hom. in Matthew. where he
says, He that wrought those things at the last Supper, is the Author of what
is done here. -- We hold but the place of Ministers, but he that sanctifies and
changes them, is Christ himself. Of what change St. Chrysostom here speaks, he
himself does plainly intimate; for in the same Homily, he immediately adds, So
is it also in Baptism, as if he should have said, As in the Sacrament of
Baptism, the Water is changed from common to sacramental Water; so in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Bread and Wine are changed from common to
sacramental Bread and Wine. And that he meant only this, and not any
substantial Change, is plain; for, in the same Homily, he says, When he would
represent the Mysteries, he gave Wine. And in another place he says, Chrysostom.
Ep. ad Caesar.
As the Bread before it is Sanctified, is called Bread; when by the
Intercession of the Priest, divine Grace has sanctified it, it loses the Name
of Bread, and becomes worthy to be called the Body of Jesus Christ, although
the Nature of Bread abides in it. And in another place he says, If it be
dangerous to employ the Holy Vessels about common uses, Chrysostom. in Matthew.
Opere Imperf. Hom. 11.
wherein the true Body of Jesus Christ is not contained, but the Mysteries of
his Body; how much rather the Vessels of our Bodies, which God has prepared to
dwell in. By all which we may plainly understand what St. Chrysostom's Thoughts
were of a substantial Change, or of Christ's bodily presence in the Eucharist,
when they were cool and calm, and free from any Ecstatical Rapture.

His next is St. Cyril of Jerusalem, in Catech. whence he quotes these Words,
Since therefore Christ himself thus affirms and says of the Bread, This is my
Body, and, This is my Blood; who can doubt of it, and say it is not his Blood?
(No body certainly; for in the same sense that Christ said it was so, there is
no doubt to be made but that it is so, i. e. Sacramentally and in a Mystery;
but here is to be noted, that if St. Cyril be to be understood literally, he
will be no good Evidence for the Vindicator; for he does not say of the Bread,
it is changed into his Body, but, it is his Body, etc. So that according to
him, the Bread must be Christ's Body, and the Cup his Blood, which as yet they
have not had the confidence to affirm, nor indeed will it consist with their
notion of Transubstantiation. And if it be to be understood Figuratively, it
will less serve his purpose; for then it will import no more than what
Tertullian says, Tertul. contra Marcion. l. 4.
Christ took Bread, and made it his Body, by saying, This is my Body; i. e. The
Figure of my Body.) But he further enforces his Argument, saying, In Cana of
Galilee he once by his sole Will turned Water into Wine, which resembles Blood;
and does he not deserve to be credited, that he changed Wine into his Blood?
(Yes, no doubt, when he tells us that he did so; or when we have as clear
Evidence of his changing Wine into Blood, as we have of his changing Water into
Wine at the Marriage Feast in Cana of Galilee. In this he appeals to Sense,
bidding the Servants draw out now, and carry it to the Governor of the Feast,
that he might taste it. But in the other we are required to believe against all
Evidence of Sense.) But to clear the point more fully, St. Cyril himself will
tell us what kind of change he here speaks of; Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. Mist. 3.
for, says he, As Bread in the Eucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy
Spirit, is no more common Bread, but is the Body of Christ; so this Holy
Ointment is no more that Ointment, i. e. As the Ointment is changed, so is the
Bread in the Eucharist, and no otherwise. As the Ointment, when once
consecrated to an holy use, is no more common Ointment, i. e. Though it be
Ointment still, and the same in substance that it was, yet it is no more the
same Ointment; for, before it was Common, now it is Consecrate. So the Bread in
the Eucharist, after the Invocation of the Holy Spirit, is no more common
Bread; i. e. Though it be Bread still, yet is it not common Bread; but it is
the Body of Christ, i. e. The Sacrament of his Body.

His next Authority is Greg. Nyssen. Orat. Catech. c. 37. whence he cites these
words, I do therefore now rightly believe, That the Bread sanctified by the
Word of God, is changed into the Body of the Word. -- Because it (the Bread) is
suddenly changed by this Word, This is my Body. -- And this is effected by the
virtue of Benediction, by which the nature of those things that appear is
Transelemented into it.

To this I answer, That the Bread sanctified by the word of God, is changed or
Transelemented into the body of the Word. If it be understood in the same sense
that the Ancient Fathers used it, we can readily subscribe unto it; and in what
sense they used it, has been in part declared already. Tertullian says,
Tertull. contra Marcion. l. 4.
Christ took Bread, and made it his Body, by saying, This is my Body, i. e. A
Figure of my Body. And St. Austin says, Aug. ad Bonifac. Ep. 23.
After a certain manner the Sacrament of Christ's Body is the Body of Christ.
He does not say, It really is, but after a certain manner. And in what manner
it was said to be so, he himself in another place informs us, saying, He made
no doubt to say, Aug. contr. Adimant. c. 12.

Theophilact. in 6. cap. Johan.


This is my Body, when he gave the sign of his Body. And Theophilact says, We
our selves are Transelemented into the Body of Christ. Which, I suppose, this
Gentleman will not understand, as if Believers were really and substantially
changed into the Body of Christ. But to clear this point, let but Greg. Nyssen,
who certainly best understood his own meaning, be his own Interpreter, and it
will plainly appear, that by these Expressions he intended no more, than what
is expressed by these and many other Holy Fathers. For in another place thus he
writes, This Altar, Gregor. Nyssen, de Sancto Baptism.
whereat we stand, is by nature a common Stone, nothing differing from other
Stones, whereof our Walls are built, and our Pavements laid; but after that it
is once dedicated to the honor of God, and has received blessing, it is a
Holy Table, and an undefiled Altar, afterward not to be touched of all Men, but
only of the Priests, and that with Reverence. Likewise the Bread, that first
was common, after that the Mystery has hallowed it, is both called, and is
Christ's Body; likewise also the Wine, Christ's Blood. And whereas before they
were things of small value, after the Blessing, that comes from the Holy
Ghost, either of them both works mightily. The like power also makes the
Priest to be Reverend and Honorable, being by means of a new Benediction
divided from the common sort of the People. Whence it is evident, That as the
Altar of stone was changed from its former state, and yet remained stone still;
and as the Priest is changed from what he was before, and yet remains the
same Man still; so, and no otherwise, did the Holy Father think that the Bread
and Wine are changed in the Sacrament; i. e. They are changed into Christ's
Body and Blood, and yet remain Bread and Wine still.

In the next place he brings in St. Ambrose, l. de his qui Mist. initiant.
where speaking of the Eucharist, he says, Shall not the words of Christ be
powerful enough to change the nature of things? (Yes, no doubt, when he
pleases so to do) you have read of the Creation of the World, that God spoke,
and the things were made; he commanded, and they received a Being. If therefore
Christ by his Word was able to make something of nothing, shall he not be
thought able to change one thing into another? Yes, certainly, when he thinks
fit to do it. But the Question here is not. What Christ, as God, can do, but,
what he will, or has done? Now let us see what kind of Argument this Gentleman
can find in this Topic; if he has any, it must run thus, Whatsoever Christ, as
God, by his Omnipotent Power, can do, that he does. But Christ, as God, by his
Omnipotent Power, can make the Bread in the Sacramen to be his Body, therefore
he does it. Would it not be every whit as good an Argument? Christ, as God, by
his Omnipotent Power, can make the Vindicator a Pope or a Cardinal, therefore
he has done it. Would not any Fresh Man smile at such an Argument, and put him
in mind of an old Maxim, A posse ad esse non valet consequentia?

But to clear St. Ambrose from that foul Aspersion, which the Vindicator here
would insinuate and impose upon him, we need but consult St. Ambrose himself;
for there is none of the ancient Fathers, who has delivered his Opinion in this
matter more plainly and expressly than he has done. For in the same Book which
is here cited, he says, Ambr. de his qui initiant. Mist. c. 3.
It is one thing that is done visibly, and another thing that is celebrated
invisibly. -- Believe not only what thou see with thy bodily Eyes, for that
is better seen which thou do not see; the thing that thou see is
corruptible, the thing which thou do not see is for ever. Where he plainly
distinguishes between the Sacrament, and the thing signified thereby. And
again, Ibid. c. 2.
As the Flesh of Christ, which was Crucified and Buried, was true Flesh, so
this is truly a Sacrament of that Flesh. Our Lord Jesus Christ says, This is
my Body. Before the Blessing of the heavenly words it is named one kind, after
Consecration the Body of Christ is signified. And in his Book of Sacraments, he
has these expressions, In eating and drinking we signify that Flesh and Blood
which were offered for us. Ambr. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4 and 5. And l. 6. 1.
Thou receivest the Sacrament in a similitude. It is the Figure of the Body and
Blood of our Lord. Thou drinkest the likeness of his precious Blood. And again,
Bread and Wine remain still the same thing they were before, and yet are
changed into another thing, i. e. They are the same things really and in
substance, but another thing Sacramentally and in signification.

As to his last Authority, taken from St. Cyril Alex. Ep. ad Coloss. Though
there be some Rhetorical aggravations, the like whereunto may be found in other
of the Fathers; some of which I have given you an account of; yet do I not see,
that any thing more is designed by St. Cyril in this place, than only to assure
us of Christ's real, but Spiritual presence in this Sacrament. For that he
never dreamt of any real and substantial change of the Elements therein, is
plain from his own words in another place, where he says, Cyril in Johan. l.
4. c. 24.
Christ gave to his believing Disciples pieces of Bread, not pieces of his
Body. And again, Id. Ad Object. Theodor.
Our Sacrament does not assert the eating of a Man, (i. e. Flesh and Blood)
that were to draw the minds of the Believers, in an irreligious manner to gross
cogitations.

I confess also, That under one kind alone is received Christ whole and entire,
that being a true Sacrament. THIS, he tells us, is a consequence of what is
declared above; and if so, then must they stand and fall together. If the
foundation be defective, the Superstructure is in danger; If the Antecedent be
false, the Consequence can scarce be true. Having therefore thoroughly sifted
and examined the preceding Article, and found no Foundation upon which to
build our Faith, that there is any such real and substantial change wrought in
the Elements of the sacred Eucharist after Consecration, as is there pretended;
nor any reason to receive their monstrous and new invented Article of
Transubstantiation into the Articles of our Creed, we may justly reject this
which he calls a consequence thereof.

But to show that we have other reasons, besides the inconsequence thereof, to
reject this Article as a Sacrilegious robbing of the People of one half of the
sacred Eucharist; let us consider the Institution of it, and the constant
practice of the Church thereupon. If we consider the Institution, we shall
there find that our blessed Savior, in words as plain as possible, did
institute his Holy Supper under both kinds; we may also find, that as he did
institute it, so likewise he did administer it under both kinds; we may also
observe, that He who said to his Disciples, Take, eat, did also say unto them,
Drink ye all of this; and in the close of all, he leaves this word of command
with them, This do in remembrance of me, as if he should have said, what you
have seen me do, the same do ye. And it is evident by the Apostles practice
hereupon, that they understood this to be the meaning of their Master. And that
this was not to remain a duty only during their time, but in all after Ages of
the Church St. Paul is very plain, saying, As often as ye eat this Bread and
drink this Cup, 1 Cor. xi. 26.
ye show forth the Lords death till he come. And as for the practice of the
Church thereupon, it is very evident, that for above a thousand years after
Christ, the Eucharist was always administered in both kinds. So that if we have
any regard either to the Institution, or Example, or Command of Christ, or to
the Practice of the Apostles, or of the Church of Christ for so many Ages; we
have great reason to reject this Article as a great Novelty. And indeed so it
is, for the first Foundation of it, as a thing necessary to be believed and
practiced, is laid in a Decree of the Council of Constance, in the year of our
Lord 1416.

But the Vindicator will tell us, that we are mistaken here, for he pretends to
find some footsteps of it in the Scriptures; and for this alleges certain
passages out of the sixth Chapter of St. John, where our Savior speaks
sometimes both of Eating and Drinking, and sometimes of Eating only.

To this I answer, That our Blessed Savior in that place does not speak any
thing of the Sacrament of his Body and Blood; but only of a Spiritual feeding
upon him by Faith. For, when he held that conference with the Capernaitan Jews,
this Sacrament was not then instituted, nor of two years after; and therefore
no conclusive Argument can be built thereupon.

But he urges us with the Authority of St. Basil, in his Epistle ad Caesar.
Patr. where he says, he finds these words, It has the same efficacy, whether
a person receives from the Priest one part or more.

Whether these be the words of St. Basil, or how truly they are transcribed, I
have not the opportunity now to examine; but admitting for the present that
they are, what is all this to the denying of the Cup to the Laity, and
forbidding the Administration of the Sacrament in both kinds, under so severe a
penalty.

But I find St. Basil cited by Johannes Gerhardus for a quite different
purpose; Johan. Gerhard. de Sacra Coena, c 9.. 43. Basil. l. 1. de Bapt. c. 3.
for he brings him in speaking on this wise; If he who by eating offends his
Brother, be void of Charity; what shall be said of him, who dares idly and
unprofitably both eat the Body and drink the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ?
And again, What is the duty of a Christian? Id. in Moralib. sub finem.
Let him cleanse himself from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; and so let
him eat the Body, and drink the Blood of Christ.

But at last he urges us with the opinion of Luther, Melancthon and
Spalatensis, That in this point Christ has left no necessary precept, but that
it may profitably, and lawfully be received under one or both kinds.

To this I answer, 1. That our Faith, is not founded upon Luther's or any other
Man's assertion, but upon the Institution of Jesus Christ. 2. That Luther wrote
his Epistle to the Bohemians, before he was fully grounded in the truth; and
that afterward he did retract (according to the example of St. Austin) many
things that he had written. To this end you may find him begging and beseeching
his Reader to read his former writings with pity and commiseration. In praefat.
Tom. 1.
Before all things, I pray and beseech the godly Reader, and I beseech him for
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that he would read these my writings with
judgment, yea and with great pity; remembering that I was sometimes a Monk, a
mad Papist, so drunk, so drowned in Popery, that I was ready to kill every one,
or assist and consent to their death, if in any things they differed therefrom,
etc.

I hold, That there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there detained are
helped by the Prayers of the Faithful. THE Vindicator here tells us, that he
does verily believe, and is fully satisfied, that there is a Purgatory; but
where it is, or whether there be a true and proper Fire there, or how long that
punishment lasts, these are no Articles of his Faith. He might have added, Or
what it is; For the Council of Trent, upon which he builds his Faith, does not
tell him that. So that to subscribe to this Article, is in effect to subscribe
to he knows not What, nor Where, nor Whether, nor How long, nor indeed Why.

It may not be amiss therefore to acquaint you what the Doctrine of the Church
of Rome is concerning Purgatory, which I shall do out of their most Authentic
Record, viz. The Council of Trent, Sess. 25. Decret. de Purgator.
Wherein it is declared, That there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls detained
there do receive assistance from the suffrages of the Faithful, but especially
from the acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar. And all who do not believe the
same, are by that Council anathematized, which makes it a necessary Article of
Faith. For thus the Council determines, If any one shall say, that after a Man
has received the Grace of Justification, the guilt of his Sin, Sess. 6. Can.
30.
and the eternal punishment due thereto, is so remitted, that there remains no
temporary pain to be satisfied for by him, either in this World, or in
Purgatory, before he can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; let him be Anathema.
And in another place the same Council tells us, Sess. 22. cap. 2.
That the Sacrifice of the Mass is a truly propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Living, and for the Dead, who are not yet thoroughly purged. And to confirm
this, there is a Canon of that Council, in the same Session in these words,
Can. 3.
If any one shall say, that the Sacrifice of the Mass is only a Sacrifice of
Praise and Thanksgiving, or a bare Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ
upon the Cross, and not a propitiatory Sacrifice; Or that it is profitable only
to him that receives it, and ought not to be offered up for the sins, pains,
satisfactions, and other necessities both of the quick and the dead; let him be
Anathema. And the Catechism ad Parochos, which always speaks the sense of that
Council, teaches the same Doctrine, telling us, Part. 1. Art. 2. n. 5.
That there is a Purgatory Fire, wherein the Souls of the Godly, being
tormented for a certain time, are expiated; that so the Gates of the eternal
Country may be opened unto them, into which nothing defiled can enter.

This is the Doctrine of the Romish Church touching Purgatory, which we are
required to subscribe unto in this Article; wherein we are taught, and it is
expected that we should steadfastly believe, 1. That there is a middle state
for the reception of Souls departed, which is neither Heaven nor Hell. 2. That
this state is a state of pain and punishment. 3. That in this state they are to
satisfy for some temporary punishments, which were not accomplished nor
accounted for in this life. 4. That those tormented Souls may be assisted and
relieved by the Prayers and Alms-deeds of their Friends here, but especially by
the acceptable Sacrifice of the Altar.

Now this Doctrine we cannot subscribe to, having (as we think) great reason to
reject it. For, 1. We do not find in holy Scripture any mention made of any
other place for the reception of Souls departed, besides Heaven and Hell; and
therefore we look upon it as a fond thing, vainly invented. 2. Nor do we find
any the least footsteps of a Popish Purgatory, among the Primitive Fathers, nor
for many hundred years after Christ. In lib. advers. Luther.
There own Martyr Roffensis deals plainly with us, telling us, That so long as
there was no care of Purgatory (which fairly implies, that there was a time
when Purgatory was either not known, or not much cared for) no Man sought after
Indulgences; for upon that depends all the opinion of Pardons: If you take away
Purgatory, wherefore should we need Pardons? Since therefore Purgatory was so
lately known and received of the whole Church, ( viz. not till the time of
Boniface VIII. about the Year 1300.) who can wonder that there was no use of
Indulgences in the beginning of the Church? But though there was not then,
there is great use made of them now; and would you know for what reason?
Erasmus in a witty Expression of his, will give you a true account, They do
wonderfully affect the Fire of Purgatory, because it is so profitable for their
Kitchins.

But the Vindicator will tell us, That both Roffensis and we are mightily out
in our Calculation; for he has found very plain Footsteps of this Purgatory,
both in Scripture and Antiquity. Which whether he has or no, is the thing now
to be examined.

He produces only one Scripture, viz. Matthew. xij. 32. where it is said,
Whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, nor in the World to come. Whence he thinks it follows by
a necessary consequence, That there are some Sins which shall be forgiven in
the next World, though not in this.

To this I answer, 1. That if we should allow him this Exposition, yet will it
not thence follow that there must of necessity be a Purgatory Fire, in which
the Souls departed must be purged, and have their sins pardoned. For, 1st.
Whether there be any true and proper Fire there, this Gentleman knows not; it
is no Article of his Faith. 2. The Purgatory they speak of, is not a place of
pardon, but of pain and punishment. For, according to their Doctrine, Sin is
already pardoned, before the Souls enter into Purgatory; only they are to
remain there for some time, to make up some satisfaction which was not
completed in this Life. But, 2dly. We cannot allow him this Exposition, for it
is so far from being a necessary consequence from these words, that a contrary
one seems to be plainly designed therein. It shall not be forgiven, neither in
this World, nor in the World to come; i. e. It shall never be forgiven, but
shall certainly be punished both in this Life, and in that to come. So that
whether we allow or disallow of this his Exposition, this Scripture will not
serve his purpose.

His Argument from Antiquity makes indeed a greater show, which is built upon
these Foundations, 1. That the ancient Fathers did frequently speak of an
Intermediate State between Death and Judgment. 2. That they did often make
mention of a Purgatory, and a Purgatory Fire, which was to be endured before an
actual entrance into Heaven. 3. That they did use Prayers for the Dead, and did
think those Prayers might be advantageous to Souls departed. All which we can
readily grant him, and yet reject this Article of a Popish Purgatory.

For the two first of these he quotes St. Austin, St. Greg. Nyssen, and
Theodoret, and he might have cited a great many more, who speak of an
Intermediate State, and a Purgatory Fire. But if he had attended to what they
say, he might have found that the middle State they speak of, is not a State of
pain and torment, but of rest and ease; and the Fire they mention is only that
at the day of Judgment, when their Purgatory Fire must be extinguished.

As for St. Austin, it must be acknowledged, that he speaks of a purgatory
Fire, and that he sometimes seems to speak of a Purgation between Death and
Judgment. But he might have observed also with what doubting and uncertainty he
speaks of it. For thus he writes, Aug. in 8. Qu. ad Dulcitium. Qu. 1.
That there may be some such thing (as the Fire of Purgatory) after this Life
is not incredible. And whether it be so or no, it may be a Question. And again,
Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 21. c. 26.
That the Spirits of the Dead may find a Fire of Transitory Tribulation, I deny
not; for perhaps it is true. And again, Aug. de Fide and Operibus, cap. 16.
Whether Men suffer such things only in this Life, or else some such Judgments
follow even after this Life; as much as I think, the understanding of this
Sentence disagreeth not from the order of the Truth. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 21.
c. 27.
And again, What Mean that is, and what Sins those are, which so hinder a Man
from coming unto the Kingdom of God, that they may notwithstanding obtain
Pardon by the Merits of Holy Friends, it is very hard to find, and very
dangerous to determine. Certainly, I my self, notwithstanding all my search and
Study, could never attain to the knowledge of it.

And as St. Austin here doubts, so in other places, and at other times he
might have found him fully resolved, Aug. Hypognost. l. 5. Aug. de verb. Apost.
Sermon. 18. Aug. advers. Ebrietat. Sermon. 232.
and positively declaring himself against it. For thus he delivers himself: Any
other third Place after this Life, besides Heaven and Hell, we know none,
neither can we find in the Holy Scriptures that there is any such. And again,
There are two Habitations, the one in the eternal Kingdom of Heaven, the other
in the eternal Fire of Hell. And again, Let no man deceive himself, my
Brethren, for there are two places, and no third Place. He that shall not merit
to reign with Christ in Heaven, without doubt shall perish with the Devil in
Hell.

As for Greg. Nyssen, if his Works were not corrupted by the Origenists, as
some suspect, we confess that he speaks of a Purgatory Fire; but the Fire that
he speaks of is the Fire of the last Judgment; for that there is no place of
pain and torment for the purgation of Souls, between Death and Judgment, seems
to be his settled Opinion; for, says he, Greg. Nyssen. lib. de dormient.
The war that is in us being ended by Death, our Souls rest, having left the
Field wherein the Battle was fought, i. e. The Body.

As for that of Theodoret, in his Scholia's upon 1 Cor. cap. 3. it is a gloss
directly contrary to the words of the Text. For, 1. The Apostle there speaks
of a Fire which tries the work, and not of a Fire which punishes the person.
2. He speaks of every Man's work, not excepting the Apostles and Martyrs, and
yet the Church of Rome exempts them from Purgatory. By the Fire therefore here
spoken of, some understand the Fire of Tribulation, or the fiery Trial, which
is to be undergone in this Life; others understand it of the fiery Trial at the
last Judgment, which must pass upon all; neither of which will favor a Popish
Purgatory; and therefore if Theodoret understood it of that, he was besides his
Text.

For his other Foundation upon which he pretends to build his Purgatory, viz.
The practice of praying for the Dead, he quotes Tertullian, St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, and St. Austin, but without any direction
where to find his Quotations. But that is not much material, for we willingly
grant that this was an ancient practice in the Church; but that they intended
thereby to deliver Souls out of Purgatory we deny; for it is certain their
Prayers were made for the best Men, for the Holy Apostles, the Martyrs and
Confessors of the Church, and for the blessed Virgin her self; all which they
thought were then in complete happiness, and who, the Papists themselves say,
never touched at Purgatory by the way. And though it was frequently practiced,
yet was there no determination of the Church in that point, but it was wholly
left to the Piety and Opinion of particular Men.

But if the Vindicator have a mind to be better informed in this matter, I
would commend unto him a little, but learned Treatise printed at London this
last Year, entitled, A short Summary of the principal Controversies between
the Church of England and the Church of Rome. In which he will find these two
Points fully cleared. 1. P. 45.
That a middle State between Death and Judgment, which is neither Heaven nor
Hell, does not prove a Popish Purgatory. And, 2. P. 61.
That the ancient practice of praying for Souls departed, does not prove that
thereis a Popish Purgatory, or that those ancient Christians did believe that
there was. Which are the two Foundations upon which he here builds.

I hold that the Saints reigning with Christ are to be Honored and Invocated,
that they offer Prayers to God for us, and that their Relics are to be had in
Veneration.

I most firmly hold, That the Images or Pictures of Christ, of the Blessed
Mother of God always a Virgin, and of other Saints, ought to be kept and
reserved, and that due Honor and Veneration ought to be given them.

IN the former of these Articles we are required firmly to believe and
steadfastly to hold, 1. That the Saints reigning with Christ are to be honored.
2. That they are not only to be honored, but invocated and prayed unto. 3.
That those Saints do offer Prayers to God for us. And, 4. That their Relics
are to be had in Veneration.

In the other it is required, that we firmly hold, 1. That the Images or
Pictures of Christ, etc. ought to be kept and reserved. And, 2. That due honor
and veneration ought to be given them.

That the Saints reigning with Christ are to be honored, we willingly grant;
we hold their Memories to be very precious, and we think we ought to follow
those pious Patterns, and imitate those holy Examples which they have left us;
which is the greatest honor that we can do them. But that they are to be
invocated, called upon, or prayed unto, we cannot consent; because we have no
warrant for it either in the Word of God, or any good Antiquity. Whether they
do offer Prayers to God for us, as it is not very certain, so is it not any
part of the question between us; nor, if it be granted, will it warrant our
praying to them. As for their Relics, those that are truly such, viz. their
Sepulchers, their Memories, their Writings and their good Examples, we have a
great Veneration for them, and do think that they ought not only not to be
exposed to any contempt or disgrace, but that a very great respect and regard
ought to be paid them. But that all those things which the Church of Rome tells
us are the Relics of Saints, are really such, we cannot agree; nor can we go
along with them in paying them that Veneration which they do; we cannot repose
any confidence in them, nor expect any help or assistance from them, nor hope
to have our Prayers heard in this place rather than in another, upon the
account of some Relics being there. As for their Images, and the honor and
veneration due to them; it had been well, if either Pope Pius or his Vindicator
had thought fit to explain themselves, and told us what kind of honor and
veneration they mean. The Vindicator indeed says, That they being things
relating to God, it must be another kind of Regard, Honor, and Veneration than
is usually given to profane things. But whether this is, or ought to be called
a Religious Honor, is matter of dispute, but no matter of his Faith. And that
as for the manner, or external profession of it, it ought to be measured from
the intention of the Church, so that we are still as far to seek for the
meaning of it, as before. Now, where can we hope to find what the intention of
the Church is, unless it be in the Council of Trent and its Catechism, out of
which Pope Pius extracted these New Articles? It may not be amiss therefore
before we proceed any further, to see what that Council has determined in
these two points, viz. The Invocation of Saints, and the worship of Images,
which are the two things promoted in these two Articles, and which this
Gentleman has here undertaken to vindicate from Novelty.

I. Touching the Invocation of Saints, The Council has defined, That the
Saints reigning with Christ do offer their Prayers unto God for us. But is this
all? No, it farther declares, Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Decret. de
Invocatione, etc.
That it is a good and profitable thing for us in an humble manner to pray unto
them. But is this all yet? No, We must have recourse to their Prayers, Aid and
Assistance. Nor is this all, for the Bodies of Holy Martyrs, and others now
living with Christ, which have been the living Members of Christ, and Temples
of the Holy Ghost, veneranda sunt, are to be worshipped or had in veneration.
And it expressly damns all those who teach, That Veneration and Honor are not
due to the Relics of the Saints; or, that it is not profitable to honor these
Relics, and other sacred Monuments of the Saints; or, that it is in vain to
frequent the Memories of the Saints, and that, eorum opis impetrandae causa, to
obtain their help and assistance.

Thus far the Council, which is seconded by the Catechism, which says, We pray
to God, either to give us good things, Catech. ad Parochos, Part 4. Tit. Quis
sit Orandus?
or to deliver us from evil; but because the Saints are more acceptable to him
than we are, we beg of them to undertake our cause, and to obtain for us those
things we stand in need of. From whence it comes to pass, that we use two very
different Forms of Prayer; for to God the proper manner of speaking is, Have
pity on us, Hear our Prayer, whereas we only desire the Saints to pray for us.
But then it follows, Though it be lawful on another account to pray to the
Saints, that they would have pity on us, for they are mighty merciful. And in
another place it says, Invocandi sunt, etc. They are to be prayed unto,
because they are continually in God's presence, and most willingly take upon
them patrocinium salutis nostrae, the patronage of our Health and Safety, which
is committed to their care.

II. Concerning the Worship of Images, that Council has also defined, That the
Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, Sess. 25.
Decret. de Invocatione, etc.
are to be had and retained in Churches. But is this all? No, All due honor
and veneration is to be given to them. And how is this to be given? By kissing
those Images, uncovering the Head, and prostrating our selves before them. And
is all this for no other end, but only to excite in us the remembrance of those
they represent? Certainly the Council intended something more, for it builds
this Definition upon the second Council of Nice, Council. Nicaen. 2. Action. 3,
4, and 6. Catech. ad Parochos, part 3. de cultu and Invocat. Sanct.
in which it was ordained, That the Images of Christ, of the blessed Virgin
Mary, and of the Saints, should not only be received into places of Adoration,
but also should be adored and worshipped. And so the Catechism explains it, for
we are there told, That to make and honor the Images of Christ the Lord, of
his most holy and immaculate Mother, and of other Saints, is an holy and most
certain argument of a grateful mind. But is this all? No. It is not only lawful
to have Images in Churches, and to give Honor and Worship to them; provided
that Honor which is given to them be referred to their Prototypes, but also it
is for the greatest good and benefit of the Faithful so to do. But is this all
yet? No. The Images of Saints are placed in Temples, ut colantur, that they may
be worshipped.

This is the Doctrine of the Church of Rome in these two Articles, as it is
delivered by the Council of Trent, and the Catechism ad Parochos, out of which
these and the other new Articles were collected by Pope Pius IV. Which Doctrine
we can by no means comply with, nor subscribe to. For,

I. As for the Invocation of Saints, 1. We look upon it as a fond thing, vainly
invented, grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the
word of God. 2. We think it to be highly derogatory to the Mediatorial Office
of Jesus Christ. 3. We look upon Prayer as an eminent Act of Religious Worship,
which we think to be due to God alone, and ought not to be given to any
Creature. And,

II. As for the Worship of Images. We think that it is an absolute breach of
the second Commandment, which forbids the worship of Images, and that in words
so large and comprehensive, that there is no room left for Evasion. For, 1. It
forbids all external acts of Adoration, as bowing down to them, or before them.
2. It does not only forbid the Worship of Images as Gods, but as Images and
Representative Objects. 3. It does not only forbid the Worship of the Images of
Heathen Gods, but of the Lord Jehovah.

But all this notwithstanding, the Vindicator thinks he has found out both
Scripture and Antiquity, wherewith to defend both these Articles.

For the Invocation of Saints, he alleges Genesis xlviij. v. 16. where Jacob
blessing Joseph's two Sons, says, The Angel that delivered me from all evil,
bless the Lads.

To this I answer, That by Angel here is generally understood the Angel of the
Covenant, viz. Christ the Son of God. But if we should grant him, that it is to
be understood of an Ordinary Angel, yet can he not thereupon avail himself any
thing in this case; for, God being pleased often to make use of the Ministry of
Angels in sending succor and relief to good Men, Jacob prayed not unto the
Angel, but to God, (as may be seen in the 15 Verse) that he would appoint the
same Blessed Angel that administered unto him in all his streights, to be the
Instrument of his good providence to those two Sons of Joseph, whom he had now
made his own, and caused them to be called after his name.

He alleges also Rev. i. 4. Rev. v. 8. and Rev. viij. 9. The first of these
Texts is nothing to his purpose, for the most that can be made of it is only
this, John prays that God would send his Grace to the seven Churches, by the
Ministry of the seven Spirits there mentioned, and what is all this to the
matter in hand? or how will this warrant our praying to Saints departed?

Nor will his next Scripture do him any more service, for it is generally
understood to be, either a Representation of the Church below, offering up
prayers by her Pastors, who are the mouths of the Congregation to God; or else
a Representation of the whole Church of Christ both in Heaven and Earth,
joining together in their Doxologies and Praises to God for the Victories of
the Lamb, and the Redemption of the World by his Blood. And this latter seems
to be warranted by the very next words, where it is said, And they sung a new
song saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the seals thereof;
for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, v. 9.

Nor will his other Text any more avail him, the 9th verse which he quotes is
nothing to the purpose, but I suppose he meant v. 4. where it is said, That the
smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up
before God, out of the Angels hand. That by Angel, here, we are to understand
Christ, the Angel of the Covenant, they themselves dare not deny. For the Angel
that offered up the Prayers of the Saints, in v. 3. is called another Angel,
different both in Nature and Office from those other seven Angels, mentioned v.
2.

But if Scripture will not do his business, Antiquity he thinks will; for that,
he says, is very express in all the Doctrine of this Article. And as witnesses
of what he says, he names St. Cyril Alex. St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St.
Gregory Nyssen, and St. Jerome, but without any direction where to find their
evidence recorded. Only in the Margin he tells us, That these Quotations may be
seen cited at large in Nubes Testium. To all which I shall only return him this
Answer, That all these Quotations may be seen answered at large in The
Antiquity of the Protestant Religion, etc. First and Second Parts, and in
another Treatise entitled Veteres Vindicati, and in the Answer to the Compiler
of Nubes Testium.

For the Worship of Images: All that he offers to prove is no more than this,
1. That the making and having of Images in Churches or private Houses, is not
unlawful. 2. That some respect and veneration is due to them, both which we
readily grant. But whether the Veneration and Honor that is due to them, ought
to be called a Religious Honor? This, he tells us, is a Dispute among Divines,
but no matter of his Faith. But if this be no matter of his Faith, yet it is
the only matter of Debate between us and them in this point; and that it is the
intention of his Church, from which he tells us, we are to take our measures as
to the manner and external profession of this Honor, has been plainly made
appear from the Council of Trent, and the Catechism ad Parochos, out of which
this Article is gathered. If therefore he does not prove this, as indeed he
does not pretend to do, he is so far from vindicating the Doctrine of this
Article, that he proves nothing at all. Not finding therefore any thing in his
proofs that tends this way, I see no reason either to give my self or the
Reader a needless trouble, by a tedious examination of them. But if there be
any thing wherein this Gentleman desires a further satisfaction, I would
recommend to his perusal (if he be permitted to read them) two or three small
Treatises, which have lately been published upon this Subject, viz. A Discourse
concerning the Object of Religious Worship, etc. An Answer to a Discourse
entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant Popery, etc. A Discourse of
the Worship of the blessed Virgin and the Saints, etc. In which if he does not
find full satisfaction in this matter, I must despair of giving him any.

I believe that the power of Indulgences has been given and left by Christ to
his Church, and that the use of them is very beneficial to the Faithful. THE
Council of Trent has indeed asserted the Doctrine of Indulgences, Contin.
Sess. 25. Decret. de ^^^ulg.
but not explained it. It damns all those with an Anathema, who either affirm
them to be unprofitable, or deny that the Church has power to grant them. And
all this without once letting us know what it means by Indulgences.

The Bishop of Meaux in his Exposition, etc. would persuade us, that all that
is intended by Indulgences, is only a Relaxation of Canonical Penance; and in
compliance with him, the Vindicator here seems to be of the same opinion; for
that is all that he advances for the Vindication of this Article.

That such a power as this was given and left by Christ to his Church, and that
the due administration of it is very beneficial to the Faithful; we willingly
grant. And that this godly Discipline was anciently used by the Church of
Christ, we deny not. For, it is most certain, that it was the practice of the
Church to enjoin penance to her offending Members, and if they did humbly and
patiently submit thereunto, and prove penitent under them, she did frequently
relax some part of their penance. And if this be all that is intended by
Indulgences, we shall not much quarrel with him about them; but, I am apt to
think, that this Gentleman will find but few of his own Communion, who will be
so ready to comply with him herein, as we are. There are two eminent persons of
his own Church, (if he has any acquaintance with them) viz. Greg. de Valentia,
Greg. de Valentia, de Indulg. c. 2. Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 7.
and Cardinal Bellarmine, who, if he please to consult them in this matter,
will tell him another tale; The former will assure him, That this opinion
differs not from that of the Heretics, and makes Indulgences to be useless and
dangerous things. And the latter will inform him, That if this opinion be true,
then there will be no need of the Treasure of the Church, and that Indulgences
will be rather hurtful than profitable.

It is plain, That these Doctors had a far different notion of Indulgences,
from that which the Vindicator here would persuade us to. But it may be he will
appeal from them as private Doctors; which if he do, whither will he send us to
learn the Intention of the Church in this matter? The Council is silent, and
gives us no Definition of the thing established by it, and their chief Pastor,
who by the Bull of Pope Pius IV. is made the sole Interpreter of that Council,
has not by any public Act, that we ever yet heard of, declared the sense of
the Council in this Decree. So that we are still left either to spell out the
intention of the Church in the Writings of their approved Doctors, or else to
guess at it by the practices of their supreme Pastors. As to the former, I have
already given you a taste, in two eminent Instances, and might, without any
great trouble, furnish you with many more. And for the latter, we need go no
farther than the Tax of the Apostolic Chamber, and the Bullarium; in the
former of which you may find Rates set, which being paid, an Indulgence may be
had for almost any kind of Sin. And in the latter you have an account of
several Bulls of Indulgence by several Popes, Vide Bullar. Tom. I. p. 204. Tom.
III. p. 74 Tom. IV. p. 86.
wherein a plenary, and most plenary Remission of Sins, and of all Sins is
granted. Which certainly must amount to more than a bare Relaxation of some
part of Canonical Penance, or else the poor People who purchased them, were
horribly cheated both of their Money, and Expectations. And if this be their
notion of Indulgences, we do not believe that any such power was ever given or
left by Christ to his Church, or that the use of it is at all beneficial to the
Faithful.

I acknowledge the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, the Mother and
Mistress of all other Churches; and I promise and swear true Obedience to the
Bishop of Rome, Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ. THE Vindicator foreseeing what Objection might be made to the
Catholicism of the Roman Church, begins his defense of this Article with an
explanation of that Title, telling us, That as the Catholic or universal
Church, signifies a Church consisting of all particular Churches united in the
Communion of the same Faith and Sacraments, and submission to the same
Ecclesiastical Government, the Church of Rome is not the universal or Catholic
Church, but a part of it; but as it imports a Church, which is universal in its
influence, and by a singular privilege has Authority over all other particular
Churches, and is the Center of their Communion, the Church of Rome in this
sense is the Catholic or universal Church, and is rightly styled the Mother
and Mistress of all other particular Churches.

This Notion of the Catholic Church is liable to as many, if not more,
Objections than the other. For, 1. Where or by whom was ever the Catholic or
Universal Church understood to import a particular Church endowed with
universal Influence? 2. By what singular privilege has any particular Church
this universal Influence or Authority over all other particular Churches,
seeing par in parem non habet imperium? 3. Whence had the Church of Rome this
singular Privilege? Was it from God or of Men? If from God, let her produce her
Charter; if of Men, then those who gave it were superior to her to whom it was
given; and certainly they did not give away their own Superiority; and if not,
then the Church of Rome, instead of being a Mother and Mistress, must own her
self to be a Daughter and Handmaid to another. 4. When, where, or by whom was
the Church of Rome ever made or owned to be the Center of Catholic Union or
Communion? These Questions, I doubt, will not be quickly answered, and till we
are satisfied in these and some others, we shall hardly be persuaded to
subscribe this Article. But why not? The Vindicator assures us, This was the
Doctrine of the first Ages of the Church, and if so, then ought we rather to
suspect our own Judgments, than distrust theirs.

To this I answer, That if this was the Doctrine of the first Ages, then Pope
Gregory the Great (who certainly was as Infallible as any other Pope) was
mightily mistaken. For, when John Bishop of Constantinople did arrogantly
assume to himself the Title of Oecumenic, or, Universal Bishop; Gregory sharply
reproves him for it; and tells him, Gregor. l. 4. Epist. 38, 39. etc.
It is a New Name, a wicked, profane, insolent Name, the general plague of the
Church, a corruption of the Faith, against Canons, against the Apostle Peter,
and against God himself. And he farther adds, That never any Godly Man, never
any of his Predecessors used those Titles, and whosoever does or shall use
them, is the very Forerunner of Antichrist. From whence it is plain, that
before his time (which was about Six hundred Years after Christ) there never
was any pretense made to it. But the Vindicator says there was, and that it was
the Doctrine of the first Ages. Now whether Gregory or this Gentleman be in the
right, is the thing in question.

The Vindicator, to make good his ground, urges us with the Authority of
Irenaeus, l. 3. c. 3. adv. Haer. where he says, That the Church of Rome is the
greatest, and most ancient of all others, founded and established there by the
Two most Glorious Apostles, Peter and Paul. -- It Is necessary that every Church
should recurr to this, by reason of its more powerful principality.

To this I answer, That Irenaeus in that Book writes against Valentinus,
Cerdon, and Marcion, who, contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, had devised
certain strange Heresies; for trial whereof he appeals to those Churches which
the Apostles had planted, saying, The Church of Ephesus, first instructed by
St. Paul, and afterward continued by St. John, is a sufficient witness of the
Apostles learning. Polycarpus being converted, and taught by the Apostles,
instructed the Church of Smyrna, and all the Churches of Asia follow it. Yet
none of all these Churches ever allowed or received your strange Doctrine. Yea
the very wild Barbarous Nations, that have received the Faith of Christ at the
Apostles hands, only by hearing, without any Book or Letter, if they should
hear of these Heresies, they would stop their Ears. Here he appeals to the
Church of Ephesus, of Smyrna, and all the Churches of Asia: But then he adds,
It would be too tedious to reckon up the Sucession of all Churches; and for
that reason, being himself a Western Bishop, he appeals to that Church which
was of Apostolical plantation in the West, viz. the Church of Rome. Which he
calls, the greatest, most ancient, and known to all Men. Not the most Ancient
of all other Churches, as the Vindicator renders it, for it is well known, that
Jerusalem, Antioch, and several others were more ancient; but it was then the
most famous Church in the West. To this Church therefore he appeals, and thinks
it necessary that in such cases all other Churches, i. e. all other Churches in
the West, should do the same; and that for two Reasons, 1. Because of the more
powerful principality. 2. Because in this Church the Tradition of the Apostles
has ever been kept. The latter of these, which is the principal, the
Vindicator leaves out, and he had reason for it, for with that he could not
serve the end he aimed at. At that time the Tradition, i. e. the Doctrine of
the Apostles, was looked upon to be the best Trial and Rule of Faith. Which
Doctrine in those early days was exactly observed in Rome without corruption,
and for that reason was that Church had in Reverence and Estimation above
others. And if the Church of Rome at this day did as faithfully keep the
Traditions and Doctrine of the Apostles, as she did then; we would never
scruple to yield her that same Honor, that Irenaeus gives to the ancient
Church of Rome.

But he makes sure not to forget the other reason, viz. The more powerful
principality. And yet he will be as little able to avail himself of this as of
the other; for the Principality which Irenaeus here means, is the Civil
Dominion, and Temporal State of the City of Rome, which was then the Imperial
City. For if we consider that this was in the Reign of Commodus the Emperor,
who was an Heathen and a Persecutor, we cannot imagine that the Church was then
possessed of any powerful Principality. But as in every Province there was a
Metropolis, or chief City; so it was usual with the Fathers to call the Church
planted there, the chief or principal Church. And it is well known, Council.
Constant. 6.
that upon that very account the Patriarch of Constantinople was, by a general
Council, declared to have equal Privileges and Authority with the Patriarch of
Rome.

And that this was all the principality that Irenaeus dreamed of, will appear
plainly; if we consider, that when Victor Bishop of Rome was angry with the
Churches of Asia, for not celebrating the Feast of Easter at the same time,
Eusebius. Histor. Eccles. l. 5. c. 23.
and in the same manner as they did at Rome, and would have Excommunicated them
for it; Irenaeus opposed his design, and sharply reproved him as a disturber of
the Church's peace. Which certainly he would not have done, had he thought that
the Church of Rome had been the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, and that
Obedience to her Bishop was necessary for every Christian, in order to his
Salvation.

His next witness is Optatus Milevitanus, lib. 2. adv. Parm. Where he speaks of
St. Peter's Chair being erected at Rome, to the end that Unity might be
preserved, and that they are Schimaticks, and Sinners, and Sacrilegious, who
set up themselves in defiance against the Chair of Peter.

To this I answer, That Optatus there writes against Parmenianus the Donatist.
Now the Donatists were a certain Sect of Christians, broken off from the Unity
of the Catholic Church, confining it to a corner of Africa, where they
themselves dwelt; as our Neighbors of the Roman Communion do now to Rome. To
convince these People of their folly and madness, and to reduce them, if
possible, into the bosom of the Church, Optatus does (as Irenaeus before him
had done) appeal to those Churches which were planted by the Apostles, and
particularly to the Church of Rome, blaming them for departing from that Faith
and Doctrine which was there kept and taught; and telling them that they could
not belong to the Church of Christ, so long as they continued in a state of
separation from that Church. He does not therefore require their Union and
Communion with the Roman Church, as with the Mother and Mistress of all other
Churches, but as with the keeper of the Apostolic Faith. Nor does he require
them to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome as the universal Head and Monarch of all
Churches, for there is not one word to be found in all Optatus tending that way.

His next Evidence is St. Cyprian, Epist. 40. There is one God, and one Christ,
and one Church, and one Chair, founded upon Peter, by the Word of God.

The design of St. Cyprian in this Epistle, is to give an account to those to
whom he wrote, of the Schismatical Sedition raised by Felicissimus and Five
other Presbyters, in the Church of Carthage, and against him their Bishop; and
by warning them against it to preserve them in Peace and Unity. To that end he
lays down these words, There is one God, etc. And immediately adds, Another
Altar cannot be set up, nor a new Priesthood made, besides that one Altar, and
one Priesthood. Whosoever gathers elsewhere, scatters. It is Adulterous, it
is Wicked, it is Sacrilegious, to make way for humane Inventions, by the
violation of a divine Constitution. Whence it is plain, That by the one Church
here, he meant the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church; and by the One
Chair, the Episcopal Chair; Obedience whereunto preserves Unity, and
Disobedience begets Schism and Sedition in the Church.

But the force of his Argument lies here, That this One is founded upon Peter,
and that not by any humane, but by divine Authority, Voce Domini, by the Word
of the Lord, i. e. as the Margin of St. Cyprian directs us, those Words of our
Savior, Matthew. xvi. 18. where our Savior says, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

To this I answer, 1. That there are some who read these words of St. Cyprian,
not super Petrum, but super petram, not upon Peter, but upon the Rock; not upon
Peter's person, but upon his profession; or as others, upon Christ, who is the
spiritual Rock, upon which St. Peter himself was builded. But, 2. Suppose we
should grant that St. Cyprian speaks of St. Peter's person, what is this to the
Bishop of Rome? for it is granted by all, that after this time, he was first
settled in the Sea of Antioch, but it is questioned by many, whether ever he
was fixed in the Sea of Rome? Or if he was, why should his Successors in the
latter place have a better Title to it, than those in the first? But, 3. If we
will suffer St. Cyprian to be his own Interpreter, he will fully clear the
matter; where having occasion to explain those words of our Savior to Peter,
St. Cypr. de Unitat. Eccles. Edit. Oxon. p. 107.
he concludes, The rest of the Apostles were the same that St. Peter was, being
joined with him in the same fellowship of Honor and Power. Where it is plain,
he gives no Supremacy to St. Peter over the rest of the Apostles, much less did
he intend any to his Successors.

But St. Cyprian must not escape thus, he is again pressed to speak in this
Cause. For in his 73. Epist. says the Vindicator, he has these words, Christ
gave this power to Peter, upon whom he built the Church.

To this I answer, That this Epistle is an Answer to one sent him by Jubaianus,
concerning the Rebaptizing of Heretics. Against which it is objected by
Jubaianus, That we are not to enquire by whom a person is Baptized, since he
that is Baptized may receive Remission of Sins, if he believe. In answer to
this Objection, St. Cyprian, after he had for some time discoursed of the Faith
of those who are without the Church, and the Efficacy thereof, at last
concludes, But it is manifest where and by whom that Remission of Sins, which
is given in Baptism, can be given. For the Lord first gave to Peter, upon whom
he built his Church, and from whence he shows the Original of Unity, that
Power, that whatsoever he should loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven.
And after the Resurrection, he also spoke to the Apostles, saying, As my Father
has sent me, so send I you; and when he had said this he breathed on them,
John xx. 21.
and said, Whosoever Sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whosoever Sins ye
retain, they are retained. Where you see he joins St. Peter and the rest of the
Apostles in the same fellowship of Honor and Power, with this only difference,
that it was given to St. Peter first, and afterward to them all jointly. And
at last he concludes, which was all that he aimed at. By this we understand
both where and by whom Remission of Sins in Baptism can be given, viz. In the
Church, and by the Pastors of the Church. And now what is all this to the
Supremacy either of the Bishop or Church of Rome?

But he has not yet done with St. Cyprian, he must come upon the Stage again
to justify what he says, Epist. 55. where we find these words, They are bold
to carry Letters from schismatical and profane Persons to the Chair of Peter,
and the principal Church, from whence the Priestly Unity has its rise.

In answer whereunto, it may not be amiss to give you a short Account of the
whole matter: The Story is this; Felicissimus and Five other Presbyters with
him, had made an horrible Schism in the Church of Carthage, contending for the
reception both of Heretics and Apostates, into the Church, without any form of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. These were opposed by St. Cyprian, of whose
Opposition they were so impatient, that at last they proceeded, contrary to all
Rule and Order, to choose a new Bishop, and fixed upon one Fortunatus. Hereupon
St. Cyprian calls a Council of African Bishops, in which the cause was heard,
and these Schismatics censured. This so inflamed their turbulent and unquiet
Minds, that they resolve to carry the matter to Rome; and accordingly
Felicissimus and others of the Party were sent with Letters from their
mock-Bishop Fortunatus, to Cornelius Bishop of Rome. (And this is the carrying
of Letters to St. Peter 's Chair, etc. that St. Cyprian here speaks of.) So
soon as they were come there, and had made known their business, Cornelius, by
Letters, acquaints St. Cyprian with it; and he in this Epistle returns him an
answer.

Whence we may Note, That it was not St. Cyprian and the Catholic Bishops of
Africa, but the schismatical mock-Bishop Fortunatus and his adherents, that
appealed to Rome. Nor does Cornelius take upon him to cite St. Cyprian and the
African Bishops to appear, and answer the matter before him; but only in a
Brotherly and friendly manner, by letters acquaints him with it. And so far was
St. Cyprian from owning any Superiority or power in the Roman Bishop over
himself, and the Bishops of Africa, that the highest titles that he gives him
in this whole Epistle, are only Brother, and Most dear Brother. He also takes
upon him sharply to reprove him, for his pusillanimity and lowness of Spirit,
at the threats and menaces of those wicked Men; He instructs him what he should
do, and directs him how to behave himself toward them. He acquaints him that
the cause was already judged in Africa, and as good as tells him that he ought
not to meddle with it: For, says he, it is determined by all of us, and it is
both equal and just, that every ones Cause should be heard where the crime was
committed. Every Pastor has his portion of the Flock, which he ought to rule
and govern, and to give an account thereof (not at Rome, but in Heaven, not to
Cornelius, but to Christ) to the Lord. Those therefore who are under our
Jurisdiction ought not to run about, (i. e. they ought not to apply themselves
to any foreign Jurisdiction) but to plead their cause there, where they may
have both Accusers and Witnesses of their Crime. So far was St. Cyprian from
owning any Superiority or Power in the Roman Bishop over himself and the
African Bishops.

But he calls the Church of Rome, The Chair of Peter, and the principal Church.
It Is true he does so, but that he never intended thereby to ascribe unto her a
Superiority and Jurisdiction over all other Churches, I take to be very plain
from the account I have now given you of his sentiments out of this very
Epistle. But having already accounted for these expressions, I am not willing
to repeat the same thing over again, but shall rather referr you to what has
been already said.

His next evidence is Greg. Naz. Hom. de Cre. Epist. Doar. We do not contemn
nor revile that great Pastor, who governs that magnificent City; we know him to
be honorable, we acknowledge him the Head -- we desire he will show himself an
indulgent and tender Father, and diligently take care of the whole Church.

To this I answer, That if by Head, he mean the chief Ruler and Governor; we
grant that he is so in his own province, and that he take care of the whole
Church of that Province, committed to his Charge, we think is his duty, and
with Nazianzen, we heartily desire that he may do it, Greg. Naz. in Epist. ad
Caesareenses. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antiochenum. Hom. 3.
and do it diligently. And that this Holy Father meant no more than this, may
plainly appear from what he says of the Church of Caesarea: It is, says he,
in a manner the Mother of all Churches, and the whole Christian Commonwealth
so embraces and beholds it, as the Circle embraces and beholds the
Center. Thus Jerusalem is frequently styled, the Mother of all Churches; and
St. Chrysostom calls Antioch, the Head of the World. Now as these Churches are
called Mother Churches, because the Cities in which they were planted were the
Mother Cities of those Provinces; so for the same reason, the Church of Rome is
oftentimes called the Chief, the Principal, and the Mother Church, because that
City, was the Metropolis or Head-City of the West. And as the Bishops of those
Churches may be, and oftentimes are called the Chief Rulers and Governors of
the Church, so likewise and no otherwise, the Bishop of Rome is sometimes
styled the Head i. e. the chief Governor of the Church. And that by the whole
Church here, we are to understand no more, but only the whole Church of that
Province, Polydor. Virgil, explaining those words of St. Cyprian, The Chair of
Peter, Polydor. Virgil. de Inventor. rerum, l 4.
the principal Church from which the Unity of the Priesthood first began, thus
writes, Lest any man hereby deceive himself, it cannot in any other wise be
said, that the Order of Priesthood grew first from the Bishop of Rome, unless
we understand it only within Italy. For it is clear and out of question, that
Priesthood was orderly appointed at Jerusalem, long before Peter ever came to
Rome.

To this I might add, That every Bishop, may be called the Bishop of the
Universal Church; because it is his duty to take care not only of his own
Flock, but of the whole Church of God. As also that this Title, Head of the
Church, has been given to several godly Bishops, who were never Bishops of
Rome, nor ever dreamt that any Supremacy of power over all other Churches, was
thereby conferred either upon him, or them. But I am not willing to enter
farther into the Controversy than the Vindicator leads me; And to this
Evidence of his, I think, enough has been said, to show that it will not much
avail him.

His next witness is St. Chrysostom l. 2. de Sacerd. c. 1. For what reason did
Christ shed his Blood? Certainly to purchase those sheep, the care of which he
committed to Peter and his Successors.

The whole force of his Argument, if he can frame any out of these words, must
be, That the Bishop of Rome is the true Successor to St. Peter. Which, if we
should grant him, I do not see how it would thence follow, that the Bishop of
Rome is the Supreme Pastor, Head and Governor of the Catholic Church; For if
St. Peter himself was not so, he cannot have it by Succession from him. De
Unitate Eccles. Edit. Oxon. p. 107. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 38.
Now St. Cyprian says, The Apostles were the same that St. Peter was, being
joined in the same fellowship of Honor and Power. And their own Pope Gregory
says, Peter, the Apostle, is (not the Head, but) the chief Member of the holy
universal Church. Paul, Andrew and John, what are they else, but the Heads of
several Nations? Yet notwithstanding under one Head (viz. Christ) they are all
members of the Church. And to speak in short, The Saints before the Law, the
Saints under the Law, the Saints in the time of Grace, all accomplishing the
Lord's Body, are placed among the Members of the Church. And there was never
any one yet, that would have himself called the Universal Bishop. So that as
Paul, Andrew and John were Heads of the Church, in like manner, and no
otherwise, was St. Peter Head of the Church. If therefore St. Peter was, then
they were all so too, for they were all equal; and what a confusion that would
be, let the Vindicator judge.

To this may be added, That if St. Peter was really the Prince of the Apostles,
and Head of the Church constituted by Christ, St. Paul certainly was very much
to blame, Gal. ii. 2.
to withstand him to the face, as he did. And it must be a very great Arrogance
and presumption in him, to say, That in nothing he was behind the very chiefest
Apostles. 2 Cor. xij. 11. Gal. ij. 7.
Or to share Jurisdiction with him, saying, That the Gospel of the
Uncircumcision was committed unto him, as the Gospel of the Circumcision was
unto Peter. But St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Galat. c. ii.
whose Authority he so much depends upon, will tell him, That Paul had no need
of Peter 's help, nor did he want his voice, but was equal unto him in Honor.

Besides all this, One may be said to succeed another, either because he
possesses the same place that he did; or because he teaches the same
Doctrine, and with the same diligence that he did. Now the former of these will
not be enough to make any one the true Successor of St. Peter, Alphons. contra
Haeres. l. 1. c. 9.
for as their own Alphonsus de Castro says, Though it be matter of Faith to
believe the true Successor of St. Peter is the Supreme Pastor of the whole
Church; yet are we not bound, by the same Faith to believe, that Leo or Clement
( though Bishops of Rome) are the true Successors of St. Peter. And yet this is
the Succession they so much boast of; and if this be it, Did. 40. Multi.
the same St. Chrysostom will inform him, That it is not the Chair that makes
the Bishop, but it is the Bishop that makes the Chair. Neither is it the place
that Halloweth the Man, but it is the Man that Halloweth the place. Did. 40.
Non est facile.
And St. Jerome will tell him, They are not always the Children of Holy Men,
that sit in the rooms of Holy Men. Nor did these Holy Fathers speak without
Book, for the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses's Chair, Matthew. xxiij. 2. And
the Abomination of Desolation shall stand in the holy Place, Matthew. xxiv. 15.
And the Man of Sin, as God, shall sit in the Temple of God, 2 These. ij. 3, 4.
As the first of these did Succeed Moses in place, but not in Doctrine; so the
two other shall succeed Christ and his Apostles. And thus Pope Liberius, though
an Arian Heretic; and Pope Coelestinus, though a Nestorian; and Pope Honorius,
though a Monothelite; may be said to succeed St. Peter in place, though not in
Doctrine. But will the Vindicator say, or can he imagine, that St. Chrysostom
meant, That Christ shed his Blood to purchase a Church, and when he had done,
committed the care of it to such Successors of St. Peter as these were?

His next is St. Jerome, Epist. 57, and 58. ad Damasum, whose words are thus
rendered by him, Ego nullum primum, nisi Christum, sequens, Beatitudini tuae,
i. e. Cathedrae, Petri Communione consocior.
I following no other Leader but Christ, am in Communion with your Holiness, i.
e. with the Chair of Peter, etc. And, I cry aloud, Whoever is in Communion with
the Chair of Peter, is mine. Which may better be Translated thus, I following
no first Man, but only Christ, am joined, as a Fellow in Communion unto thy
Blessedness, i. e. to Peter 's Chair.

Whence we may observe, 1. That St. Jerome does not acknowledge any first,
head, or chief in the Church, no not the Pope himself, but only Christ. 2. That
he does not submit himself as a Vassal or Subject to the Pope, but does
consociate himself in Communion with him. 3. That it is not only with him, but
with St. Peter's Chair. And what he means by St. Peter's Chair, he afterward
explains, when he comes to give a reason of this his Address. Where he tells
us, The Foxes destroy the Vineyard of Christ, so that among these broken
Cisterns, that have no Water, it is hard to understand, where that sealed
Fountain and enclosed Garden is. Therefore he thought it good to consult St.
Peter's Chair, and that Faith which was commended by the Apostles Mouth. So
that it was not St. Peter's Successor in place, but in Doctrine, that he
applied himself unto. Now if we consider that the Age in which St. Jerome lived
did mightily abound with Heretics, we cannot think it strange that he should
forsake the company of those wicked Men, and join himself in communion with
those, who then held that Faith entire, which they impugned. But if you ask me,
why should he rather address himself to the Bishop of Rome, than any other? The
answer is ready, he had received his Christianity at Rome, In vita Hieron.
he had been educated there from his youth, he was a Priest of Rome, and had
sometime been Secretary to this very Damasus. All which considered, it is no
wonder, if he had a particular kindness for that See. Now what is all this to
that universal power which the Pope at this day claims to have over the whole
Church of God? Should the Vindicator follow St. Jerome's Example, and, and in
his Address call the Pope his Fellow, I doubt it would not be very welcome.

And that St. Jerome meant no more than is here explained, will plainly appear,
if we consider what account he made at other times of St. Peter's Chair, when
he found abuses and errors maintained in the Church of Rome.

Then he cries out, Si Authoritas quaeritur, etc. Hieron. in Epist. ad Evagrium
If we seek for Authority, that of the World is greater than that of the City
(viz. Rome) Wherever there is a Bishop, whether it be at Rome, or at Tanais,
or at Engubium, he is of equal Merit, and equal Priesthood. The power of
Riches, and the humility of Poverty, cannot make a Bishop either higher or
lower. All Bishops are the Successors of the Apostles.

His next Evidence is, St. Aug. Epist. 92. ad Innocentium Papam, whose words
are not well translated by him; The words of the Epistle are these, In the
great dangers of the infirm Members of Christ we beseech you to use your
Pastoral diligence. For, there is a new Heresy, and too pernicious a Tempest
raised by the Enemies of the Grace of Christ, who by their wicked Disputations
endeavor to take from us the Lords Prayer. And then giving him an account,
what that Heresy and Tempest was, he at last concludes, But we hope, the Mercy
of our Lord Jesus Christ assisting, who deigns to govern thee consulting him,
and to hear thee praying to him; those who think so perversely and perniciously
will yield to the Authority of your Holiness, drawn from the Authority of holy
Scriptures, that so we may rather rejoice in their Correction, than sorrow for
their Destruction.

For the better understanding hereof, we are to consider, That this Epistle was
sent to Pope Innocent, not by St. Austin alone, but by the Milevitan Council,
in which he presided, and in which the Pelagian Heresy had been considered and
censured, as it had been before in the Council of Carthage. And the design of
their writing, as appears by the whole tenor of the Epistle, was not to beg
his confirmation of what they had done, but to acquaint him with what they had
done; and to desire him to take the same pastoral care, and use the same
diligence to discountenance that Heresy in his Province, as they had done in
theirs. Epist. 95. ad Innocent.
For St. Austin in another Epistle tells him, We have heard that there are some
even in Rome it self, (where Pelagius long lived) who for diverse causes are
favorable to him; some there are who report that you persuade them so to be,
but more who believe that he is cleared from that Heresy by the Eastern
Bishops. And therefore they expected that he should not only clear himself of
that suspicion, but also undeceive his people as to the Transactions in this
matter in the East.

This was the design of this Epistle, as indeed it was of all those
Communicatory Letters, which in those days were so frequent, when any matter of
great importance happened in the Church; which were things of great use, and no
small advantage then, for thereby Catholic Communion was preserved, warning
was given of any approaching danger, and the Bishops and Pastors of the Church
awakened to provide against it. Nor were these Epistles sent to the Bishop of
Rome only, but to other Bishops also. To this purpose we meet with another
Epistle to Hilarious Bishop of Poitiers in France, Epist. 94.
written in the same style, and to whom he makes his Address in words to the
same effect, as he did to the Bishop of Rome; for thus he directs it, To
Hilarious our most blessed Lord, and reverend Brother and Fellow-Bishop in the
truth of Christ. In this Epistle he tells him, That a new Heresy, an Enemy to
the Grace of Christ, was endeavored to be set up; and having given him an
account what it was he desires him to use his pastoral care and diligence to
suppress it.

But that St. Austin and the Fathers in the Numidian Council never dreamt of
any power or authority either in him or the Bishop of Rome, or any other
Bishop, over them and all other Churches, we need no other Evidence, than the
Acts of this very Council. In which we find this Decree made, Council.
Milevitan. Can. 22.
If they have a mind to appeal from their Bishops, let them not appeal but only
to the Councils of Africa, or to the Primates of their own Provinces. But if
they shall make their Appeals beyond the Seas (i. e. to Rome) let no Man in
Africa receive them into Communion. Council. Carthag. 6. Can. 92.
The same was also decreed in the African Council; and the reasons of it are
expressed at large in the Epistle of that Council to Pope Coelestinus.

Thus have I considered the Proofs brought for Vindication of this important
Article, and having laid them in the Balance, have found them all too light.
But he has yet one Authority more, not from Antiquity, but from a Modern
Author, and one of our own, viz. the Reverend and learned Doctor Sherlock.
This, I confess, Disc. of the Knowl. of Jes. Christ, p. 163.
I did not expect; for who would ever have thought that that worthy Gentleman
should ever have been brought upon the Stage as an Advocate for the Popes
Supremacy. But this Gentleman thinks, that whatsoever is said by any Body
touching Order and Discipline in the Church, and the necessity of subjection
and obedience to the Governors thereof, must needs terminate in the Pope, who,
they say, is the Center of Unity; though in so saying, they do but beg the
Question. For we can with great cheerfulness and willingness subscribe to all
that Dr. Sherlock has there said, and yet think our selves never a jot the
more obliged to swear Obedience to the Bishop of Rome.

I undoubtedly receive and profess all other things delivered, defined, and
declared by the Sacred Canons and General Councils, and particularly by the
Holy Council of Trent; and I condemn, reject and anathematize all things
contrary thereunto; and all Heresies whatsoever the Church has condemned,
rejected and Anathematized. THIS, he tells us, is the consequence of that
Doctrine of our Creed, wherein we profess to believe The Holy Catholic Church.
But how comes this to be the consequence of that Doctrine? Very naturally; for
the Church of Rome is this Catholic Church. It Is boldly said, but how does
this appear? Very plainly, for there are the greatest reasons in the world to
believe it. So that now we must either show our selves to be unreasonable Men,
or else of necessity we must subscribe this Article. But are we obliged to take
all this upon the bare word of the Vindicator? May we not look into, and
consider these reasons, whether they be so great and good as he talks of?
Surely we may, or else he would not have exposed them to public view. Well
then let us see what they are.

R. 1.
His first Reason is, Because the Church of Rome has continued in a visible
Succession of Pastors from Christ's time till now.

Ans.
The point of Succession has been already considered, and, I think, enough said
to show the unreasonableness of that Plea. But because he so much insists upon
the visible Succession of Persons in the same place, let me ask him two or
three questions. 1. Who was the Bishop of Rome next by Succession to Peter? who
the second? who the third? who the fourth? For in this they are not yet well
agreed. Some say Linus was the second, others say Clemens. Some say Anacletus
was the third, others say Clemens. Some say Anacletus was the fourth, others
say Anacletus. 2. Whether an Heretic, or a Necromancer, or a Blasphemer being
in the Chair, be the true Successor of St. Peter? and if not, whether that do
not break the Line of Succession? 3. Whether, when there was no Pope for some
Years, the visible succession of Pastors in that Church was not discontinued?
4. When there were three or four Popes at one and the same time, and not known
who was the true one, there was not an apparent interruption of their visible
succession?

R. 2.
Because the Church of Rome never went out of, or separated from any precedent
Church, but all other separate Congregations have gone out from her.

Ans.
If by going out of, or separating from any precedent Church, he mean departing
from the Doctrine, and renouncing the Discipline of that Church; which he must
do, if he mean any thing; then we say, That in both these the present Church of
Rome has gone out of, and separated from the Primitive Church, as has been
plainly made appear in this Discourse. And that those who separate from her, do
not separate from the Church, but from the corruptions of that particular
Church; which they are well warranted to do by St. Paul, who having told the
Corinthians, That there can be no fellowship between Righteousness and
Unrighteousness; no Communion between Light and Darkness; no Concord between
Christ and Belial; nor any Agreement between the Temple of God and Idols; at
last thus inferrs, Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate,
says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, 2 Cor.
vi. 14, 15, 16, 17.

Because the Church of Rome has sent Apostles abroad, and converted all
Heathen Nations to Christianity. R. 3.


Ans.
This is so notoriously false, and so well known to be so, to every one that
has but looked into Church History, in which we have an account of most
Nations, when and by whom they were converted; that I cannot but wonder at the
Confidence of this Gentleman in asserting it. But if we should grant him this,
would it thence follow, That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church? Might
I not as well reason thus, The Scribes and Pharisees compass Sea and Land to
gain Proselytes, therefore those two Sects were the whole Jewish Church?

Because the Church of Rome in public Synods has opposed and condemned in all
Ages arising Heresies. R. 4.


This is as notoriously false as the former, Ans.
as is plain from those two Instances of the Milevitan, and African Councils,
which I mentioned in the precedent Article; and might easily be made more
plainly appear by Instances of other Councils, which have not only not desired,
but rejected the Authority of the Church of Rome, when it would have inposed.
But the thing is so well known that I shall not need to do it.

These are all the Reasons he alleges, and these, he tells us, are the
greatest in the World. If they be so, the World is in an ill condition, and
men, like the great Nebuchadnezzar may be sent now to graze amongst the Beasts
of the Field, having lost their Reason.

I am of Doctor Sherlock's mind, That Men cannot own the Authority and
Government of Christ, till they submit to the public Instructions, Authority
and Discipline of the Church. But what is all this to the Church of Rome's
being the Catholic Church? It Is plain he does not say it, and I am well
assured he never meant it.

I subscribe to St. Austin's Judgment, That particular Councils, Aug. de Bapt.
cont. Don. l. 2. c. 9.
must yield to General, because the whole is deservedly preferred before a
part. But did ever any Council, either particular or General, decree a part to
be the whole, or a particular Church to be the Catholic Church? If not, I do
not see how the Vindicator can avail himself of this passage, nor for what end
he did produce it.

Thus it appears, that the New Articles in Pope Pius his Creed, are neither
agreeable to Scripture, nor the Sense of the Primitive Fathers. And for that
reason we cannot subscribe to this last Article.

THE CLOSE.
TO close up his Vindication, he undertakes to answer some Objections of ours
against these New Articles, which, how well he has done, I shall now examine.

The Apostles knew best what was to be believed; Object.
since therefore none of these Articles are in their Creed, they ought not to
be imposed on us as Matters of Faith.

To this he answers, Answ.
That the Apostles Creed is a Summary of the principal Mysteries of the
Christian Religion, but does not contain all that is of Faith.

To this I reply, That a thing may be said to be of Faith two ways, Reply.
either absolutely or occasionally. 1. Absolutely, i. e. in, and for its self,
when by its own nature, and God's primary intention, it is an essential part of
the Gospel; such an one as Teachers in the Church cannot, without mortal Sin,
omit to teach the Learners; such an one as is intrinsecal to the Covenant
between God and Man; and not only plainly revealed by God, and so a certain
Truth, but also commanded to be preached to all Men, and to be distinctly
believed by all, and so a necessary Truth. Of this kind there are two sorts,
viz. Such as are necessary to be believed, or such as are necessary to be done,
and of the former of these it is that we speak, when we say, That the Apostles
Creed contains all necessary Matters of Faith. 2. A thing may be said to be of
Faith only occasionally, i. e. when it is not so in, and for its self, but
because it is joined with others which are necessary to be believed, and for
the sake of that Authority by which it is delivered. Of this sort there are
multitudes of Verities contained in the Holy Scriptures, as for Instance, That
Zacharias was a Priest of the Course of Abia, that Elizabeth was of the
Daughters of Aaron, that Cyrenius was Governor of Syria, that Pontius Pilate
was the Roman Deputy, that Paul left his Cloak at Troas. These are all Truths
and Objects of Faith, because they are found in the divine Revelation; but they
are not such Truths as the Pastors of the Church are bound to teach their
Flock, or their Flock bound to know and remember. For it would be no crime to
be ignorant of these, or to believe the contrary, if I did not know that they
were delivered in Holy Scripture. When therefore we speak of Matters of Faith
contained in the Creed, we mean all necessary points of mere Belief, and of
such we say it is a perfect Summary.

No, says the Vindicator, for it does not contain all that is in the
Scripture, and yet all that is there is of Divine Inspiration and of Faith. We
grant it, but all things that are there are not equally of Faith; many of them
are not absolute and necessary, but only occasional and accidental Objects of
Faith; as I have already shown.

As for Baptism and the Lord's Supper, we acknowledge them to be great
Mysteries of our Religion, but they are not points of mere Faith, and therefore
not within the question. That the Scripture is the word of God, and that such
and such Books are Canonical, depends upon another Evidence; by which we must
be convinced that they are so, before we can give a rational assent to the
Articles of the Creed; because they are all taken out of these Books and our
belief of them built upon that Authority. The Belief therefore of this being
necessarily antecedent to the belief of the other, it would have been a very
absurd and preposterous thing to have made that an Article of our Creed. As for
the 39 Articles of the Church of England, they are propounded only as Articles
of Communion, not as Articles of Faith; and therefore the Objection does not
reach them. And as for the Nicene and Athanasian Creed, they are only
explications of the Apostles Creed, and contain the same, and no other Faith,
but what is contained in that. This I think, may suffice to show, That he has
not yet answered that Objection. But if the Vindicator desire yet further
satisfaction in this point; I would recommend to him (if he be allowed to read
such Books) the fourth Chapter of Mr. Chillingworth's Book, entitled, The
Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, and another little Treatise
printed at London the last year, entitled, The Pillar and Ground of Truth.

All the particulars in this profession were not undoubtedly believed by all,
Object.
before the Decrees were made at Trent.

To this he answers, Suppose they were not, Answ.
Neither was the Canon of Scripture, which the Church of England receives,
undoubtedly believed by all in the primitive times.

This may be allowed to be a good answer to that Objection, Reply.
but that Objection is his own, it is none of ours; Our Objection is this, That
not one of all these twelve new Articles in Pope Pius 's Creed was ever
received as an Article of Faith by the Primitive Church. And to this he answers
nothing.

There Is no Authority upon Earth can make a new Article of Faith. Object. Answ.


To this he answers, That there is an Authority, which can declare a thing to
be of Faith, which was not before expressly so believed by all.

This we willingly grant, but this does not answer the Objection; Reply.
for we do not question the Church's power to declare a thing to be of Faith,
which before was dubious, or not expressly believed by all. But we say, That
there is no such Authority in the Church, as to make that to be of Faith, which
really was not so before, i. e. to make a new Article of Faith. And to this he
returns not one word of Answer.

This Authority can declare only such points, Object.
as may be warranted by Holy Scripture, and such as these are the subject of
the XXXIX Articles; but as for Pope Pius's Creed, it is but the Invention of
Men.

For Answer hereunto, he referrs us to what he has said in his Book, Answ.
wherein, he says, he has showed, That all the Articles of this Creed are
founded upon Scripture, and the Authority of the most eminent Men in the
Primitive Church. And farther faith, That the XXXIX. Articles are not so
express in Scripture, as these of Pope Pius.

Whether there be any Truth in the first part of his Answer, Reply.
as he referrs us to his Book, so I shall referr you to the Answer given to it
in these Papers. And to the latter part of his Answer, it may be a sufficient
Reply, to remind him of what he has been often told, That the XXXIX Articles
of the Church of England are not propounded as Articles of Faith, but as
Articles of Communion, nor is the Belief of them required of all upon pain of
Damnation, as these of Pope Pius are; and therefore there is not so much danger
in our compliance or non-complyance with the one, as with the other. Whether
these Articles of Pope Pius be founded upon Scripture, has been one part of
the question between us, and therefore for satisfaction in this point, I shall
refers you to what has been said upon that Subject on both sides.

Thus have I considered the Vindicator's Answers to some Objections, which he
thought fit to encounter with; and how well he has acquitted himself therein,
I shall now leave it to the ingenuous Reader to judge between us.

The End.

