Duty and Interest UNITED IN PRAYER and PRAISE FOR Kings, and all that are in
Authority. From 1 Timothy II. 1, 2. BEING A SERMON Preached at WESTMINSTER, Upon
the late day of Thanksgiving, SEPT. 8. 1695.

By V. A. Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for John Barnes, at the Crown in the Pall mall, MDCXCV.

Duty and Interest United in Prayer and Praise FOR The King, and all that are
in Authority. FROM
I Tim. II. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions and giving of thanks, be made for all men: for Kings and all that
are in Authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness
and honesty.
THE visible Degeneracy of what we call Religion from its Original in the
Scripture, and its fairest Copy in the purest Primitive times, has filled the
hearts of the more considering persons with great sadness: Could we view our
faces in that Glass, we should either correct our deformities by it, or, as
some are too ready to do, break the Glass, that it may not at once show us, and
upbraid us with them.

For whether it be that aerie Speculations have eaten out the practice, or
fiery contentions about matters of lower concernments, have starved the Spirit
of Zeal for the great and weighty things of Religion; or the deluge of
profaneness which threatens to lay morality and godliness under water, be too
strong for us to stem the Current; most certain it is, that the Christian
Religion has had its beauty so miserably effaced, has been so wretchedly
misrepresented, or so little represented to its advantage, that its open
enemies have dared to triumph over it; and its few cordial friends have found
much difficulty and discouragement to support its credit.

Amongst the many Instances of the decay of Religion in this present Age, the
great Neglect of praying to, and praising God for our Governors supreme and
subordinate, has been one, which perhaps has rendered them less zealous for,
and possibly jealous of Christianity, as that which has not very favorable
aspects upon the Persons and Thrones of Princes; or at least the Professors of
it have horribly contradicted their own avowed Principles; and that which they
pretend to be the only Rule of their Faith, has but a slender influence upon
their Consciences.

Now as I have a clear Warrant from the Text, and as ^ound an Invitation from
the gracious Providence of God that smiles upon us, I will endeavor first to
show what it is we owe, and then to awaken the sleepy Consciences of men to pay
what they owe, both in Prayer and Praise to God for Kings, and all that are in
Authority.

The Text therefore gives us clear Direction in three momentous points. 1. The
Matter of our Duty; or what we owe. 2. The Objects of the duty, or to whom we
owe it. 3. The Reasons of our duty, why we owe it. (1.) If we heedfully attend
to the first of these; or what we owe: The Text has reduced them to these four
particulars.

1. That we offer up to God supplications, (...): earnestly to wrestle with the
Almighty, that he would divert his anger, or whatever calamities, judgments,
plagues, may be in the womb of that anger, from them: that his vigilant eye
would discover, his powerful hand turn away and defeat all those machinations
which may be formed against their persons and governments; in a word, that he
would secure them against those evils to which their high station, and the
discharge of their weighty duties therein, may expose them.

2. That we also present our prayers, (...), to God on their behalf; that he
would fill them with all those graces, wisdom, counsel, understanding, courage,
that may qualify them for their arduous calling: that he would prosper and
crown them with glorious success in all their lawful and honorable
undertakings.

3. That further we make intercessions, (...), for them, that God would not
only bless them, but make them blessings to their Subjects, and happy
instruments to procure much good to all that come within the sphere of their
power and calling.

4. We owe this further, that we return thanks, (...), to God for them: for all
the good that they have done, or that was in their hearts to do; for all those
deliverances God has wrought out for us by them; and for all that courage and
conduct which God has bestowed on them to render them serviceable; and for all
that God has done for them in their preservation.

All this we owe; and are further instructed how we must pay it from the word
(...): which will instruct us, 1. that we perform all this with the greatest
vigor of Soul, and application of Conscience. 2. That we do it constantly with
unwearied perseverance. The nature of the word implies the former, and the form
of the word the latter.

(2.) The Object of our duty, is express in these words, for all men; for
Kings, and all that are in authority: only be it observed, that tho we owe to
our King prayer and praise, yet these duties, these debts must be paid to God;
and we shall acquit our selves both as Christians and good Subjects, when what
we owe for them, we do not pay it to them, but to God on their behalf.

The persons to whom we owe supplication, prayer, intercession and
thanksgiving, are here either described in general or in special. 1. In
general, we owe it to All men: (...): none so low but our prayers may help
them; none so high but our prayers may serve them; none so good but may need,
none so bad but may claim a share in our prayers.

We are indeed taught to distinguish between the violent men of the world, as
they are our enemies, and as they are the enemies of the Lord, and of his
Christ; under the former consideration, let us pray that God would forgive
them, convert them, restrain them; wherein if our charitable prayers reach not
their hearts, they will return into our own bosoms: And for this we have
precept from, and precedent in our Lord and Savior, Precept. Mat 5. 44. Love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray
for them that despightfully use you and persecute you, Precedent. Luke 23. 34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

But as they fall under the other dismal character, our prayers ought to be of
another temper, that God would convert 'em, there we would begin; but if they
proceed as implacable enemies of Christ, we pray that he would defeat their
counsels, insatuate them in all their contrivances, break their powers,
disappoint them in all their expectations; and seeing we pray for no more than
we know Christ will do, that he would overthrow and confound them and all their
mischievous devices.

But the Text enjoins us not only to pray, but to give thanks for all men;
which seems very hard to flesh and blood: We are apt to think we behave our
selves well toward all men, if we can bear their insolences, forbear revenge,
and rest content under their provocations, and think it to be a straining of
the point too far to press us to give thanks for them: But indeed in some cases
we owe more (...) than to our friends, the one will conceal, the other divulge
our failings; and seeing our hearts are so deceitful, and our friends so
partial, let us give thanks to God that we have enemies that will watch against,
and learn from thence to watch over our selves.

We are debtors to the poor and to the rich; the poorest may lend us the
subsidy of their prayers, of their holy examples; they may teach us meekness
under hard treatments of men, patience under the hand of God; submission to
poverty; improvement of trials and afflictions; which are mercies of so great
value, that we cannot expect any obligations equivalent from the richest.

2. But especially we owe our supplications, prayers, intercessions and
thanksgivings, for Kings and all that are in authority under them.

If self were rightly understood, this duty would be the easiest task that ever
was imposed upon us; for in praying for them, we pray for the Nation, and so
for our selves: the prosperity and success of the King, is the prosperity of
the whole Kingdom; and as the Philosopher cursed the man, whoever he was, that
first divided bonum, utile and honestum; that which is profitable, from that
which is just and righteous: So may they be looked upon as the common Plagues of
a Nation, who first divided the interest of the Prince from that of his People;
or first taught the People to set up an interest distinct and separate from
that of their Prince.

(3.) The Reasons which support so weighty a duty are next to be attended to;
and they are two. The first is drawn from our clear duty, the second from our
unquestionable interest; and consider the cause we have to acknowledge the
goodness of God, who has so strongly united both these, that we can never fail
in the former, but we must be false to the latter.

1. The former Reason is drawn from the conscience of the divine Command given
forth by his Apostle, l exhort; under the authority of which Praecept the
highest spirit must bow, the stubbornest bend: This answers all objections,
silences all disputes, satisfies all scruples. This Text is not constitutive of
a new duty, but declarative of an old obligation which from the beginning lay
upon the Conscience; this was not a duty now newly created, but newly
exemplified; he does not now make a new bond, but ties it closer that
Conscience may feel its bonds; when Conscience slumbers it must be awakened;
and when a Notion is much worn off, it must be refresht and touched up again to
the Original.

2. The other Reason is drawn from our own interest and advantage, that we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. Which Reason has
two branches.

1. Our civil interest will lie much in it; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life. It Is but a languishing dying comfort we can take in any thing
we call ours, if we cannot possess it in Peace: Security is the sweetness of
Propriety; whatever be the furniture of our table, the sauce of every morsel is
peace and quietness. We look upon all our good things with a pitiful eye, when
we think they may be ours but for this moment. The Sword of a foreign Enemy,
the Rapine of some petty Tyrant may sweep away what we have in an hour.

2. Our Religious interest is greatly concerned in this duty, that we may lead
a life in all godliness and honesty. Reason then we have to pray, and give
thanks for our Rulers, that we may, and do lead such a life, in outward peace,
with a freedom to worship our God according to his will revealed to us in his
holy word.

From the words thus opened, many observations offer themselves: I must content
my self, and I hope you, with this one clear from the Text, and pertinent to
the present occasion.

Doctrine. A religious and Loyal People can never want just cause to praise,
and give thanks to God for their Kings and Governors.

If they be bad, yet we have reason to pray God would mend them, and to praise
God too, that they are no worse? that if they be not such as are eligible, yet
that they are such as are tolerable. If they be good and gracious, then the
case is plain; to pray he will confirm them; and to give thanks that we who
have neither merit, nor meetness for so great a favor, yet are blessed with it.

If God shall exalt the Nation, we have cause enough to pray, that he would not
cast us down; if he shall lay us low, to bless his name that we are laid no
lower.

If God shall prosper our King with success, we have reason still to fear and
pray, that our turning those successes into wantonness, may not provoke God to
turn his hand against us; if he shall humble us with adverse providence, yet
will there remain matter of thanksgiving that we are not consumed.

We can never be so low but the everlasting arms are underneath us; our enemies
are never so high but the Almighty arm of God is above them. Let the storms
rise and roar, and rage, our God fits above them. There Is matter of praise: if
it be a dead calm, still we have reason to pray, that storms may not surprise
us.

The Psalmist has drawn the circumference of our rejoicing and our fears with
great exactness, Psalm. 2. 11. Rejoice with trembling. Never such cause of
rejoicing, but it suggests matter of trembling; never such cause of fears, but
it affords matter for hope, place for faith, and room for thanksgiving to God,
that we are not sunk in utter despair.

The Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 30. teaches us the due measure of sorrow, To weep as
tho we wept not; and the true bounds of rejoicing too, To rejoice as if we
rejoiced not; The former, because God can (...) ^way those tears from our eyes:
the latter, because he can^allay (...) most pro^use rejoicing, and mingle our
cup of consolation with the waters of bitter affliction; when God exalts us, we
are cautioned not to exalt our selves, but our God; when he abases us he would
have us keep our hearts low, but to lift the eye of our faith on high. And this
will be the true mean under the various dispensations of providence, when God
humbles us to be humbled, when he chastises us to be chastifed, but not sink in
^^pondency; when he lifts us up, then to be lifted in praises.

The Apostle James, chapter 5. 15. instructs us, that Prayer is the proper duty for
a day of affliction; that praise is the suitable duty for prosperity; but yet
s^, that prayer is never out of season in our highest, not praise improper in
our lowest condition.

In the managing this observation, I will endeavor 1. Briefly to confirm it.
2. Then largely to apply it.

I. For Confirmation.
And for that I shall only offer three consideratious.

1. Reason. The wise God has put all things in this lower world in a state of
mixture; none so evil, but has a mixture of good to allay the evil; none so
good, but has a mixture of evil to dilute the goodness of it. God oftentimes
writes bitter things against a person, against a people, but withal sends some
Mercy to sweeten it; at other times he indulges us pleasant morsels, but withal
provides a mixture of crosses, that we may not surseit upon the luscious
Mercies.

And as the good is distinguished from the evil, tho not separated; so the evil
is mingled with the good, but not confused; good is good still, tho it receives
a tincture of evil; and evil is evil still, tho it receives a dash of goodness.
Now as mercy and judgment, sorrow and joy, are as it were blended together into
one mass, so will our praises and prayers have their proper employments in
both. If God sets the good against the evil, Eccles. 7. 14, there is matter for
prayer that God would turn the evil unto good, Genesis 50. 20. and matter for
praise too, that God has promised it shall work for good, Rom 8. 28. And first
let us for the clearing of this point look back into former ages, especially
into the Jewish state.

2 Chronicles. 15. 16, 17. we read that Asa removed his Mother from being Queen,
because she had made an Idol in a Grove. To depose an Idolatress was then it
seems one good step toward a happy Reformation; And Asa cut down her Idol, and
stamp it and burnt it, by the brook Kidron. What rejoicing was there in Judah
that the work of Reformation went on so pleasantly? What cause of thanksgiving
to God, that he had inspired the King with such a zeal for the true worship of
God against Idolatry? But yet 16. 17. The high places were not taken away out
of Israel. There Is matter of lamentation, that the work advanced no further;
and of prayer too, that God would raise such a spirit as might pluck them down
also: Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. The most perfect
heart of the most zealous Prince cannot always go through to a perfect
Reformation. But do we not read, that this good King Asa, chapter 14. v. 5. Took
away out of all the Cities of Judah, the high places and the images. True! out
of Judah, but not out of Israel! Where lay the reason of the Difference? In
Judah he had an haereditary right, had better hold on the spirits of the
people; there was a sweet harmony between the King and the People, there he
might venture farther in Reformation. In Israel he had but an acquired right by
Conquest; the People were averse to a through Reformation, there he must use
caution and prudence: However the Idols were broken down, there is matter of
rejoicing and praise; the high places are not removed, there is matter of sorrow
and prayer.

Sometimes the King may be inclined to reform, and a restli^^ People may
binder; there give thanks to God for a well inclined King, and pray that he
would cure the Peoples bigotry: Sometimes a King may incline to Idolatry, and
the People adhere to the true Religion; give thanks for a fixed people, and
pray for an averse Prince.

Secondly, Let us but look into our own hearts, and there we shall find too
great a mixture; there we shall meet with grace and nature, heaven and earth,
flesh and spirit in continual combat, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. The flesh has its
interest, motions, and actings; the spirit opposes it, it cannot do the evil it
would: the spirit breathes, moves, works toward God; the flesh opposes it, so
that it cannot do the good it would. The Law of the mind commands the serving,
glorifying of God; the Law of the members rebels and wars against it; the law
of the members leads to bondage under sin, the law of the mind resists it. What
reason of strong cries and prayers, that we may be delivered from this body of
death* Romans 7. 24. What cause of thanksgiving, that Christ gives us the
victory, that with our minds we serve the law of God, v. 20.

In a word, we are furnished with matter of thanksgiving that we are on this
side Hell, and yet have mighty reasons for prayer too because we are on this
side Heaven.

Thirdly, Let Us view our case at home, we shall find a mixture ^here of good
and evil, affording us matter of sorrow and joy, and hence of prayer and
praise. God has given our King some good success abroad, let us give thanks for
that; but our victories are purchased with the lives, the blood of many of our
fellow Subjects, there is matter of mourning to cool the joy of our successes;
and still for further prayer, that the issue of this bloody war may be a happy,
just and honorable peace: We have large matter of thanksgiving, that God by
our King has given a check to the Arms of that Monarch who had swallowed up so
many Countries, and threatened the rest; but still cause of servent prayer, that
God would yet use his Majesty as an instrument, in the hand of his wise and
gracious Counsels, to reduce the man of the earth to reason, that he may no
more triumph.

Again, we have abundant reason to give thanks for our King, that under his
auspicious Reign we may be as holy as we will; yet have we reasons for further
prayer, that men may not be as wicked as they will, and as their own naughty
hearts, and the Tempter would prompt them to be.

Such then being the posture of all humane affairs, there is a dark and bright
side of the same cloud; they are checkered with black and white throughout,
that as they administer matter of joy and sorrow, trouble and comfort, and
nothing is sincere and without mixture, so they bespeak of us both prayer and
praise.

In Hell, the wrath of God is poured out without mixture, Rev. 14. 10. without
mixture either of mercy from God, or hope in them. In Heaven, the love of God
is given out without mixture, either of anger in God, or fear in the blessed;
but we in this middle state have our hopes and fears, our tears and rejoycings,
which call for praise in our most depressed, and prayer in our most exalted
condition.

II. Reason. Is drawn from the natural and necessary connection between these
two duties, of Prayer and Thanksgiving: they are twins of the same womb, they
are born, they breathe, they smile or weep, live or die together.

The renewed nature, the new heart is but one, the actings which proceed from
thence are various; the branches are many, they are all one in the root; the
streams various, the spring but one: As the Capillary Arteries are innumerable
in the extreme parts, yet are all one in the heart; as the lines which reach
the circumference are numerous, yet all meet in the center; so are the actings
of grace various and multiform, as they are diversified by various objects, as
drawn out by different occasions, yet they agree, and are uniform in the habit.
Prayer and praise are exerted upon various reasons, but it is the same holy
nature which supplies and furnishes out these holy operations.

Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let
your requests be made known to God.

The same spirit that enables us to pray, assists us also to praise our God;
the answers of Prayer immediately engage the soul to return our humble thanks,
that he has heard the voice of our supplications: Those very praises suggest
matter of prayer again, that he would graciously pardon the defects of our
prayer, and overlook the errors of our praises, and yet still to bless his Name
that notwithstanding these failures or excesses, he has regarded with
acceptance both our prayers and praises.

Would we reserve and adjourn all our thanksgivings for heaven? why, here is
abundant matter to fill up, and furnish out praises on this side the throne! or
do we reserve our Prayers for the extremity of distresses? there is occasion for
them in the height of our triumphs.

The state of glory excludes prayers: because the Spirits of just men made
perfect are put into the actual possession of whatever they could want, or can
possibly desire, without fear of losing it: The state of eternal wrath excludes
prayer too, because there is no hope lest in that bottom of despair to kindle a
spark of desire to meliorate that evil condition: But our present state admits
both hope, and desire, and fear too; now whiles we can hope for promised good,
or have reason to fear impending evil, we have proper occasion for prayer; and
while we can pray, we have just cause of praise, that God is not out of the
reach of our Prayer, nor we out of the reach of his Mercy. Psalm. 66. 19, 20.
Verily God has heard me; he has attended to the voice of my supplication.
Blessed be God, which has not turned away my prayer, (from him) nor his mercy
from me;

Let us once more consult the Apostle; 1 These. 5. 16, 17, 18. Rejoice evermore:
Pray without ceasing. In every thing give thanks. At first view we may imagine
the Apostle puts us upon either impossible or impracticable, or contradictory
services: Rejoice evermore! As if we had no cause of sorrow, nor any thing
further to ask; and yet Pray without ceasing! as if we had no place for, or
cause of thanksgiving: Pray, as if you had nothing; and yet Praise, as if you
possessed all things: And in every thing give thanks. If the case be good,
bless God directly and formally, if evil, yet bless him that it is no worse.

The attributes of God appear to us, and we conceive of them that they really
are various; and accordingly, we engage our souls in a various consideration of
them, and a different demeanor of soul toward them. We conceive of him as
good, and therefore love him; as faithful and true, and therefore believe him,
and in him, trust to him, and depend upon him; as bountiful and rich in mercy
toward us, and therefore return our thanks unto him: And yet these attributes
are but one in God, or rather they are that one God. Thus the graces which a
Believer does act and exercise are distinguished, tho not divided; the soul
loves, fears, and believes, and yet'tis but one soul, one new creature that
puts forth these various operations.

If we bring all this to the present subject of which we treat, and the solemn
occasion on which we meet, it will stand thus. We are here as a people, and I
hope really a people that would recognize the divine favors to our King, to us
all in him; yet prayer must not be excluded from the present service: that God
would never be weary of doing good to him, or to us in him; that God would
finish the work that he has begun, and strengthen the King to finish the work
which he has begun; Thus to bless our God for the ground we get; and as we gain
to pray that we may get more, till this troublesome War shall terminate in a
happy Peace; that so Peace being settled abroad, we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life at home, in all godliness and honesty.

III Reason. The Truth may be confirmed from the (...) and alternations of the
divine providence; which, as it were, delighting to sport it self with humane
affairs, creates those perpetual changes in them, which will employ our praises
as well as our prayers.

What we see in the successions of night and day, what we feel of changes in
our vile and frail bodies. as to health and sickness, that may we expect in the
great political Bodies and the affairs of Empires.

The Psalmist has made ^ Record of it, Psalm. 102. 10. Thou have listed me up,
(there is matter of thanksgiving) and thou have cast me down. (There Is matter of
debasement and prayer.)

That which we are to keep in our eye when God exalts us, is a holy fear, lest
we exalting our selves, God should throw us down; and that which we should keep
upon our hearts when God abases us, is, that we abasing our selves, God may be
entreated to lift us up

A deplorable instance of the impotency of humane nature, to bear any thing
with a due temper and moderation, is that of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 15. He was
marvellously helped until he was strong: But when he was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction So difficult it is to maintain the equipoise, and
not to reel and stagger from one extreme to another: A little air swells a
bubble, and a little more breaks it.

And this David found, Psalm. 30. 6. In my prosperity (...), I shall never be
moved, thou Lord by they favor have made my mountain (...) stand strong.
Wherein we may observe, 1. His confidence, that his mountain should never be
moved, or however not removed,

2. That this confidence seems to be well founded, upon the favor of God,
wherein then lay the evil of his confidence? That he did not duly consider the
instability of all things, but presumed that his state was unmovable. 3. That
God, to humble his confidence, hides his face, and then his confidence is
shaken.

But thus do the affairs of Kingdoms and Commonwealths run in a circle;
prosperity awakens pride, pride provokes God to forsake us, and a people
forsaken are upon the brink of destruction: Let therefore him that stands take
heed lest he fall; and let him that falls, repent and pray that God would raise
him up.

It was a deep sense of the perpetual rotations of Providence that moved that
great Saxon King, whenever God smiled upon his Arms with Victory, to prepare
for adverse events; and whenever he lost the day, to encourage and strengthen
himself with the hopes of better success. Si modo victor erat, ad crastina
bella timebat:
Si modo victus erat, ad crastina bella parabat.
All this leads to our Duty: God has favored us with good success this
Campaign, praise his Name, but persume not; he can send us a rebuke in a
moment: If so, he not dejected, but pray, for he has in infinite wisdom
attempered all affairs, that prayer and praise shall have their turns, as
prosperity and adversity walk their rounds; till prayer be swallowed up of
eternal praises to them that fear the Lord, and the presumptuous hopes of
impenitent sinners be drowned in eternal despair.

Having now briefly confirmed the truth as was promised, I must more largely
improve it, in

II. The Application.
We have heard, that a Religious People can never want just reasons to pray to,
and praise God for Kings and all that are in Authority. Hearken then to the
Apostles Exhortation: He exhorts, and it is in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ
that he does so; he exhorts, that this be done first of all, that it may have a
precedence of all our little private interests; and that we postpone not so
important a duty to the adjusting of lesser matters.

Would we give our selves leave and leisure to think, what a sad generation of
Emperors they were, for whom the Apostle enjoins the Primitive Christians to
pray and give thanks; it would shame our consciences and make us blush, that
they could pray better, and praise God more, for a Tiberius, a Claudius, a
Caligula, a Nero, than we for a Prince so tender of his Subjects, so far from
the sanguinary spirit of persecution, which filled all the veins, and the whole
mass of blood of those Plagues of the World, those Monsters of Men, the Roman
Emperors; such, as it is a wonder the earth could bear, or the patience of God
endure such Wretches to tyrannize over so vast numbers of rational creatures,
as the Empire did contain: I can look upon them under no other notion, than the
Ministers of divine wrath to plague a generation of men, who had not only shut,
but put out their eyes, that neither natural nor gospel light might shine into
them; for such as these, better men had been much too good; and much worse, if
possible, not too bad to avenge the affronted Deity upon their Immoralities.
But yet as to the Christians, who were converted out of them, and dwelt among
them, and were a part of them, they were not so bad, but faith could pick up
something for which to bless God; and the worse they were, the more need still
to ply the throne with humble prayer either to make them better, or to keep
them from being worse.

I would be understood to speak this of those that were Heathens. For if any in
after times should be found professing the Christian Religion, and wearing the
Heathen, or perhaps the Atheist under that disguise; if when a flattering
juncture should tempt him, he should throw off the viz^rd, and appear an
Apostate, a (...), the greatest indication of the unpardonable sin; the Apostle
would not, durst not say, that they should pray for such a one, 1 Job. 5. 16.

And we have good assurance, that a Nazianzene would not pray for a I^lian,
unless it were to confound him.

Tertullian, who lived under a set of Emperors of a fairer character, has given
us a Glass in which we may see the true face, and natural complexion of the
Christian Religion in his days, as to their behavior toward their Emperors.

Illuc suspicientes Christiani, manibus expansis, quia innocui; undato capite,
quia non erubescimus; sine Monitore, quia de pectore; Oramus proomnibus
Imperatoribus, Vitam illis prolixam, Imperium securum, Domum tutam, Exercitus
fortes, Senatum fidelem, Populum probum, Orbem quietum, and quaecunque hominis
and Caesaris vota sunt.

We Christians (says he) lifting up our eyes to Heaven, with our hands stretched
out, to show that we are innocent; with our heads uncovered, to show we are not
ashamed; and without a Moniror because we pray from our very heart, do beseech
God for all Emperors, that he would grant them a long life, a secure
government, a safe house, valiant armies, a faithful Senate, a reformed people,
a quiet world, and whatever else either as men, or Emperors they can pray for
themselves.

Compare now the matter of right, whom the Apostle commands the Primitive
Christians to pray for; and the matter of fact, whom the Primitive Christians
did pray for, and we shall be convinced, that the best will need our Prayers,
and the worst may challenge our Thanksgivings to God, that he has kept his poor
Church alive, and in being under them. As the skill of the Pilot is more
magnified, that he steers the Vessel steady in a storm so is the power, wisdom,
and faithfulness of Christ more glorious, that he could secure his Church under
such barbarous Tyrants.

How utterly inexcusable then are we, who being posited under more favorable
circumstances, instead of praising God for gracious Princes, are murmuring at
them upon any little trip, or wry step that they make or take, and perhaps are
first creating causes to murmur at, and then justifying our murmurings by those
imaginary causes; who instead of praising God for them, are cursing them, and
that not in the Bedchamber, but the open streets; being uneasy under their
Scepters, and rendering them uneasy upon the Throne; and instead of strengthening
their hands against the common enemy, are weakening them, either to oppose
their Enemies, or protect their Loyal Subjects.

I would willingly hope, that there are not many of this bran and leaven
amongst us, considerable either for numbers, for power, or interest; especially
since such vast throngs of them have of late been converted; converted I say,
to their own secular interest, perhaps to the Kings; tho whether really
converted to God, their own inconsistent conversations give us some cause to
doubt. I speak of those Secular and State-converts, of whom his Majesty's
Victories in Ireland converted thousands, his late Successes in Flanders ten
thousands; and Non-jurors are converted to Jurors; tho happier it had been
(...) them, if of S^earers, they had been Non-swearers, and learned to fear an
O^th. Our mischief then is, that all these State Proselytes upon the least
temptation will become Apostates.

That which will employ the remainder of my time must be to enqu^e

1. What matter of prayer Providence has afforded us to offer (...) to God for
the King, and all that are in Authority?

2. What reasons we have to return thanks to God for our King, and those that
are in Authority?

3. What ought to be the frame and temper of our hearts, while (...) are
praising God for them.

In all which I will endeavor to evidence, that when we are mest humble in our
Prayers, yet still we may find cause of Thanks(...) when we are raised and
enlarged in our Praises, yet we (...) not want cause to lie low at the
footstool, and look up to the throne in most earnest supplications upon their
account.

Let us then narrowly enquire what matter of Prayer Providence has afforded us,
to offer up for our King, and all that are in Authority.

1. The first thing that recommends itself to us, is, that God will, yet more
abundantly, pour upon our King the spirit of government, that he may so govern
the people, whom God, and their own choice, have committed to his charge; that
he may give his account with joy. 2 Chronicles. 1. 7. God gave Solomon his Option,
Ask what I shall give thee! A large Charter! And the same God that gave him his
choice, gave him wisdom to choose, Thus he answers, v. 10. Give me now wisdom
and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can
judge this thy people which is so great? In which choice he discovered, that he
was already possessed of much of that wisdom that he asked of God: For 1. It was
a wise consideration, that he looked upon the people to be the Lords people;
more the Lords than his. He durst not therefore arrogate any such propriety in
them, or such dominion over them, as might prejudice Gods title to them, or
disseize God of his Sovereignty over them. It is thy People. 2. It was a wise
thought, that a great people are better governed by wisdom and prudence than
force: A principle, which could he have insused into the thick skull of
Rehoboam, he had saved him the ten Tribes, which his own rash folly rent from
him. 3. He was wise, that he understood that it must be the wisdom that comes
from above, that is pure, and of an aetherial temper, like the fire that came
down upon the Altar, that would prove the true wisdom to rule Gods people: when
all conclusions have been tried, all experiments made, yet it will be found
that Piety is the best Policy.

Now this Prayer of Solomon was so acceptable to God, that he gives him both
that he asked, and that he asked not, v. 11. Because this was in thy heart; and
thou have not asked riches, wealth, or honor, nor the lives of thine enemies,
neither yet have asked long life, but have asked knowledge for thy self, that
thou may judge my people over whom I have made the King; wisdom and
knowledge is granted thee, and I will give thee riches, wealth, and honor, etc.

1. Let us therefore earnestly pray, that God would grant to our King, and in
their proportion to all his Ministers, a large measure of the Fear of the Lord,
that it may be the foundation of all his Counsels, all his Administrations, all
his Undertakings.

David and Solomon both agreed in this maxim, Psalm. 111. 10. Prove. 9. 10. That
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: And tho David in some few
instances had departed from his own avowed Rule, yet when he came to die, and
look death in the face, and to (...) his Conscience for the errors of his
reign, he (...) in the fear of (...). And (...) Lord Jesus Christ himself, to
who ^ all power was given in h^^ven and earth, Mat. 28. under whose (...) the
father has put all things: and given him to be head over all things ^ the
Church. Yet was he to be qualified for the executing of that great trust, with
the spirit of wisdom, and with a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord,
Isa. 11. 2, 3.

And not only is this qualification necessary for our King, but for all that
are in Authori^y: This was the reason of that excellent advice given by Jethro
to Moses, Exodus 18. 21. Provide out of all the people able men; such as fear
God, men of truth, hating covetousness.

2. Let us further pray that God would endue our King and his Ministers, with
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge, that they may not judge by the sight of their eyes nor
reprove by the hearing of the ears: which, as it was promised and given to our
blessed Savior, Isa. 11. 2. and that without measure, Joh. 3. 34. So has he
the residue of the Spirit to dispense to all those whom he has placed in
public stations, that they may answer the ends of government: Then may we
prognosticate and promise to our selves happy days, and our selves to be a
happy people; when all that are in Authority, shall not hearken to the
insinuations of Sycophants, nor lend an ^ar to false Accusers, nor listen to
the whispers of offered Bribes to pervert ju^gment, and to blind their eyes,
but shall administer impartial justice; consider the cause, and not respect
persons; when Justice shall run down like a stream, and Righteousness like a
mighty flood; when the oppressed shall berelieved, the Orphan and the
fatherless vindicated.

Nor do we want matter of Thanksgiving upon this account; when we seriously
consider how the Courts of Judicature are filled with persons of great Learning
and Knowledge in the Laws of the Land, and above all with men of great
Integrity in the administration; such as fear not the faces of the mighty, such
as no (...) can corrupt; and when we have seen of late a notable example amade
of one, that without any temptation, but of his covetous heart; dared to
receive a Bribe, under the color of a Gratuity, to betray his trust, and
pervert justice and judgment in the Fountain.

2. It will be proper matter for our Prayers too, that God would single out and
bestow upon our King, wise and (...) Counselors, such as stood before Solomon;
not the green heads, and unexperienced rash young men, that soothed up Rehoboam
to his own ruin.

And as we have matter for Prayer, so for Thanksgiving too, that God has
blessed the King with wise Senators, who considering the present necessities
under which his Majesty now is, ha^^ supported him with great indeed, bat
absolutely necessary Supplies: They judged in their great wisdoms, that it was
better to breathe a vein, than to cut off the head; to prune the tree, and lop
off some useful b^anches, than to have it cut up by the roots: That it is better
we should complain once than always. It was wisely considered, that it was more
eligible at any rates to keep the War at a distance in foreign parts, than by
unseasonable sparing to invite it to our own doors, nay into our own bowels.
The little finger of a foreign Enemy invading, had been heavier than the loins
of our Representatives.

And let us heartily and cheerfully praise our God, that our cost has not been
in vain; nor let us ever grudge, that something of the lading is thrown
overboard to save the Vessel, in which all our most precious concerns civil
and religious are embarked.

3. Let us again send up our most earnest supplications, that God would
preserve the life of his Majesty: It was (...) somewhat a rude Remonstrance
that the Army made to David, 2 Samuel 18. 3. Thou shall not go forth to battle;
and yet there was love at the bottom, loyalty and fidelity in the (...), and
the reason of it. Thou art worth ten thousand of us. It (...) David preferred
loyal rudeness to (...) treach^ry. The Life of our King is an invaluable mercy;
but yet if after the (...) of Lords and Commo^s, (...) the many from all parts
of three (...) humoly beseeching him to take care of his royal person, the King
his seen cause, by an unparallelled example of courage, to inspire his (...)
wit ^^n extraordinary spirit of (...) what reason have we to (...) He ven to
wrestle with the (...) for the preservation of the life (...) generously
exposed ab^oad for our security at home; when Joshua was engaged against Amalek
in the field, Moses with Aaron and Hur were striving with God in the Mount;
well knowing the ready way to prevail over the enemy in battle, is first to
prevail with God in prayer.

Let us therefore repeat our prayers; That God would compass him him with his
favor as with a shield, Psalm. 5. 12. That God would bind up his soul in the
bundle of life with the Lord his God, but the souls of his enemies he would
sling out, as from the middle of a sling, 1 Samuel 25. 29.

And in this particular how mercifully has God prevented our prayers? Before we
called God has answered us; and while we were yet speaking God did hear, Isa.
65. 24.

Let us therefore convert this great mercy into Thanksgiving, and that
Thanksgiving into Prayer, that both may run in a perpetual circle which knows
no beginning, and knows no end.

4. We have great cause to pray, that God would bless our King with a loyal,
quiet people, disposed to obedience. The same power that stills the noise of
the Sea, must also still the tumult of the People, Psalm. 85. 7. And the
Psalmist, who understood this secret of government with an admiring heart,
blessed God, Psalm. 144. 1, 2. not only that he had taught his hands to war and
his fingers to fight, but that he subdued his People under him. The waters
would be always smooth, if the unruly winds did not ruffle them into billows:
And the multitude love their ease so well, that they would enjoy the sweets of
peace with contentment, did not some politic Achitophels ferment the humor,
and then influence them to disorders; first throw in a spark of discontent, and
then blow it up into flames of Mutinies and Rebellions. An evidence that
government is of God, who composes the minds of so many millions to a calm
submission and willing obedience to one man.

Let it be here remembered, that God has given our King a people, who tho they
may sometimes be practiced upon to run into uproars, yet Loyalty is so inlaid
in their tempers, and annealed to their souls, that the secret enemies of our
King and Peace could never yet make their earnings out of them: They are like
the West Wind, that for a while may be troublesome, but commonly goes to bed at
night; mutable indeed like the Moon, yet as they know the time of rising, yet
they know their going down. Those commotions, which in some popular States
would overturn, have amongst us hardly shaken the Government; and what has been
elsewhere an Earthquake, we have scarcely felt so much as a Trembling.

Nay, we have great cause to join our Thanksgiving with our Prayer, that he has
converted our danger into our security; that he has made the people not the
terror of the governmen^, but of its enemies: And what was once the
preservation of Christ, is now of the King; some ill men have an ill and
envious eye upon the Throne, but they fear the people.

5. Let us continue our Prayers, that the Reign of his Majesty may not be
famous to after ages by any notable judgment; that no devouring fires,
desolating pestilence, bloody mass^cres, ruining earthquakes, or inundation,
may signalize his government to posterity.

It was a Speech becoming the Monster Caligula, who heavily complained of the
unhappiness of his Reign, that it was not marked with any notable calamities;
as if a greater Plague could have befallen the Empire than himself.

We have had some of our late Reigns that have fallen under another character;
the Massacre in Ireland, the Civil Wars in England, the dreadful Fire of
London, and the horrid Plague that ushered it, will secure them against an
inglorious Record in our Chronicles for ever.

But let us bless that merciful Providence, that has hitherto preserved the
present government from being known in History by such tokens of divine wrath
and vengeance; and again pray, that a firm peace, sanctified plenty, prosperous
trade, and universal prosperity, may be the glory of it; and that the black
brand of universal debauchery, which stigmatized the former age, may be worn
out in this, by a blessed Reformation.

6. Let us associate our Prayers, that the God of Peace, who makes men to be of
one mind in one house, would continue, and increase that good understanding
that has hitherto been between the King and his People; and let not evil men be
able to foment jealousies between them, to weaken our hands at home, that our
enemies may have the easier work to destroy us abroad:

There are a sort of wretched tools, that are always whispering in the ears of
Princes, that the Peoples Privileges and Franchises will undermine and blow up
the Royal Prerogative; and then fly-blowing the Peoples Heads, that Prerogative
will eat up the Peoples Liberties and Properties. Now this being a tender
point, wherein each is infinitely jealous, produces a continual parrying, and
fencing, and counterworking between them: for where the Sea is eating and
working into the shore, the maritime People will be raising Mounds and Piles
not only to secure themselves that they lose no more, but by way of Reprisal,
encroaching upon the Main for what they have lost.

But let all that wish well to the King and his People pray, and add all just
endeavors to their Prayers, that no perverse spirit may mix it self with their
respective interests, no jealousies creep into their counsels, but that they
may mutually conspire for the public welfare.

I have read of the meeting of two poor men, the one blind, the other lame; the
blind man had good limbs, the lame had good eyes. It was mutually agreed that
the blind man should carry the lame upon his shoulders; and thus the lame man
was eyes to the blind, the blind was limbs to the lame. I Will venture to apply
it: The people have strength, but they want conduct; our governors have
conduct, but they want the peoples strength: Be it agreed, that we lend the
King all our power, and that he govern us with his wisdom and skill.

Acceptis oculis, praebuit Ille pedes. Surely we have great reason to bless our
God upon this head; that God has graciously preserved a mutual confidence
between the King and his people; that they who have sought occasions for our
disturbance upon this subject, have found none; that wicked men have been
unsuccessful in their insinuations; that the tares they have sown have yielded
'em no harvest.

7. Let us yet pray and not faint, and pour out our souls in supplications to
the Almighty, the Lord of Hosts, the God of Battle, that his Majesty's forces
by Sea and Land may be crowned with glorious success; that he may at length
(...) to Reason that mighty Nimrod, who has taught us what we may expect from
his prevailing Arms, by the treatment he has given to his own too Loyal
Subjects. That Monarch is of the nat^^e of fluid bodies; quae difficulter suis,
facile alienis termi^is contine^tur: If then his own temper will not restrain
him, let God send out a powerful hand that can.

Let us therefore pray, that the end of this bloody and expensive War may be an
honorable and just Peace; in which the Interest of the Allies may be secured,
the Interest of our own Nation in Trade recovered, the Dominion of the seas
vindicated: but God deliver us from a Peace patcht up of plausible expedients;
palliated with fair pretenses, to cover the enemies secret purposes to violate
it, when he has filled his empty Coffers; when he has recruited his exhausted
strength by taking breath, to build his Alliances upon the ruins of the
dissolved Confederacy; which like an old Ulcer ill healed, and skinned over,
waits only a flattering juncture to break out again, with more threatening
symptoms; But let our Prayer and Peace be that of Hezekiah, Isa. 39. 8. God is
the word of the Lord, for he said, there shall be peace and truth in my days.
Nor do we want matter of thanksgiving for the successful and hopeful issue of
this Summers Campaign: Wherein the late boasted invincible Prince is proved to
be conquerable; and as we hope, so we pray, that this may be but an earnest of
what God will further do for a Repenting, Reforming, Praying and Thankful
People.

8. Lastly, Let us keep up our Prayers in vigor, that God will make our King a
glorious instrument in the hand of his gracious power to suppress that daring
wickedness, that impudent profaneness, which the Enemy sowed, watered, and gave
increase to, in the late Reigns of unhappy memory: That, at least, iniquity may
stop its mouth, and hide its deformed face, that deeds of darkness may not
defy the Sun; that if men will sin, they may however creep into those corners,
whither they had once driven much of Religion.

We must confess and lament that we have sins enough in the Armies to rout them
without an Enemy; Sins enough in the Fleets to sink them without a Tempest, and
sins enough on shore to make us like to Sodom and Gomorrha; but the more need we
have to beseech heaven that he would not deal with us after our sins, nor
reward us according to our iniquities: And that he would put upon our King the
Honor of the famous Hercules, who cleansed the Augaean Stables, with turning
the stream of the River through it; a labor justly numbered amongst the twelve.

We look upon his Majesty as bearing a double Sword, that of War, and that of
Justice; we pray that he may bear neither in vain: We have seen how wisely and
strongly he has wielded the former; we now pray for a Peace, that he may have a
Theater whereon to wield the other: And when God shall command him to sheath
that of War, he will invite him to draw the other: To defend the innocent, to
plead the cause of the Orphan and Widow; and to punish those wretches whose
effrontery has dared both the Sword of God and the King.

We are ready to wonder what temptations these vile ones can pretend to their
abominations: The cheap swearer sells his soul for nothing: The blasphemer
makes bold to defile the sacred name of God with his unhaliowed lips; and what
wrong has his Creator done him? The profuse drunkard se^ls his health for a
pleasure that perishes in the using.

And here we would gladly find more matter of thanksgiving, for what our King,
and those in authority under him, have done to vindicate the name of God
against these Agressors: We thankfully own that some Remedies have been
prescribed and applied, but slight medicines do but i^ritate the disease: some
good Laws we have, and some Proclamations for their execution, against the
Profanation of the Lords day, against Cursing and Swearing; but seeing
execution is the life of the Law, without which the Law is but a dead Letter;
and that there are so few men of Courage, Zealous for the glory of God, and the
repute of our holy Religion, to give life to those Laws by an impartial
execution; there is work still for earnest Prayer, that God would take the work
into his own hand, and effect that by the Sword of his Mouth, which the Mouth
of the Sword cannot, or they that manage it will not.

Forget we not however to return our humble thanks to God, who has stirred up
some from the Press and Pulpit to bear their testimony against the Iniquity of
the day; and for those zealous Magistrates, especially in the City of London,
who have dared to punish, where any have dared to offend, and have been zealous
for the honor of God, against all the discouragements they have encountered in
the way of their Duty.

(2.) Proceed we now to our Second Inquiry; what proper matter for thanksgiving
to God we can find on the behalf of the King, and those that are in authority.

1. And first let us begin our thanks to God, that he has given us such a
Prince to govern us: A mercy for which we could neither pretend merit, nor
meetness: A Prince that can show that Title in reality, which some others had
only in formality, our own deliberate consent and free choice. I know,
Succession in the right line has made a mighty noise amongst us; but surely
ra^ional creatures have their reason allotted them to know, and choose what is
best for themselves, or let them quit their pretended superiority above the
brutes. And if there be any such thing, the Election of the People gives the
clearest Jus Divinum, both to the kind or form of government, and the person
that must support and administer it.

Deuteronomy. 17. 15 That shall in any wise set him over thee whom the Lord thy God
shall choose. Where we cannot but observe, 1. The act of the People. Setting a
King over them. And this 2. In pursuance of the act of God, choosing or pointing
out the person, whom the People ought to set up.

Now this manifestation of Gods choice, in either is a way extraordinary, and
thus he pointed to David, as the person whom in due season the People were to
set over themselves. For tho God had designed the person, and anointed him by
Samuel, in token of that Designation, yet the Right of the People was left
entire unto them. 2 Samuel 2. 4. The men of Judah came, and there they anointed
David King over the house of Judah, Which Title as David owned, so he asse^ts,
pleads, and adheres to it in his controversy with the house of Saul, v. 7. The
house of Judah have anointed me King over them. And there is no doubt but if a
People wanted a King, they would thankfully own the condesention of God, that
he would direct them to a fit person whom they might advance to the Throne.

But in ordinary cases, when we cannot expect an immediate Revelation to
de^ermine the point, we must look upon the person to be of the divine
Designation, whom, all circumstances considered, God has qualified for
government in general, and adapted to the genius, and temper of the Nation in
particular, over whom he is to reign: Now what could he more articulately the
voice of God in our case than this: He was a Prince and Protestant born, such a
one the Nation gr^aned for; trained up to War from his youth; such a one we
wanted, to revive the Military Courage of the Nation, almost choked with
luxury and riot, through the effeminacy of the two last reigns; one whose
Interest led him to espouse the betrayed Cause and Interest of the Land,
against a haughty Prince, who had swallowed up a considerable part of Europe,
and daily gaped to devour the rest: Now it being clear that we wanted a Prince,
and as clear that we wanted such a Prince, and still as clear that God offered
us such a one as we wanted, what could the Nation do in their general
Convention, but set up such a one as the Lord did choose.

Let us therefore return our thanks to our God, who graciously offered; who
disposed the hearts of the people unanimously to accept the offer of God, and
then so powerfully inclined the Princes heart to accept our offer; tho he
foresaw the Crown of England was alternately flowred with Lillies and Crosses;
and he that would wear our Crown of Gold, must also wear one of Thorns.

But as we have cause of Praise, so have we of Prayer too. In the grand Charter
of Israel to set a King over them, there are some special clauses to which both
King and People will do well to attend.

1. That the person whom they should set over them, be one of their Brethren,
v. 15. Thou may not set a stranger over thee. To this Proviso our Convention
had a religious respect; judging him that is of a strange Religion, that has
espoused a foreign int^rest, and whose heart is an Alien to the good and
prosperity of the People, and who had introduced a foreign power, to be really
a stranger, tho locally born within the King^om; and him that shall own the
Cause of our Religion, the true Interest of the People, to be a Denizon, tho he
had been born in the remotest parts of the earth.

2. We have here a Law prescribed to the King himself, v. 18. That when he sits
upon the throne of the kingdom, he (shall write him a Copy of this Law in a
Book; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God; to keep all the words of this
Law -- that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren He must still
remember, that as the people have lifted him up above them, yet he is under God
still.

Regum timendorum in proprios Greges,
Reg^s in ipsos Imperium est Iovis.
This Law of the Lord in which the King is commanded to read, and walk, afford,
us a Distinction which some men tinctured with an arbitrary spirit, either will
not understand, or would confound. 1. There is the Law of all Kings. 2. The way
of some Kings.

1. There is the Law of all Kings; o^ that Law which the King of Kings has
prescribed subor^i^ate Kings to govern themselves, and their people by: That
they trust in God, and not to an arm of flesh; that they make the Word of God
their Rule; that their hearts be not lifted up above their brethren. And unto
this divine Law we pray that our King, that all Kings, and all that are in
Authority may give deference.

2. There is the way of some Kings; not that in which they ought to walk, but
which some of them, too many, are persuaded to tread, 1 S^m. 8. 11, This will
be the manner of your King, etc. Not what righteously he ought to be, but what
eventually may be.

Blessed therefore be our God, that we have known Laws, that we know what we
may ex^ect from our King; that he knows what he may expect from us, that there
may be a mutual confidence between us; that the King bre^k not in upon our
Properties, that we (...) not in upon his (...); that the Laws of the Land are
to determine and (...) all matters between us; that the King may rule, and we
obey, in the Fear of the Lord; and God, even our God, shall give us his
b^^ssing.

2. (...) our most enlarged Praises be offered unto God on the (...) that in
the mid^t of those many dangers to (...) he has ^een exposed, yet the Divine
Providence has (...) over his (...). Ballets are imp^^tial things; the Sword
(...) one as well as another; the C^^non is no Respecter of (...) and ^et, when
many have fallen on his right hand, many on the left, the fatal stroke has no^
come nigh him.

W^ cannot forget what a wound God gave us this last year, in the person of o^r
most excellent, most gracious Queen: none can touch that tender point but o^r
wounds bleed afresh. Tears may be wiped from our eyes, but the Fountain flows
grief to this day; we cannot reflect upon that dreadful stroke which astonished
three Kingdoms, but our hearts tremble at the thought, that if the blow had
been repeated in the person of his Majesty, and our wound opened before it was
well healed, we must have bled to death.

Bless we God therefore, that Providence in preserving our King, has not
preserved only three Kingdoms, but almost all Europe. And let us mingle our
Prayers with our Thanksgivings, that the same watchful and faithful eye of
Providence would superintend his person still, that Praises may succeed
Prayers, and Prayers follow Praises in an uninterrupted succession, which that
the one may be successful, and the other acceptable, let us be advised that we
mix not our sins with either.

3. We have special matter of Thanksgiving administered to us, that God has
attended the Arms of the Confederates with unexpected, sure with undeserved
successes, this Summer. This i^ the duty of the Text, and of the Day; which we
have the more reason to ad^ire, and recognize, in that the word and and works
of God have had such lean success upon our hearts, and lives at home: we may
well wonder that the Kings Sword should cut so deep in the field, when the
Sword of God does so little execution upon our lusts; would we be persuaded to
lay down our Arms and submit to God, how soon would our enemies weapons drop
out of their hands, and they be found prostra^e at our feet.

Upon what confidence is it, that we who so desperately fight against God,
should hope to prevail over our enemies. Are we so vain as to think our selves
fit m^tches for Heaven and Earth? It had been our wisdom, when grappling with
so potent an enemy, to have made our Peace with the Almighty! Do we provoke the
Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he? Let us therefore before we enter
upon further acts of hostility, hearken to the Advice of our Savior, Luke 14.
3^. to deliberate and cons^lt, whether we are able with our ten thousands of
sins, to meet him, who can meet us with twenty thousands of judgments; and if
not, to send Emb^ss^d^rs of Peace, or rather to close with those overtures,
which he by his own Ambassadors of Peace has offered unto us.

But let us join our Supplications to our Thanksgivings, that the grace of God
may turn us from our iniquities, that God may turn from his just displeasure,
and that we repenting of the evil of sin, he may also of the evil of
punishment, which he has threatened, and we have deserved.

4. We have yet plenteous matter to fill up and furnish our Thanksgivings, that
we could sit at home, every man under his own vine and fig tree, eating the
good of the Land, when our Lord the King, with his Nobles and Commanders were
in Tents. I am afraid, we have not du^y weighed the Mercy, that our Native
Country has not been made ^he (...) of War, which tho it has been supported
with the Nations Purse, (...) not at the cost of our Blood. God and the King
have kept the War from our doors. The cruel enemy does not Lord (...) our
houses. We live out of the noise of the Cannon, (...) sound of the Trumpet, the
groans of the D^ing. Our Cities are not first plundered, and then fired. The
enemy has not reaped what we sowed. Our Virgins are not torn from under the
Wings of their tender Parents; our Wives from the Arms of their beloved
Husbands. How little impression has this made upon our hearts, if a Mercy of so
great imp^^^^nce escapes our most serious Consideration, our highest
Thanksgiving.

I have observed, when the issues of affairs upon the Wheel were dubious, how
impatient we were, how fretful that we could no sooner hear the Events of
Sieges, Battles; when had we had understood our selves, we had more reason to
admire the disposal of wise Providence, that these matters were transacted at
such a distance, that we could be informed no sooner. Had this War been acted
upon the bloody Theater of our Native Country, our own eyes would have been the
Expresses to tell of the burning of Towns, our ears the Intelligencers, that
would soon have brought the tidings, that our Country was laid waste and
desolate.

And now let fervent Prayers accompany our Praises, that our base ingratitude,
our sordid murmurings, may not bring this War over Seas, to avenge the quarrel
of provoked goodness upon us; we who have no more sympathized with our Brethren
and fellow Subjects, that have hazarded or sacrificed their Lives to keep Fire
and Sword at a distance from us, may justly be taught at dearer rate, to prize
that Mercy, when God shall his for Armies of enemies to invade the Land of our
Nativity.

5. Proceed we to yet further cause of Thanksgiving to God, that has made our
King his Servant in delivering us from those Twin-plagues of P^pery and
Slavery, and therefore do we offer to him the Twin-duties of Prayer and Praise.

May we never imitate the Israelites who cried importunately for Mercies one
day, which they scornfully threw away the next. We cannot but remember, sure I
am God remembers, how we sighed, and groaned under the apprehensions of Papal
Tyranny; how we fasted, how we prayed, that God would prevent what we feared,
divert what threatened us, and remove what we felt, with prodigal vows what we
would be, what we would do, what we would return, if God would deliver, and
save us that one time.

As Israel was in a wretched frame to praise God for Manna, when they were
murmuring, and longing again for the Fleshpots of Egypt; in such a sorry case
(...) we to bless God for our Deliverances, when we are (...) upon our old
Bondage, and have forgot the evils we were f^eed from, the ends we were
delivered for, and the present freedom we are delivered unto.

^

6. We have infinite matter of Thanksgiving to God* but I will refresh your
Memories with one more. Let our Souls and all that it within us bless his Name,
that under his Majesty's benign and tender government we may be as holy as we
will, we may pray in our Fa^ilies, worship our God in our Congregations, reform
our own persons, and none dist^rbs us, none m^kes us afraid. Who hinders our
Religi^us observation of the Lords day? Who persecutes us for acting, walking,
worshipping according to our Consciences, provided our Consciences be
instructed, and guided by the word of God.

The King has broken the rod of the oppresso^; it lies no longer upon the lot
of the righteous, as a pressing temptation to put forth their hand to (...) The
fury of the violent man is restrai^ed; the prey pluck^ (...) of the Teeth of
the Lion; in ^hort, the snare is broken, and we are delivered.

But yet we have cause to pray, that Men may not be as wicked as they will;
that the swinish D^unkard, the vain Swearer, the impudent Blasphemer, the
Sabbath breaker and filthy Adulterer may be restrained and ashamed; and that at
least it may be as Criminal to be Atheistic^l and Irreligious, as it has
sometimes been rep^ted to serve and worship God the Father, through the Son, by
the Spirit.

I have now dispatched my two first enquiries: It remains,

(3.) That we enquire, What ought to be the frame of our hearts whilst we are
making supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks for Kings
and all that are in authority? For satisfaction in this point, I must only
leave these few Directions, and then Conclude.

Direction 1. Conscienciously beware that we pull ^ot down, by prof^ning the
Lords day, all that we build up by a Thanksgiving day; we have cause to fear,
lest we provoke God more than we praise him: Praise him in words, and dishono^r
him in our wor^s. As God expostulated with his People when they were Fasting,
Isa. 58. 5. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? May he not plead with us; Is
this such a Thanksgiving-day as I have chosen? Let us fear lest God make us
keep a day of Fasting for our day of Thanksgiving: Profaning Gods day is an odd
way of praising him. I will readily grant,

1. That Thanksgiving is a duty proper to the Lords day. Nor can we more
suitably, and seasonably fill up that holy day, than with a thankful
Commemoration of the triumphant Resurre^^ion of our Lord Jesus Christ; and let
us throw in too, all the particular Victories, which our Redeemer has won ove^
the Kingdom of Satan, and Antichrist.

2. I readily grant, that holy Joy is an individual Companion of holy Praise,
and well suited to that holy day.

3. Nor can it be denied, that some sort of rejoicing, or outward signs,
expressions, and testimonies of the inward Joy in God, and Praise unto God, are
agreeable to that day, and the duties of it; such are Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, ^inging with grace in our hearts unto the Lord, Gal. 3. 16.

4. And there are other lawful expressions of our joy and rejoicing, which the
usage and custom of several Nations have found out, and applied to this end;
such as may be Illuminations, Bone fires, Ringing of Bells, Fireworks, the
disloding of Guns, and whatever other innocent expressions of joy may be in
practice.

5. But yet great care, caution and conscience, ought to be app^i^d in the
u^ing of these arbitrary expressions of our joy; as whether they be not (...)
with, and destructive of the solemn worship of the Lords day: If they shall
divert us from holy meditation upon that holy word, which we have he^rd upon
that holy day; if they shall interfere with that worship we owe to God in our
Families, and in our more secret retiren^ents.

6. There are some expressions of Rejoicing which upon any other day be sinful,
or become so, as they are ordinarily practiced; wherein the lusts of men are
apparently gratified excited, and inflamed; and to which no Rules of Moderation
were ever yet effectually prescribed.

7. And there are some which seem to be the contrivance of the Devil to advance
his Kingdom and Interest; such as drinking of Healths: in which tho some
critical Divines can divide the sin, from the things in the notion and
speculation; yet as the custom has obtained upon ti^es of profuse indulgence to
rejoicing we see that in fact, God is dishonored, the creatures are shamefully
abused, the souls of men are brutified.

Let therefore all that fear God be cautious; our Bonefires may kindle such a
fie^ce fire of wrath, that all our tears cannot quench it; and whilst we are
ri^ging our Bells so unseasonably, God can make us ting 'em backwards. Retire
we therefore to our Families, and there bless and praise God for his great
mercies, and let us not be partakers of other men's sins, lest incensed Justice
turn our thanksgivings into mournings, and we prepare work for days of
Humiliation by our carnal, vain, and unsanctified Rejoicing.

2. Direction. Let us well understand, and keep fixed in our eye, the true
reasons of our thanksgivings to God on the behalf of our Kings, and all that
are in Authority; and there are two great ones mentioned.

1. That we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, (...). The former word denotes
a Mind disposed to peace, composedness, and rest; for all the world will be
stormy without us, if we be not of a calm temper within. The other denotes, a
posture and state of things secure from disturbances abroad: Bless we therefore
our God that in any degree we are, and pray that we still more may be,
Delivered out of the hands of our enemies, that we may serve him without fear
all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 74. The less cause we have slavishly to fear
men, the more reason we have religiously to fear our God.

2. That this quiet and peaceable life may be spent in all go^liness and
honesty. The end of a just War is an honorable Peace; the end of that Peace is
Godliness. Shall we make a war with heaven, because God has indulged us a Peace
on earth? Are we therefore worse to our God, because he is better to us? Do we
thus requi^e the Lord? Peace without godliness is but a confederacy against the
Almighty. As therefore we may sit down under our own Vine, lets also sit down
under the shadow of Christ, that his fruit may be sweet to us: Let not
therefore our Peace, when ever God shall restore it, prove the Mother of
Luxury, Riot, and Carnal Security, nor the Nurse of Idleness; but let it teach
us to live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.

3. Direction. Let us endeavor to get all our deliverances, all our mercies so
rooted and fixed in our hearts, that our praises may not be the work of a day,
but the business of our lives. It was recorded as the great reproach of Israel,
Psalm. 106. 12, 13. They sang his Praise. They soon forgot his Works! The words
refer evidently to their deliverance at the Red Sea, E^od. 15. 1. where, while
the mercies were recent and fresh upon their minds and (...), they were lifted
up in Praises at that ^ate, that had we seen and heard them, we must have
concluded their Rejoycings reached heaven, and would terminate there; and yet
they had (...) but two or three days in the Wilderness, but the sense of the
Mercy was worn out, and they are murmuring, repining, and provoking their God.
Such are we prone to be! To sing the praise of God one day, and curse him the
next. And that not because fresher calamities have overtaken us, to obliterate
the sense, and (...) the impressions of late salvations, but from a strange
frame of spirit, that cools, and dies over the mercies, that we cannot without
special grace watch unto prayer, and praise one hour.

O pray therefore, that the same God who has given us cause, would also give us
hearts to praise him; and that in an abiding sense of his never ^ailing
goodness may live, as well as speak his praises for ever.

4. Direction. Whilst we are enjoying the comforts of these selvations God has
vouchsafed to us, and are giving do honor to the instruments which the
Sovereign Goodness has used, or shall use in procuring them, let us not rob God
of his peculia and deserved glory: Let our King, and all under him, have their
due, but be sure that God have his! How easily does (...) dispense his favors
to those that diligently seek him, but (...) he reserves the glory to himself,
and will not part with it to (...) ^^ther.

Nor can we doubt but that the King, and all that have fought under him, will
cheerfully join with us whilst we pray.

Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory,
for thy Mercy and Truths sake!

Let it therefore abide upon the imagination of the thoughts of all our hearts,
to maintain our prayer in vigor for the King and all that are in Authority,
with affectionate thanksgivings to the God who has served his gracious counsels
of them, in working our deliverance for us, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, Amen.

FINIS.

