SOME QUERIES TO PROTESTANTS ANSWERED. And an EXPLANATION of the Roman
Catholick's BELIEF IN Four Great Points CONSIDERED. I. Concerning their Church.
II. Their Worship. III. Justification. IV. Civil Government.


IMPRIMATUR.

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Mar. 4. 1685. Guil. Needham RRmo. in Christo P. ac D. D.
Wilhelmo Archiepisc. Cantuar. a Sacr. Domest.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Luke Meredith, at the King's Head at the West End
of St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

To the READER.
NOT many days since, I had some Papers put into my Hands; which so soon as I
had an opportunity, I opened and perused. The first I found entitled, some
Queries to Protestants. The next, Queries of Religion or Liberty. And the last,
an Explanation of Roman Catholick's Belief, concerning these 4 points. Their
Church, Worship, Justification, and Civil Government, as it was presented to
some Persons of Quality for their particular Satisfaction. By these Papers I
found that the Roman Emissaries were very busy, compassing Sea and Land to
gain Proselytes. And because they have had no good luck by open and fair
dealing, they now take another course; They creep into Houses, and privately
insinuate themselves into the acquaintance of unwary People. Which when they
have once done, they begin their work; which is by puzzeling questions, and
false representations of their Religion, to unfix the minds of men; and then
take occasion of their unsetledness to draw them over to their party. Now
seeing our Adversaries are so diligent, certainly it behooves us to be very
watchful; and by all lawful ways and means to countermine their cunning
Craftiness, and arm our selves against their devices. Upon this consideration,
I thought it might be no disservice either to private Christians, or the Church
of which I am a Member to take these Papers into consideration; and by shsw,
Answers to the Queries, and a brief Animadversion upon the Explanation, to put
weapons into the hands of others, wherewith they might defend themselves
against their Assaults.

This is the design of these few following sheets, wherein I have studied
nothing more than Brevity and Plainness. To the first Paper of Queries I have
given very short answers, but I hope both plain and full. To the second,
because the Queries seem to be contrived with more art and cunning, my answers
thereunto are somewhat more large, but I hope, not too long. And upon the
Explanation of their Belief in those 4 great points, I have made such
Animadversions, as I hope may satisfy any one, that the Explainer has not
dealt so fairly, nor so ingenuously with his Persons of Quality, as he ought to
have done.

Whether what is here done, will answer the design of doing it, or no, I know
not; but hope, by God's Blessing it may. In confidence therefore of the Divine
blessing and assistance, I now, Reader, commit it into thy Hands; desiring
only this favor, that to the reading of it, thou will bring an humble and
teachable temper of mind; which if thou do, I do not doubt but it may be in
some measure serviceable to thee at this time. Which if it be, may God have the
glory, and thou the comfort and advantage of it. This is and shall be the
hearty Prayer of

Thy faithful friend, and fellow Christian.

Some QUERIES to Protestants answered.
Qu. 1. WHether Divine Revelation be not the entire object of Faith, which
Faith is but one, etc? Ephesians. 4.4.

Ans. Divine Revelation is both the rule and object of Faith, which Faith is
but one.

Qu. 2. Whether Faith must not give an undoubted assent to all things revealed?
Jam. 2.18.

Ans. If the Revelation be Divine, there ought not to be doubting of the things
revealed.

Qu. 3. Whether these Revelations do not contain in them many mysteries
transcending the natural reach of humane wit or industry? 1 Cor. 1.10. Matthew.
16.17.

Ans. There are many mysteries in Religion which are above the natural reach of
humane wit and industry, above reason but not contrary to reason.

Qu. 4. Whether it did not become the divine wisdom and goodness to provide
man some way or means whereby he might arrive to the knowledge of those
Mysteries?

Ans. Divine Wisdom and goodness has not been wanting in the provision of
ways and means, whereby Man may arrive to the knowledge of those Mysteries, so
far as is necessary for his happiness both here and hereafter.

Qu. 5. Whether these means must not be visible and apparent to all,
proportionable to the capacity of all? Joh. 9.14. Mat. 11.25. 1 John 5.22.

Ans. The means appointed by God are visible or invisible, they are
proportioned to the capacity of all, but it is not necessary they should be
visible to all.

Qu. 6. Whether these Mysteries were not taught by Christ and the Holy Ghost to
his Apostles?

Ans. Whatever is contained in the Divine Revelation, was certainly taught by
Christ and the Holy Ghost to the Apostles, for he made known unto them the
whole Will of God.

Qu. 7. Did not the Apostles teach these Doctrines in almost all places of the
world, before the Scriptures were all of them written or acknowledged to be
their writings, or collected into one Body?

Ans. The Apostles were faithful Stewards, and did dispense the Doctrine of
the Gospel faithfully and sincerely in all places where they came, even before
the Holy Scriptures were all written or collected into one Body.

Qu. 8. When they began to write the Scriptures, did they profess that they
writ in them all and every truth which had been delivered unto them, or did
they only write them upon emergent occasions?

Ans. All and every truth necessary for the Salvation of mankind, is faithfully
and fully delivered in the Holy Scriptures. And that being the design of them,
we have no reason to be anxious or solicitous about any more.

Qu. 9. Were all divine truths necessary for the Salvation of mankind, for the
Government of the Church, and the confounding of Errors designedly and
expressly delivered in them?

Ans. The Scriptures are abundantly sufficient to instruct all men in those
things which may secure their Salvation, and preserve them from error; And
whatsoever is essentially necessary to the Being or good Government of a Church
may there be found; but whatsoever may be accidentally necessary in respect of
time and place, is left to the prudence of Governors.

Qu. 10. Was not the sense and meaning of this written word delivered at the
same time to the Apostles Successors?

Ans. The Apostles did explain the Mind and Will of God to all to whom they
preached, and the written word being designed not only for the learned but
unlearned, was set down in such intelligible words as might comport with the
capacities of all.

Qu. 11. Were not those Successors of the Apostles obliged under pain of
damnation to deliver the sense and meaning to their Successors, and so
consequently to our days, or at least no contrary sense?

Ans. The Successors of the Apostles in all Ages are undoubtedly obliged to
deliver the true sense and meaning of the Holy Scriptures to others; and it
were to be wished that none had failed of their duty therein.

Qu. 12. Whether all that is mentioned in Scripture be not true, according to
the sense and meaning so delivered?

Ans. All that is mentioned in Scripture is undoubtedly true, according to the
true sense and meaning thereof.

Qu. 13. Whether an obstinate Contradiction of any one truth thus delivered in
Scripture (though there appear no necessity it should have been mentioned in
Scripture) be not injurious to that divine Authority and veracity, and which
unrepented of shall bring damnation?

Ans. An obstinate contradiction of any one plain truth delivered in holy
Scripture, is certainly a very great injury to divine authority and veracity.

Qu. 14. When difficulties did arise about the sense of Scriptures or matters
of Faith, whither the dicision of those controversies was carried, and whether
the present Church of every Age was not to decide it?

Ans. It was undoubtedly the practice, and is most rational that the present
Church in every Age should decide such controversies. For, the Priest's Lips
should preserve knowledge, and they should enquire the Law at his mouth. And no
question the Church has Authority to declare matters of Faith, but not to make
any new Articles of Faith.

Qu. 15. Whether every particular person was to have an Authoritative power in
this decision, or whether it was not universally left to the Heads and
Governors of the Church Assembled together?

Ans. Every particular person has undoubtedly a Judgment of discretion allowed
him in matters of that nature, but the Authoritative power of deciding and
determining was in the Heads and Governors of the Church Assembled together
for that end.

Qu. 16. Whether such a force of Hopes or Fears could possibly happen at once
upon all the Heads of the universal Church Assembled together, or after
consenting to those that were Assembled, as should make them declare that to be
a truth revealed by Christ, which was not so delivered to them to have been the
ever esteemed sense of Scripture or perpetual tradition which was not so?

Ans. Whilst men are men they will be liable to hopes and fears, and subject to
the power and force of them; if therefore we consider the Heads and Governors
of the Church as such we cannot allow them an Exemption therefrom; and
consequently there may be no impossibility in the things propounded. We grant
that in a General Council lawfully assembled, we have great reason to hope for
the presence, direction and assistance of the Holy Ghost, ^t how far the
passions and humors of men may frustrate our Hopes, we know not. This we
certainly know, that the Acts of one Council have been made void by another,
and therefore it is more than probable that one of them did declare something
to be a truth revealed by Christ, which was not so delivered unto them.

Qu. 17. Whether the Decisions of such Assemblies or general Councils were not
always esteemed obligatory in the Church, and whether particular Persons or
Churches obstinately gainsaying such Decisions received by a much Major part of
the Church diffused, were not always esteemed to have incurred those Anathema's
pronounced by such Councils?

Ans. If those Assemblies or Councils be truly general, we do very much
reverence their Authority, and think their decisions to be obligatory. But we
do not think all to be such that are called so; As for instance, The Council of
Trent is by some sort of men looked upon as a general Council, and all their
Religion almost built upon the Authority thereof; and yet the Church of England
never received the decisions of that Council, nor did the Galican Church for
many years; and yet neither the one nor the other did for all that esteem
themselves to have incurred the Anathema's pronounced by that Council.

Qu. 18. Whether the universal Church did not in all Ages practice this way of
deciding controversies, and whether these be not as universal a tradition of
this, as the practice was universal without interruption?

Ans. Universal practice will amount to an universal Tradition, and that this
has been the practice of the Church in all Ages, especially in matters of
great weight, we deny not; nor should we oppose the same course now, provided
the Council were free and general.

But the Enquirer goes on,
Some will perhaps say that such Councils cannot Err in fundamentals but may in
not fundamentals. I ask these,

Qu. What are fundamentals and what not?

Ans. Those things which are essentially necessary to the being of Religion may
properly be called fundamental; but those things which only respect order and
decency therein, and vary according to time and place, and are alterable by the
Governors of the Church, when they see cause these are not fundamental.

Qu. Whether there be not some things fundamentals to the Church, which are not
to every particular?

Ans. There may be some things fundamental to the Being of a Church, which are
not so to every particular member of that Church, but whatsoever things are
^ndamental to the Being of Religion, are equally so to the whole Church and
every member thereof.

Qu. Whether an obstinate denial of what is fundamental or necessary to the
universal Church, or granting as I may say upon what is fundamental by a
particular person, be not in time a fundamental Error, especially after an
universal declaration of it as truth delivered by Christ and his Apostles?

Ans. This Query as it is here worded is hardly reconcilable to sense, but I
suppose his meaning is, Whether for any particular person obstinately to deny
what is fundamental or necessary to the universal Church, and declared to be a
truth delivered by Christ and his Apostles be not a fundamental Error? To
which I answer. That every particular Christian ought with all deference to
submit his own private Judgment to the public Judgment of the Church, and
though it do not appear so plain to him, yet he ought rather to suspect his own
than that of the Church. But if in some things he cannot be satisfied, and
therein happen to differ from the Church, provided he do not thereby break the
peace and unity of the Church, it will hardly amount to a fundamental Error.
But what if it be declared by the Church to be a truth delivered by Christ and
his Apostles, will not that make it so? To this I answer, That no declaration
of the Church, how universal soever it be, can make that to be a truth
delivered by Christ and his Apostles, which really is not so And therefore in
that case we must have recourse to their Writings, and if it be not either in
express words contained therein, or by sound consequence drawn therefrom, we
ought not to comply with it, nor is it a fundamental Error to differ therein.

Qu. Whether the universal Church assembled in a General Council ought not to
be justly esteemed the decider of what is fundamental, and what not?

Ans. When the universal Church by her proper Representatives is lawfully
assembled in a Council truly General, that Council without all dispute will be
a very proper Judge of what is fundamental, and what not; but this is rather to
be prayed than hoped for.

Qu. Whether an obstinate denial of any one truth delivered by Jesus Christ or
his Apostles (though the delivery was not absolutely necessary to Salvation)
may not be called a fundamental error, seeing it brings the rest he delivered
in question, as also his veracity?

Ans. The denial of any one truth delivered by Jesus Christ or his Apostles is
a very great fault, and if that denial be obstinately continued in, after plain
conviction that it is such a truth, it is a very dangerous Error.

Qu. Whether therefore the denial of any one truth delivered to us by an
uninterrupted tradition, as taught by Christ and his Apostles, would not be a
fundamental Error?

Ans. There is a great difference between a thing delivered as taught, and
plainly taught, by Christ and his Apostles; for we meet with many things
delivered as taught by them. and tradition pretended for them, which really and
in truth were never taught by them, or either of them; aed to deny such is so
far from being a fundamental Error, that it is no Error at all. There is also
a great difference between traditions. If by tradition he mean the holy
Scriptures, we grant that to deny any thing that is plainly and clearly taught
therein, is a very great Error: But if by tradition he mean such as is merely
humane, and not clearly warranted by the Word of God, we think we ought to
reject such, how uninterrupted soever they be; for if an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel than has been preached, let him he accursed, says St.
Paul.

Qu. And on the other side, whether the teaching of any Doctrine (only piously
believed, but) sufficiently known not to have been expressly, or by a natural
consequence delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and which may upon that
account be false, not having Divine Revelation (which alone is infallible) for
its ground; whether, I say, the teaching such a Doctrine so known, as one that
was delivered by Christ, (when they know it was not) would not be a fundamental
Error?

Ans. Whosoever teaches such Doctrines as are mentioned in this Query, and in
that manner, is highly guilty; and when the Enquirer shall think fit to be more
particular, and produce his instances, he may expect a more particular answer,
and perhaps be told at whose door this charge will lie: In the mean time this
general answer may suffice.

Qu. Whether Christ having taken care (as some grant) that his Church should
not err in fundamentals, has not consequently taken care that she should not
teach any one Doctrine as delivered by Christ, and consequently of Faith, which
was not taught by him, and consequently might be an Error?

Ans. Christ has taken all care possible to secure his Church from Error, and
has given her his gracious promise to be with her to the end of the World. But
the Church being composed of men, and such as are fallible, the security is not
promised to particulars. Particular persons, and particular Churches too, we
know, not only may, but have, grossly erred. The security therefore is only
promised to the Universal Church; and when he tells us what he means by that,
he may expect a more direct answer to his Query.

Qu. Whether those Doctrines, or most of them, controverted now by Protestants,
have not been taught and believed in the Church as Doctrines delivered by
Christ, long before Luther, yea and delivered in the most General Councils
those Ages would permit, and accepted of by the Church diffusive, none that we
know of dissenting, but those condemned in those Councils for Heretics, and
whose Heresies expired almost with themselves?

Ans. It is now plain that this Enquirer, by the Church, and universal Church
so often mentioned by him, does all along mean the Church of Rome, which we are
so far from complying with him in, that though we own that Church to be a
Member, yet we cannot allow it to be a sound Member of the Catholic Church.
And if by the Decisions and Declarations of the Church, he mean the
determinations of that Church, they are no further obligatory than to her own
Members, nor many of them to them neither, if strictly enquired into. As for
Luther, we do not receive our Religion from him, but from Jesus Christ; and for
any Doctrines now controverted, we are content to have the same determined by
the Holy Scriptures, and the four first General Councils. As for the Councils
our Enquirer hints at, we deny that they were truly General, or that all their
decisions were ever accepted of by the Church diffusive. And he cannot but know
that there were many more, not only Persons, but whole Churches, which did
dissent from them.

Qu. Whether there was from the first 400 years, till the time of Luther, any
known body of Pastors and Teachers declaring a dissent in any Age from those
Doctrines, and opposing those Councils; and whether the Greek Churches did not,
and do to this very day consent with this Western Church in most points now
controverted by Protestants?

Ans. This Query is preposterously put, for how should any body of Pastors and
Teachers in the first 400 years oppose themselves to those Councils which were
not then in being, nor heard of till many hundred years afterward? But that
the Fathers in those first Ages did teach the same Doctrines we now do, we
appeal to the Records of those times. And that those after-Councils by him
mentioned, were dissenters from those of the first Ages, we are contented to be
tried by comparing the Acts of both together. And that the Greek Church did, or
now does, agree with the Church of Rome in all or most of those points now in
difference between her and us, we utterly deny, and challenge him to the proof
of it.

Qu. Whether Luther (the first Author of Protestancy) did not separate himself
from the whole visible Church at that time spread over the West, contradicting
all the Prelates and Pastors then living in the universal practice of that
Church, and the General Councils received as such by the foregoing Ages?

Ans. As for the names of Protestant and Papist, I look upon them as names of
distinction, not of Religion. The Religion we both own is Christian: This we do
not receive from Luther, nor they from Ignatius Loyala, St. Francis, or any
such, but both of us from Jesus Christ; The only question is, Whether they or
we hold that Religion in greatest purity? It Is true that Luther in his time did
more narrowly look into the corruptions of the Church of Rome, declared against
them, and on that account separated from her Communion, and for any thing yet
appears may be very well justified in so doing. For, if any Church shall make
terms of her Communion so sinful and dangerous that no man with safety to his
Soul can continue in it, it will be high time to come out of it.

Qu. Whether he or Protestants at present do pretend to such Demonstration for
those Tenets they hold contrary to the Roman Church, (the then only visible
Church in the West) that no understanding, to which it is sufficiently
proposed, can in the least doubt of it?

Ans. We have such evidence for the Doctrines which we hold and teach in
opposition to the Church of Rome, as, being sufficiently proposed, no man can
reasonably doubt of. And as for those who will scruple without reason,
notwithstanding the clearest evidence that the nature of the thing will bear,
we can only pity and pray for them.

Qu. Or whether they do not rather say, that being fallible, they may err, even
in what they think a Demonstration; and if they may err, perhaps they have
erred even in their Reformation?

Ans. We do not pretend to infallibility, nor do we think that the claim which
the Bishop of Rome makes to it is any more than a groundless pretense only. But
a posse ad esse non valet consequentia, from a bare possibility of erring, to
argue a certainty that we have erred in every thing we have done, is an
argument fitter to be offered to Children than Men.

Qu. Whether therefore denying these Doctrines thus delivered by the Church in
all Ages, as Doctrines delivered by Christ and his Apostles, upon no better
grounds than these, perhaps they may be true, and perhaps not, be not a putting
ones self into the danger of erring even in fundamentals?

Ans. We deny no Doctrines delivered by the Church in all Ages, as Doctrines
delivered by Christ and his Apostles; nor do we own any Doctrine upon such weak
grounds, as perhaps they may be true, and perhaps not. But we say, that the
present Church of Rome does teach such Doctrines as the Doctrines of Christ and
his Apostles, which were never taught by the Church in all Ages, nor delivered
by Christ and his Apostles; And in these things we oppose our selves against
them, and think we have great reason so to do, having the holy Scriptures and
the Primitive Church on our side. And whilst we are thus supported, we have no
fear of erring in fundamentals.

Queries of Religion or Liberty.
WHo this Enquirer is, as I am at present ignorant, so am I not much concerned
to know; but I take him to be one who has conceived a mighty opinion of
himself and his performances. He thinks that by these Queries he has struck at
the root of Protestancy, (as he and those of his Persuasion call it) i. e.
Reformed Christianity, that he has given it a fatal blow, a mortal wound, and
left it grovelling in the dust without the least hopes of recovery. Like that
overgrown, uncircumcised Philistine, he defieth the Armies of the Living God,
and calls for a Man to fight with him; For, in the close of his Queries he
makes this proud and confident challenge.

If any give answer, (As if he should have said, if any be so bold and daring,
so over confident and foolhardy, as to undertake an Answer to these Queries)
It is desired to be Categorical and short, without any discourses of things not
demanded. Now whether this man do not triumph before the Victory, or whether
those Queries be so unanswerable as he believes them to be, is the thing under
consideration. And because he has not only given the Challenge, but appointed
the Weapon, I shall neither decline the one, nor the other, but according to
his own method shall undertake his Queries in the same order as he has
propounded them.

Qu. 1. Whether the Flock and Church of Christ (to whom was promised grace and
eternal happiness) be that company and society of People christened in his
Name, who by order of Government, Rules, and Decrees, from him and his
Apostles, were united in Faith, Worship, Discipline, and manner of Life, called
Religion?

Ans. The Church of Christ is either Militant or Triumphant, the one on Earth,
the other in Heaven; of the former of which we are now to speak. The Church
Militant is either Universal, or Particular; the former comprehending all and
every Member of Christ's Mystical Body, wheresoever dispersed upon the face of
the whole Earth; the latter comprizing only a certain Number of Christians
formed into a select Body or Society, under certain Laws and Rules not
differing from those of the Universal Church. Such are all Provincial and
National Churches; and though none of them may arrogate to themselves the Title
of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, yet none will deny but that
they are true Members thereof. This I have premised to prevent confusion and
misunderstanding: for the confounding of these two, as it often happens in
discourses of this kind, has been the occasion of great mistakes. Those of the
Romish Persuasion, by the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, do
usually understand the Church of Rome, which though it be a manifest
Contradiction, being the same with a Particular Universal, yet do they run away
with it, and by that specious and gorgeous Title think to bear down all before
them, aloud proclaiming that to be the Mother and Mistress of all other
Churches. This thus premised, I shall now be as Categorical and short in my
Answer to his Query, as he can desire: Viz. That the Flock and Church of Christ
is a Company or Society of People Christened in his Name, who by Order of
Government, rules, and decrees from him and his Apostles, are united in Faith,
Worship, Discipline, and Manner of Life, called Religion.

Qu. 2. Whether by Separation or Excommunication from that Society and Unity
are lost those promises?

Ans. Separation and Excommunication are two things, for, though every one that
is excommunicated be thereby separated from that body, of which before he was a
member; yet a man may be in a state of Separation, without being under the doom
of Excommunication. For Separation may be a voluntary Act, whereas
Excommunication is a formal and Judicial Sentence, delivered by a lawful Judge,
authorized and appointed by the Church to pronounce the same; by virtue whereof
the sentenced person is divided from the Body, separated from the Society, and
shut out of the Communion of God's Church. The case thus stated, my answer to
this Query will be as follows, viz.

1. Whosoever, upon any pretense whatsoever, does separate himself from the
Society and Unity of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Aposstolical Church, does in
so doing cast himself out of the paternal care and protection of God. For, it
is a certain and undoubted truth, He that has not the Church for his Mother
cannot have God for his Father. And consequently can have no pretense to the
promises of grace here, or eternal happiness hereafter.

2. Whosoever without just cause, does separate himself from the Society and
Unity of that particular Church of which he is a member, is guilty of a sinful
and dangerous Schism; and whilst he continues therein can have no roason to
expect the blessing of those promises.

3. That there may be sometimes a just cause of Separation, as when a Church
makes the conditions of her Communion such, as a man cannot communicate with
her, without sin and danger. But in this case particular members ought to be
mighty wary and cautious; for, it is not every dissatisfaction of their own, or
every irregularity of that Church, that will be a sufficient cause of
Separation, unless the terms of her Communion be manifestly and apparently
sinful.

4. That the great end and design of Excommunication is the repentance and
amendment of the person excommunicated. It does not therefore make void the
promises of God, nor utterly deprive the sentenced person of the benefits
thereof, but only by a temporary correction shows him his folly and danger,
and calls upon him by a timely repentance and amendment to recover himself out
of the one, and prevent the other. But it must be acknowledged, that if a man
obstinately continue in that condition, and live and die under that sentence,
his condition will be very dangerous.

These may serve as general Answers to this Query, but if by the Separation or
Excommunication here mentioned, be meant, (as no question it is) a Separation
of Excommunication from the Society and Unity of the Church of Rome; Then we
have this further to say.

1. That the present Church of Rome has separated her self from the One, Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, by setting up such Doctrines and practices as
were never taught, practiced, nor allowed either by Christ or his Apostles, or
their Successors in the Primitive Church.

2. That the present Church of Rome has made the conditions of her Communion,
such as none without sin and danger can Communicate with her, and by that means
has justified a Separation from her.

3. That the Church of Rome has not, nor ever had any lawful Power or
Authority over the Church of England; nor are we Subject to the Jurisdiction of
that See, whether we consider it as Episcopal, or as Metropolitan, or as
Patriarchal; and therefore we cannot be justly charged with a Separation
therefrom. It is true indeed that for some time she had Tyrannically usurped an
unjust power over us, and kept us in Bondage and Slavery to her; but, God be
thanked, we at last found an opportunity to shake off those Chains, and deliver
our selves from the servitude under which we had so long groaned. And this we
have done, and are still ready to justify to the whole world to be no sinful
Separation.

4. That an Excommunication thundered out by the Church of Rome against us of
the Church of England, is but only Brutum fulmen, an insignicant Scarecrow,
which upon mature consideration, we have no cause to be afraid of; for she
having no power over us, we are not accountable to her, nor subject to any
sentence pronounced by her; And therefore notwithstanding that pretended
Separation or Excommunication from the Society and Unity of that Church, which
they make so much noise with, we are in no apprehension of losing the benefits
of those promises, which God has made to his One, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, of Grace here and Eternal Happiness hereafter.

Qu. 3. Does Christian Religion consist in matters of Morality or Ceremony, of
indifferency to be accepted, or rejected, and altered at the Choice Judgment
and well liking of private Persons, Corporations, or States?

Ans. Religion in general may be considered either in its Essentials, or as it
is clothed with Circumstantials. The former of which are unalterable, but the
latter may be subject to change. The Christian Religion in particular falls
under the same consideration, the Being whereof consists indeed in matters of
Morality, which being innituted and ordained by Christ are not alterable by
Men. But the order and decency, which are things necessary to the well being of
that Religion, consists in Ceremonies and things indifferent, which are in
their own nature alterable, and being the institutions of Men, may be altered
by Men; but not by any private Persons: For whatsoever has been established by
the whole Body, cannot be altered by any particular member, or any number of
Men, who are members of that Body, nor by any Authority less than that, by
which at first it was established. And here the Church of Rome may do well to
consider by what power and authority she has made so bold with the very
Essentials of the Christian Religion, altering some and adding others, making
new Articles of Faith, which were never taught by Christ nor his Apostles, and
imposing them as necessary to be believed by all those of her Communion.

Qu. 4. Or does it consist in the Laws and Rules of Faith, and life of
Christians, so important and binding, as that by the contempt thereof one must
lose Eternal Happiness?

Ans. This Query is very little different from the former, and has, I think,
received a sufficient answer in the solution of that For by matters of Morality
there, wherein I say the Being of the Christian Religion does consist; I mean
Moral and unchangeable truths, which are to be received and believed by all
Christians, and Moral actions which are to be done by them: and for our belief
and performance of these things, we have such laws and rules delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, as are binding unto all; the contempt whereof may very
much endanger, and without a serious and seasonable repentance and amendment
will certainly forfeit eternal happiness. And therefore it will highly concern
the Church of Rome to consider, whether she be not guilty of such contempt,
whether in some of her public Orders and Decrees she have not apparently
contradicted some of these important Laws and Rules?

Qu. 5. Whether those Laws and Rules taught by Christ and his Apostles bind as
well the Christians of succeeding Ages (who could not be present to see and
hear them) as they bound those who were present, heard them taught, and saw
their Original Writings?

Ans. That these Laws and Rules are as binding to me now, as they were to any
of the Disciples in our Savior's or his Apostles time, I willingly grant. And
if this concession will do this Enquirer any service, much good may do him with
it. For, if the seeing of the Original Writings of Christ and his Apostles, or
being present to hear them deliver those Laws and Rules, were necessary to make
them obligatory, then ought we to have Christ and his Apostles come down from
Heaven, and write and preach the same things over again, not only in every Age,
but in every year and every day of that year, and in all places of the world
too. But let us proceed, and see what mighty use this Enquirer will make of
this wire drawing this Query.

Qu. 6. Whether after the death of Christ and his Apostles, and Disciples, by
his institution other persons successively in all Ages were in order chosen,
and Authorized as Pastors and Church Magistrates, to preserve, teach, and
promulgate those binding Rules to all Nations?

Ans. That the blessed Jesus, out of his abundant care and goodness, for the
carrying on of that great work which he had begun, for the promoting of that
holy Religion which he had instituted, and the well ordering of that Church
which he had founded, did appoint certain orders of Men, and endow them with
gifts which might qualify them for their several employments, we do verily
believe. For St. Paul tells us, God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles, then
gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues, 1 Cor. 12.28. And
in another place he says, He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. But that he ever
instituted any Officer in the Church, by the name of a Church-Magistrate, I
never read. Yet if by his Church-Magistrate, he mean no more than St. Paul
does, by Governments, we shall not quarrel with him about the word. And that it
was the work of these Officers to preserve those Laws and Rules which he left,
and to teach and promulgate them to all Nations, we readily grant. But then
what shall we think of those, who either add thereto, or diminish therefrom;
who either alter those binding Laws and Rules, or make new ones of their own,
and impose them upon others as if they were of equal Force and Authority with
those delivered by Christ and his Apostles? I could easily give instances, to
show that the Church of Rome is guilty both ways; but I am not willing to
transgress the method which the Enquirer has propounded, by entering upon
discourses of things not demanded.

Qu. 7. Were they Clergymen or Laymen by whom immediately they were chosen, and
authorized in those high Functions?

Ans. We do verily believe, being well assured by the Holy Scriptures, by the
Doctrine and practice of the Apostles and primitive Christians, and by the
usage and custom of the Church of God in all Ages, that it only appertains to
Clergymen, by the solemn imposition of hands to set apart others to those
Sacred Functions, and that they have sufficient Power and Authority to
authorize them to perform those Holy Offices. I never heard this denied by any
of the Reformed Religion, and therefore this Enquirer might, if he had so
pleased, have spared this Query.

Qu. 8. Were all Christians in succeeding Ages bound to believe what those
succeeding Pastors or Supreme Church-Magistrates taught them, as binding Laws
of Christ and his Apostles, and that the Writings by them collected, preserved,
and delivered in a different Language from the Original, were the true Copies
of Original Apostolic Writings, and that the sentence, interpretation and use
thereof delivered by them in Supreme Councils for unity and peace, and to
prevent Schisms and Errors, were Rules which all Christians were bound to
follow?

Ans. This Query is a Song of three parts, to answer all which directly, I
shall be obliged to take it in pieces, and consider the parts severally. And
though the Answers thereunto would very well admit, and do almost necessarily
require a long discourse; yet I remember the Enquirer has confined me to a
Method, which I have promised to observe, and therefore in my answers thereunto
I shall be as short as possible, without entering upon discourses of things not
demanded.

Qu. 1. Were all Christians in succeeding Ages bound to believe what those
succeeding Pastors or Supreme Church-Magistrates taught them, as binding Laws
of Christ and his Apostles.

Ans. Whatever has been taught as a binding Law of Christ and his Apostles, by
all the Pastors and Governors of the Church in all Ages, at all times, and in
all places, we have no reason to suspect. For Christ has promised to be with
his Church to the end of the World, Matt. 28.20. And to build it upon a Rock,
so that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Matt. 16.18. And by his
spirit of truth, to guide it into all truth, Joh. 16.13. The universal Church
therefore being thus secured from error, we have no apprehensions of being
deceived thereby. But though we owe this deference to the One, Holy, Catholic
and Apostolic Church, and the united Body of the Pastors and Governors
thereof, yet no particular Church, nor any particular Pastor or Governor
thereof, nor any number of them, less than the whole, have any reason to claim
the same; for whilst Men are Men, they are and will be fallible, and being so,
they may and oftentimes do err, and though the whole Body cannot yet any
particular Member may be deceived; and therefore we ought not greedily to
swallow all that is taught by them, but to examine well what they teach, before
we give our assent thereunto, otherwise we may easily be imposed upon.

Qu. 2. Were all Christians in succeeding Ages bound to believe, that the
writings collected by those succeeding Pastors or Supreme Church-Magistrates,
and by them preserved and delivered in a different Language from the Original,
were the true Copies of Original Apostolic Writings?

Ans. That the Holy Scriptures were faithfully collected and preserved by the
Church, and that the Copies handed down to us, though in a Language different
from the Original, are true Copies, we do not at all doubt. For, we cannot
imagine that the universal Church should conspire together to impose a falsehood
upon posterity. But that these Scriptures are the Word of God we believe not
only upon the Authority of the Church, but for several other reasons, as this
Gent. cannot but know, if he have been conversant in our Writings: which
reasons might here fitly be produced, if I were not confined by the Enquirer to
a short Method, and had promised to observe the same. I shall therefore only
add that if (by being bound to believe) he means, that it is a binding Law of
Christ and his Apostles, that for this reason we should believe those Copies to
be true; we deny it, because we cannot find any such Law delivered by them. But
if (by being bound to believe) he only mean, that considering by whom they are
handed to us, we have no reason to doubt of them; we readily comply with him.

Qu. 3. Were all Christians in succeeding Ages bound to believe, that the
sentence, interpretations and use of those Writings delivered by those Pastors
or Supreme Church-Magistrates in Supreme Councils for Unity and Peace, and to
prevent Schisms and Errors, were Rules which all Christians were bound to
follow?

Ans. What this Enquirer means by Supreme Church-Magistrates and Supreme
Councils, is somewhat hard to be understood; for to constitute two Supremes in
one and the same body will make it look a little monstrous. If by the Council
being Supreme, he mean that is above the Supreme Church-Magistrate ( i. e. the
Pope, for I do not doubt but that he intends him all along by that Expression)
I am afraid his Holy Father will give him but small thanks for that opinion.
But if, by his Supreme Church-Magistrate, he mean that the Pope is above tha
Council, then what signifies the sentence or interpretation of a Council, if
not confirmed by him? So that till this case be rightly stated, and agreed upon
amongst them, both they and we shall be at a loss, whose declaration is to be
the Rule, which we are bound to follow. We do highly reverence the Authority of
Councils truly general, and for any thing in disserence between us and the
Church of Rome, we dare appeal and stand to the determination of the four first
general Councils. But to be Hood winkt, and bound up by an implicit Faith, to
receive and embrace every thing, that is offered to us, by those who call
themselves Pastors, or Supreme Church-Magistrates, or by every Convention which
calls it self a Supreme Council, is more than we can consent to, and more
indeed than either Christ or his Aposdes required of their hearers. When
neither the Doctrine preached by Christ, nor the Miracles done by him for the
confirmation of that Doctrine, could convince the stubborn and unbelieving
Jews, that he was the Messiah, whither does he send them? he bids them search
the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. And St. Paul highly commends the Bereans, saying,
They were more noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those
things were so, Act. 17.10,11. Our Savior and his Apostle St. Paul, did not
trouble their hearers with puzling questions. Whether those Writings were the
Word of God? How they were assured that they were so? What was the sense and
meaning of them? How they came to know it, etc. Nor did they send them to the
Sanhedrim, or any other Council to be instructed therein; but they send them
directly and immediately to the Scriptures themselves. It was taken for granted
then, and ought to be so now, that the Writings transmitted to them and us, did
really and indeed contain the Word of God, and both our Savior and St. Paul
well knew, that God had delivered his mind in words so intelligible, that there
was no fear of sending any one thereunto. And indeed it were an unreasonable
thing that every private Christian should be obliged to consult what sense and
meaning is put upon the Holy Scriptures by a general Council, before he receive
and embrace them. Nor will it suffice to say, that they may learn it from their
Pastors and Teachers, for how shall they know that their Pastors and Teachers
understand it any better than they do, or if they do, that they give them the
true and genuine sense and interpretation, for they may with as much reason
suspect them, as they can those Copies of the Sacred Writings which they have,
though in a Language different from the Original. So that at this rate,
Christians will be involved in such Intricacies and Meanders, that they will
never know what they should believe, and what not. And therefore, though we
have a great veneration for what is delivered by Councils truly General, yet
can we not consent that that is the only rule which all Christians ought to
follow.

Qu. 9. If not then, What other order was there left by Christ and his Apostles
for the Christians of succeeding Ages, to be truly and undoubtedly informed
what Christ and his Apostles taught, or wrought so many Ages before, as binding
Laws to them that should come after, who never heard them speak, nor saw any of
their Original Writings?

Ans. Even the same which our blessed Savior recommended to the Jews, and St.
Paul so highly commended in the Bereans, i. e. to search the Scriptures, which
whosoever does, and that with an humble and teachable temper of mind, may
therein easily discover such evident footsteps of Divinity, as will plainly
speak their Original, and sufficiently inform us whence they are, and by what
manner of Persons they were written. Therein may we find all things necessary
to our Salvation writ in Characters so legible that he that runs may read
them, so plain and easy, that the meanest capacity may understand them. So
that to fortify our persuasion that these are the Laws and Rules delivered by
Christ and his Apostles, if we had no other way left us, this alone might
suffice. But if any private Christian meet with any thing therein, which
requires some help for satisfaction, he has Pastors and Teachers at hand to
apply himself unto, who are an Order of men instituted by Christ for that very
end and purpose; and in whom, if he has not some apparent reason to the
contrary, he ought to repose great confidence.

Qu. 10. Whether to the Testimonies and Decrees of those succeeding Pastors and
Supreme Church-Magistrates, and to their sentence given upon the Controversies
of Religion, risen in diverse Ages, is due, at least, as much Credit and
Obedience (although perhaps some of them might be vicious in Life) as in
temporal matters is due to the Laws, Interpretations and Sentences of Supreme
Civil Magistrates?

Ans. That as much Credit and Obedience is due to the Testimonies and Decrees
of the Pastors and Governors of the Church in matters of Religion, as to the
Laws, Interpretations and Sentences of Civil Magistrates in temporal matters, I
readily grant. But then we may do well to consider how far that Credit and
Obedience ought to extend both in the one and other Case. For, as in temporal
matters, if the Commands of the Civil Magistrate do concern matters of Faith,
i. e. things which I am required to believe; in that Case his Laws ought to be
so clear and evident, as may convince my reason and judgment, otherwise I am
not bound, by a blind resignation to surrender up my faith and belief; for it
is not in the power of man to make me think otherwise than I do, without such
convincing reasons as may satisfy me that I think amiss. But if I cannot
believe as he would have me to believe, yet ought I not by publicly opposing
his Sentiments, to raise a Faction, and thereby disturb the Peace of that State
in which I live. Or if the Commands of the Civil Magistrate concern matters of
Fact, wherein my obedience is required; in that case if I can with a safe
conscience and without disobeying God do it, I ought actively to obey the Civil
Magistrate, but if I cannot do it without displeasing God, and wounding my own
Conscience, in that case I ought not to resist, but passively to obey; For,
here the Apostles Rule will hold good. Whether it be better to obey God or Man,
judge ye? So in matters of Religion. If the Testimonies and Decrees of the
Pastors and Governors of the Church do concern matters of Faith, I do
acknowledge that there is a great deference due to their sentence and opinion,
and unless there be very clear evidence to the contrary, I ought rather to
suspect my own than theirs; yet whatsoever Testimonies and Decrees are
propounded by the Church, they are propounded to rational men; and it must
necessarily be supposed, that men ought to exercise that reason which God has
endowed them withal, in judging of the evidence upon which those Testimonies
and Decrees are built, which evidences, if they do not prove convincing and
satisfactory, they cannot command their own belief; much less can any Power or
Authority do it. For, to act by an implicit faith in that case were to act more
like Brutes than Men. And therefore though we willingly own that there is as
much credit due to them, as to Civil Magistrates in the like case, yet can we
not grant any more. Or if their Testimonies and Decrees concern matters of
Fact, wherein our Obedience is required, i. e. matters of Discipline, which
respect the order and decency of Religion, we grant that obedience is due to
them, and as much obedience as is due to Civil Magistrates in the like case;
yet still a Judgment of discretion is to be allowed to the Subject, how far he
can with a safe Conscience actively obey, and when and where he is to exercise
his passive obedience. But this caution ought to be observed by every private
Christian, that by an imprudent management of his different Sentiments he do
not disturb the Peace, nor break the Order and Unity of the Church.

Qu. 11. Or has Christ left such liberty to all succeeding Christians, that
they need not believe, credit, or obey any the Testimonies, Laws,
Interpretations, or Sentences given by any supreme Legal Governors, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, in their respective Councils, further than every particular
person in his private Judgment shall like, choose, and accept of?

Ans. This Query I take to be fully answered in the Answer to that immediately
preceding, wherein the case is plainly stated. How far the Credit and Obedience
of Inferiors is due to the Sentences and Determinations of their Superiors,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. And therefore without saying the same things
over again, or enlarging thereupon, I shall refer you thereunto.

Qu. 12. Whether a few particular persons, or some few of the Magistrates Civil
or Ecclesiastical, for discontent or differing in Judgment, from the united
body of the rest, may under pretense of Conscience or Reformation separate
themselves from the United body and society, and make new translations and
interpretations of written Laws different from the former, and by force and
persuasion draw People from their old Society, Unity and Obedience, to new
Congregations, Institutions and Rules of their framing, opposite and
destructive to the former?

Ans. This Query consists of several parts, and therefore to give a direct and
apposite Answer thereunto, I shall endeavor to obviate the several parts
thereof by these Propositions following, Viz.

1. That no person or number of men, whether they be private Persons, or
Magistrates Civil or Ecclesiastical, ought to separate themselves, on any
pretense whatsoever, from the body of the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church.

2. That discontent or differing in Judgment only, are no sufficient grounds of
separation from any particular Church, whereof we are Members

3. That a bare pretense of Conscience and Reformation will not justify a
Schism, nor excuse those who are guilty of a Schismatical separation either in
Church or State. For, the peace of the whole Community is far more valuable
than any private man's satisfaction, and ought not to be laid open to the
attempts of any Schismatical pretenders whatsoever.

4. That the written and established Laws of God or his Vicegerents upon Earth,
are not reversible, nor alterable by any man, or number of men. Because they
cannot pretend to that Authority, by which at first they were established, and
without that they cannot be altered. For, if we, or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed, says St. Paul. Gal. 1.8.

5. That it is not lawful for any person or persons who are Members of an
established Church, either by force or persuasion to draw People from the
Communion of that Church, and so break the Unity, and disturb the Peace
thereof; or by any Artifices whatsoever either to undermine or batter down the
Ramparts, i. e. the established Laws and Constitutions of that Church.

These Propositions put together, may suffice as a general Answer to this
Query; but now to apply them to the matter in hand, i. e. the difference
between us and the Church of Rome, for on that account was the Query
propounded. And this I shall now do in these following particulars.

1. That the Church of Rome (though she mightily pretend to it) is not that
One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church. That she is a Member of the
Catholic Church we grant, though we can scarce allow her to be a sound Member
thereof; but that she should pretend to be the One, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church, either diffusive or representative we cannot consent, nor
has she ever yet, or ever will be able to make goad her claim thereunto.

2. That the present Church of Rome is guilty of a sinful and schismatical
Separation from the United Body of the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church, we affirm. And that for these reasons, 1. Because she usurps an higher
place and power in the Body Ecclesiastical, than of right is due unto her,
thereby breaking the Union, and disturbing the Peace of the Church. 2. Because
she has voluntarily divided the Catholic Church, both in Faith, Worship, and
Government, by her innovations. 3. By separating, both by her Doctrines and
Censures, three parts of the Christian World from her Communion, and as much as
in her lies, from the Communion of Christ. 4. By rebelling against general
Councils, and usurping an Authority over them. 5. By breaking or taking away
all the lines of Apostolical Succession except their own, and appropriating all
Original Jurisdiction to themselves. 6. By challenging a temporal power over
Princes, either directly or indirectly, which has been a great occasion not
only of Schism in the Church, but of Sedition and Rebellion in the State. All
which instances have been charged upon, and made good against the Church of
Rome by our Writers, and may be so again, whenever we are called to it.

3. It is not therefore we that have separated from them, but they from us;
whilst we adhere to the united Body of the Holy, Catholic and Apostolic
Church, which they have forsaken.

4. Nor is it we but they, who have altered the written and established Laws of
God and his Church, by adding new Articles of Faith, such as were never
delivered by Christ or his Apostles, nor taught by the primitive Church, nor
comprised in any of those Creeds received by the Church; and making them
necessary Conditions of their Communion. As the Doctrines of Supremacy and
Infallibility, of Indulgences and Purgatory, of Transubstantiation, etc.

5. It is they therefore, and not we, who by force and persuasion, and by all
manner of Artifices, endeavor to draw People from the Unity and Obedience of
the Holy Catholic Church, unto new Congregations, Institutions and Rules of
their own framing, opposite to, and destructive of the former. Like the Scribes
and Pharisees of old, they compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when
he is made, they make him twofold more the Child of Hell than themselves Matthew.
23.15.

Qu. 13. Whether Persons so acting are better than Rebels and Usurpers, or such
as Simon Magus and those that deserted the Apostles to follow him: and
therefore to be avoided as Persons separated from the flock of Christ?

Ans. That they are no better than such as he has here named and described, we
willingly grant; and upon that very account is it, that we now avoid Communion
with the present Church of Rome.

Thus have I given an Answer, and I hope a sufficient one, to these Enquiries;
and that short, without entering upon discourses of things not demanded, or at
least, not employed in those demands; and so observed the Method propounded by
the Enquirer.

An Explanation of Roman Catholick's Belief concerning these IV. Points, Their
Church, Worship, Justification, and Civil Government, as it was presented to
some Persons of Quality for their particular Satisfaction.
THese are four great Points, and if well and truly explained, the Explanation
of them may be of very great use; but if otherwise, if he only guild the Pill,
that the Patient may be more easily persuaded to swallow it, it may prove of
dangerous Consequence; instead of informing, it may debauch the minds and
understandings of men. Let us therefore look before we leap, let us consider
well whether this Explainer has been honest and faithful in his Explanation,
before we receive all he says for Gospel. And for your assistance herein, I
shall set down his own words, then animadvert thereupon, and when that is done,
present you with both for your better satisfaction.

The EXPLAINER.
1. We believe the Holy Scriptures to be of Divine Inspiration and Infallible
Authority, and whatsoever is therein contained we firmly assent unto as to the
word of God, the Author of all truth.

But since in the Holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood
which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction, we therefore
profess (for the ending of all Controversies in our Religion, and settling of
Peace in our Consciences) to submit our private Judgments to the Judgment of
the Church in a free general Council.

The ANIMADVERTER.
1. The Explainer tells us that the Roman Catholics do believe the Holy
Scriptures to be of Divine Inspiration and Infallible Authority, etc.

A very fair and good profession, wherein we do heartily join with them; And is
it not a great pity there should be a secret reserve to spoil and overthrow it?
They believe this, but is this all they believe? Do they not believe also that
some things which before the Church's definition of them might have been
innocently disbelieved, yet after they are once defined and determined by the
Church, to be matters of Faith, and of equal Authority with any other things
delivered by Christ and his Apostles? Do they not believe also that some
Apocryphal Books are of Divine Inspiration also, and of as infallible Authority
as the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles? Do they not believe Traditions to
be the unwritten Word of God, to be divinely inspired, and of Equal infallible
Authority with the written Word? If they do, then the Explainer has not been
so fair and candid, so just and faithful as he ought to have been in his
Explication; though he has told us the truth, he has not told us the whole
truth. And that they do believe all this, though I might easily produce a Cloud
of Witnesses, and those none of the least admired of their own Authors; yet
because I design brevity, I shall content my self at present with the Evidence
and Authority of one of their most magnified Councils, which they call both
free and general, (though in truth it was neither) and that is the Council of
Trent. Which Sess. 4 8. Apr. de Canon. Script. takes the Books of Toby, Judith,
Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, and Maccabees, into the Canon of Scripture, (though
they could not but know that they never were in the Jewish Canon, nor ever
universally received by the Christian Church) and anathematized all those who
do not upon this Declaration believe them to be Canonical. And the same
Council, in the same Sess. professes to receive and reverence Traditions with
no less pious Affection, than the Books of the Old and New Testament; and that
not in matter of Rite and History only, but of Faith and Manners also. Now what
is this but to add to the Scriptures, and to accuse them of insufficiency and
imperfection? And if so, then what does this Explainer do, but deceive those
Persons of Quality, to whom he presents this as the Sum of their Belief?

But the Explainer goes on, and says, since in the Holy Scriptures there are
some things hard to be understood, which the ignorant and unstable wrest to
their own destruction. And here I shall by the way only remarque these two
things.

1. The Apostle indeed says there are some things hard (but not impossible) to
be understood. For, if men will use the means, if they will apply themselves
with an humble and teachable temper of mind diligently to read the Holy
Scriptures, if they will seriously meditate on what they read, and earnestly
and devoutly pray unto God for the assistance and direction of his Holy Spirit
therein; the difficulty may be removed, and they may be enabled rightly to
understand those Scriptures, at least so far as is necessary for them to know.

2. The Apostle tells us, to whom those things are hard to be understood, viz.
the ignorant and unstable. So that the difficulty seems to be not in the things
themselves, but in the incapacities of men. For, if men will be ignorant still,
and not use the means to know better; or if they will content themselves with
some airy Notions, which float and fluctuate in the brain, without ever
endeavoring to bring them to a consistency; not only some, but all things in
Scripture, and even the clearest declarations of the Church may be hard to be
understood by them, and so they will be as much at a loss in the one as in the
other. But how much this Text is misunderstood and misapplied, a Reverend and
Learned Divine of our Church, in a Treatise entitled, Search the Scriptures,
has plainly demonstrated, to which I refer the Reader. But let us see what
Inference he draws from hence, Therefore (says he) we profess (for the ending
of all Controversies in our Religion, and settling of peace in our Consciences)
to submit our private Judgments to the Judgment of the Church in a free General
Council.

In which Inference I cannot but remarque these things.

1. This Inference does plainly imply a necessity of a visible Judge of
Controversies, to whom, in all matters in difference, there should be an
Appeal, and whose decision should be final. Now if this be really so, Then, 1.
It is mighty strange that Christ and his Apostles, who pretended faithfully to
deliver the whole mind and will of God to mankind, should never once mention
such an Officer in the Church. Or, 2. If they should omit to mention so
necessary a thing in their writings, and only deliver it by word of mouth to
their immediate Successors, it is no less strange that they should either not
know, or never make use of such an Expedient for the ending of those
Controversies that arose in their days. 3. We must conclude, that either the
Church has been mighty careless of her own peace, or that this Judge has been
very negligent in his business, to suffer so great and so fatal Controversies
to continue so long in the Church of God, when there was so ready a way to put
an end to them.

2. Our Explainer in this Inference acquaints us with the great ends, for the
sake of which such a Judge is necessary: viz. The ending of all controversies
in our Religion, and settling of peace in our Consciences. These indeed are
great things, and greatly to be desired. But whether there be any such
Expedient, or if there be, whether it be sufficient for these ends, are the
things in question. Now, that from the first foundation of the Christian Church
to this very day, these great ends have not been universally attained, is very
plain and evident; which to me is a very great Argument that either God never
instituted any such expedient, or if he did, that it was not sufficient for
these ends; which would be a mighty reflection upon the power and wisdom of
God.

But because some things in Scripture are hard to be understood, does it
therefore necessarily follow that there must be a visible Judge of
Controversies, to deliver the sense of those places to us, without whom we can
never attain thereunto, and from whose decision there lies no appeal? I confess
I cannot see the necessity of this consequence: For, if it be granted, as it is
on all hands, that the Scriptures which we now have are the Word of God,
revealed by him, and of infallible Authority, we must believe that either God
would not, or could not explain his mind to the sons of men in words as plain
and intelligible as any such Judge will or can do, or else there can be no such
necessity of any such Judge upon that account. If there be no other way to
attain the sense of Scripture, but only the decision of such a Judge, then what
way or means is left us to understand the sense of the declaration of that
Judge? will there not want another Judge to determine that, and another to
explain his, and so in infinitum?

But let us for once suppose, though we do not grant it, that there ought to be
a Judge of Controversies in order to the attaining of these great ends, let us
see how he ought to be qualified, and where we shall find him. This Judge must
be a person or number of people, who must have a superiority not only of order,
but influence over all others, to whose decisions and determinations all
Christian people ought to conform their judgments and practices. Nor must that
influence be precarious but authoritative, for nothing can warrant their
Impositions, but the Authority by which they are imposed: Nor can any Authority
suffice to oblige mankind to believe that, which is neither necessary as to its
matter, nor evident as to its proof, antecedently to the definition of such an
Authority, but only such an one as is infallible. Now where shall we und such
an one, seeing there are so many pretenders to it? If we believe the Popes
themselves, the Jesuits, and the rest of the high Papalins, then his holiness
will carry away the Bell; but if we believe General Councils, and those who
defend their Supremacy, then they will carry it from the Pope; and if we
believe others of equal credit, then the Catholic Church diffusive will carry
it from both. So that if there ought to be such a Judge, you see it is not
agreed upon among themselves who he is. But,

3. Our Explainer determines this Controversy, telling us, that it is the
Judgment of the Church in a free General Council, that we ought to submit to.

And in this we heartily join with him, for we profess to have as great a
deference for the Judgment of the Church in a free General Council, as they
have or can have, and to have as great a regard to the sense of the whole
Christian Church in all Ages since the Apostles as they, nay it may be greater
than they will pretend to have; for, we are so far from declining it, that as
to the matters in difference between them and us, we appeal thereunto, and are
willing to be concluded thereby; being as well assured as the Records of those
Ages still remaining can assure us, that it is on our side. But if by Church
here, he mean the present Church of Rome, as it stands divided from other
Communions, we deny that she has any more authority to impose a sense of
Scripture upon us, than we upon her, or any other particular Church upon either
of us. Or if by Councils, he mean those Western Councils which have been held
in these parts of the World in latter Ages, we cannot allow them either to be
free or general, and consequently cannot grant, nor have they any reason to
claim any such authority over us. But if by Councils, he mean those primitive
Councils, which indeed were the most free and general, and best deserved to be
styled the Church Representative; we have so great a veneration for their
Opinion and Judgment, that we shall not decline to submit the Umpirage of our
Cause to them. But what is all this to the present Church of Rome, which at
this day so arrogantly claims a right and authority to interpret Scripture, and
impose her sense upon us? For, unless she can prove her self infallible, all
her pretended authority in this case will fall to the ground: If she be indeed
infallible, she would do well to let the world know whence she had her
Infallibility. She must have it either immediately from God, or by delegation
from the Catholic Church diffusive; If from God, let her produce her Charter;
If from the Catholic Church diffusive, then it depends upon her authority, and
by the same authority she may recall it again when she pleases: So that upon
this ground it will prove but a very Fallible Infallibility. We know she
challenges it by virtue of those promises of the Spirit in the Scriptures,
which promises they themselves do confess to have been made only to the
Catholic Church; and therefore, though an Infallibility, even in Judgment,
were granted to belong to the Catholic Church, yet that can signify nothing
to her, till she has proved her self to be that Catholic Church, to which
alone those promises confessedly belong.

Thus you see how candid and faithful our Explainer has been in this first
Point; and now let us examine whether he acquit himself any better in the next.

The EXPLAINER.
2. We humbly believe the Sacred Mystery of the blessed Trinity, One Eternal
Almighty and Incomprehensible God, whom only we adore and worship, as alone
having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to whom alone, (1 Timothy 1.17.) we
acknowledge as due from Men and Angels all Glory, Service and Obedience;
abhorring from our Hearts, as a most detesta bld Sacrilege, to give our
Creator's Honor to any Creatures whatsoever. And therefore we solemnly
protest, That by the Prayers we address to Angels ane Saints, we intend no
other than humbly to solicit their assistance before the Throne of God, as we
desire the Prayers of one another here upon Earth, not that we hope any thing
from them as Original Authors thereof, but from God the Fountain of all
Goodness through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshipped, as the Gentiles did their Idols; but we retain them
with due and decent respect in our Churches, as Instruments, which we find by
experience do often assist our memories and excite our affections.

The ANIMADVERTER.
Our Explainer here, in behalf of the Roman Catholics, makes a very good
confession of Faith, telling us, That they humbly believe the sacred mystery of
the blessed Trinity, One Eternal, Almighty and Incomprehensible God, whom only
they adore and worship, as alone having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to
whom alone (1 Timothy 1.17.) they acknowledge as due, from Men and Angels, all
glory, service and obedience, abhorring from their hearts, as a most detestable
Sacrilege, to give their Creator's honor to any Creatures whatsoever.

This is true Primitive Christianity, good Catholic Divinity without any
mixture of Popery, and is it not great pity that any thing should be added
thereto, or mixed therewith, to spoil so good a Confession? Thus far we can
readily and heartily join with them; but when they superadd Articles of their
own, such as were never delivered by Christ or his Apostles, nor owned by the
primitive Catholic Church, and set them in equal place with those of Divine
Revelation, and primitive practice; then we cannot keep pace with them, but are
forced to stay behind, and sit down contented with primitive Christianity; so
that in truth it is not we that leave them, but they that leave us, and
consequently are guilty of the Separation.

And this is the case here between us and our Explainer. For after all this
glorious profession of adoring and worshipping the One Eternal Almighty and
Incomprehensible God and him only, and abhorring the giving of his glory to any
Creatures as a most detestable Sacrilege; he introduces Prayers to Saints and
Angels, and the Worship of or beofre images, as things equally necessary to be
performed by Christians. Now, if Prayers and Adoration be acts of religious
worship, and the Objects to which they are offered be Creatures, then it must
needs follow, that either all Religious Worship is not due to God alone, or
else that they do give part of his honor to something that is not God. It is
true indeed that he endeavors to palliate these practices with some pretended
qualifications, thereby to shift off the weight of this charge which lies so
heavy upon them; but they are so thin and threedbare, so empty and
insignificant, and have been so miserably baffled of late, especially in the
Answer to A Papist Misrepresented and Represented, as also in two other little
Treatises, the one entitled A Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints,
printed in the year 1684, and the other entitled, A Discourse concerning the
Object of Religious Worship, etc. printed 1685, that I cannot but admire at our
Explainer's confidence to produce them at this time. These Treatises are, or
upon easy terms may be, in every man's hands; and there is therein so much
said upon this Subject, and so much to the purpose, as may very well spare me
the labor of enlarging thereupon; to them therefore I shall refer the Reader
for further satisfaction. But by these short Remarques, which I have made upon
this part of our Explainer's Confession, it is plain that he has been no more
candid and ingenuous in this than in the former. Let us therefore try him in
the next.

The EXPLAINER.
3. We firmly believe, that no force of Nature, or dignity of our best Works
can merit our Justification, but we are Justified freely by Grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, ( Romans 3.24.) And though we should by the
grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly life, and holy obedience to the
Commandments; yet our hopes of eternal glory, are still built upon the mercy of
God, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other Merits, according to our sense of the word, signify no more than
Actions done by the assistance of God's Grace, to which it has pleased his
goodness to promise a Reward. A Doctrine so far from being unsuitable to the
sense of the Holy Scriptures, that it is their principal design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising Heaven as
a reward of our obedience. 1 Timothy 4.8. Romans 2.6. Romans 8.13. Hebr. 6.10. Nothing
being so frequently repeated in the word of God, as his gracious promises to
recompense with everlasting glory the Faith and Obedience of his Servants. Nor
is the bounty of God barely according to our Works, but high and plentiful
even beyond our Capacities, giving full measure, heaped up, and pressed down,
and running over, into the bosoms of all that love him. Luke 6.38.

Thus we believe the merit or rewardableness of holy living, (both which
signify the same thing with us) arise not from the self value even of our best
actions, as they are curs, but from the grace and bounty of God. And for our
selves we sincerely profess, when we have done all those things which are
commanded us, we are unprofitable Servants (Luke 17.10.) having done nothing
but that which was our Duty; so that our boasting is not in our selves, but all
our Glory is in Christ.

The ANIMADVERTER.
If this be really the Faith of Roman Catholics, we shall not stick to
acknowledge it is ours too, and then we shall have no occasion to differ in
this point. But I am afraid our so near an Agreement is too good news to be
true; Our Explainer, I doubt, has either mistaken or to gain a Proselyte, or
for some other end which might be serviceable to Holy Church, has very much
misrepresented the Doctrine of his own Church in this point. For sure I am, the
Council of Trent, which they so much magnify, and on whose decisions they so
much depend, has a quite different Notion of Justification and Merit. That
Council after some Months debate upon the Point of Justification, at last came
to a decision, and declared, That the only formal Cause of our Justification is
God's Justice, not by which he himself is just, but by which he makes us just;
wherewith being endowed by him, we are renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and
are not only reputed, but are made truly just; receiving every man his own
measure of justice, which the Holy Ghost divides to him, according to each man's
predisposition of himself, and cooperation And withal denounces a flat
Anathema to all those who shall dare to say, that we are formally justified by
Christ's righteousness, or by the sole imputation of that righteousness, or by
the sole remission of our sins, and not by our inherent grace, diffused into
our hearts by the Holy Ghost. Sess. 6. Can. 10, 11. And the same Council,
speaking of the Merit of good Works, says, If any man shall say, that the good
Works of a justified Person do not truly merit the increase of Grace and
eternal Life, let him be Anathema. Sess. 6 Can. 32.

Now one would think the choice were very easy, which of these to believe,
whether the Council of Trent or this Explainer. The accounts they give are too
different to be both believed; and can there be any question which of them is
most authoritative? Certainly our Expla^ner must be a very bold Person, who in
defiance of such a celebrated Council, durst deliver what he has done for the
belief of Roman Catholics in this point; and he must look upon his Persons of
Quality, to whom he presents it, as a parcel of unthinking and inconsiderate
Animals, who would swallow any thing without Examination. Either he was in
earnest, or he had a mind to put a cheat upon them; if the latter, he plainly
discovers how good a Christian, and how true a Catholic he is. If the former,
surely he did not well consider, how fatal the Consequences of that Doctrine
would be to the Church of Rome. For, 1. If this be really the Faith of Roman
Catholics, then, What becomes of that gainful Trade of Indulgences, which is
wholly founded upon the Treasure of the Church, wherein are heaped up piles of
satisfactions of Saints, of which the Pope only keeps the Keys, and has power
to dispense them where he lists. There was a time indeed, when Indulgences were
looked upon to be nothing else but a Mitigation or Relaxation, upon just
Causes, of Canonical Penances, which are or may be enjoined by the Pastors of
the Church on penitent Sinners, according to their several Degrees of Demerits.
But this is a Doctrine out of date with the present Church of Rome, insomuch
that Greg. de Valentia says, That this Opinion differs not from that of the
Heretics, and makes Indulgences to be useless and dangerous things, de Indulg.
c. 2. And their great Champion Bellarmine, among several other Arguments
against this Doctrine, brings this for one, That if this were so, there would
be no need of the Treasure of the Church, which he takes a great deal of pains
to prove to be the Foundation of Indulgences. But, 2. What will become of the
profitable Doctrine of Purgatory, which is built upon Indulgences, and they
upon the Treasure of the Church, wherein the Merits of Saints are kept, to be
dispensed by the Pope for the delivery of Souls out of Purgatory? But, 3. What
will become of the Pope's Coffers, which being once emptied, and this Spring
dried up, which should have supplied them, can have no prospect of any other so
effectual way to replenish them again. Had our Explainer well considered these
ill Consequences of his Explanation, he would certainly have thought of it more
than once, before he had exposed it. I cannot imagine what should persuade him
to such an Explanation, unless he had obtained a dispensation to guild his
Bait, the more easily to catch what he angled for. And if this be it, is it not
a great Argument of the Candor and Ingenuity of our Explainer, and a mighty
motive to his Persons of Quality to swallow all that shall be propounded by him?

And now we are come to the last point which he undertakes to explain, and
shall examine whether he be more ingenuous in that than he has been in the
other.

The EXPLAINER.
4. We firmly believe and highly reverence the Moral Law, being so solemnly
delivered to Moses upon the Mount. Exodus 20. Matthew. 19. Eccles. 12 13. so
expressly confirmed by our Savior in the Gospel, and containing in it self so
perfect an Abridgment of our whole Duty both to God and Man.

Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual Contracts one toward another, and therefore our
constant profession is, That we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of our promises made to any Persons of what
Religion soever, much more to the Magistrates and Civil Powers under whose
Protection we live, whom we are taught by the Word of God to obey not only for
fear but Conscience sake, and to whom we will most faithfully observe our
Promises of Duty and Obedience, notwithstanding any Dispensation, Absolution,
or other proceedings of any foreign Power or Authority whatsoever.

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous Position,
That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably imputed to
our Practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply in their usual and familiar
sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever.

The ANIMADVERTER.
Our Explainer would have the World believe, that those of his Communion do
highly reverence, and have a mighty regard for the Moral Law. We do the same;
but we know and believe the Second Commandment to be part of that Law, and
therefore dare not be guilty of Image Worship, which perhaps the Explainer did
not think of.

He further tells us, that they believe, that this Law does contain in it self
a perfect Abridgment of our whole Duty both to God and Man. We believe the
same, and we do further believe, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and
yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. James 2.10. And therefore we dare
not worship Images, nor give divine Honor to any Creatures, nor disobey
Magistrates, nor deal falsely with our Neighbors under any pretense whatsoever,
nor do any thing that is there forbidden, nor leave undone any thing that is
there commanded. Whether the Explainer thought of all this, I know not; but he
cannot but know that the Practices of those of his Communion are not
correspondent thereunto.

But the two great things that he would have the World believe of them upon the
Credit of his Explanation, are these, viz. Their sincerity and Loyalty, which
he would fain insinuate to be the natural Offspring of their Principles, and
the constant Rule of their Practices. These therefore are the things which we
are now to take under Consideration, and that we may be the more clear therein,
I shall consider them severally.

1. And first as to their pretense of sincerity. The Explainer tells us, They
believe, That the Moral Law obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual Contracts one toward another, and therefore their
constant profession is, that they are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of their promises made to any Person of what
Religion soever. And as an Argument to evince the truth hereof, he farther
tells us, that they utterly deny and renounce, that false and scandalous
position, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitably
imputed to their Practices, and most unjustly pinned upon their Religion.

If this position, That Faith is not (...) be kept with Heretics, be untruly
charged upon them, then we must acknowledge that it were uncharitable to impute
it to their practices, and unjust to pin it upon their Religion; but if it
appear to be the Doctrine and Practice of their Church, then it will
undoubtedly overthrow all their pretentions to Faithfulness and Sincerity.

And that this is really the Doctrine and Practice of their Church, we have the
suffrage of a whole Council, by them styled General, viz. the Council of
Constance, by whom this Doctrine was owned, affirmed and practiced. And John
Huss, Hierom of Prague, and Savanarola, though they had the public Faith for
their safe conduct and return, yet in defiance thereof, by virtue of this
Doctrine, they were proceeded against, and severely suffered. The same thing
was also fiercely disputed in the Diet at Worms, in the case of Luther. And had
not Caesar been a better Christian than the Ecclesiastics, and more a
Gentleman than his Holiness, Luther, notwithstanding his Safe Conduct, had not
returned safely from thence. But lest any secular Princes hereafter, should,
either through Scruple of Conscience, or in point of honor, think themselves
obliged to keep their Word, and so hinder them of their prey when it is in
their hands; the Doctrine is now improved, and we are told, There are two
distinct Tribunals, and the Ecclesiastical is the Superior: and therefore, if
a secular Prince gives his Subjects a Safe Conduct, he cannot extend it to the
superior Tribunal, nor by any security given hinder the Bishop or the Pope to
exercise their Jurisdiction. Becanus in Theol. Scholast.

This Doctrine is also confidently taught, and the practice thereof encouraged
by their most eminent Doctors and Casuists. Some instances whereof (for it
would fill a Volume to give you all) I shall now present you with for your
better satisfaction in this point.

Cardinal Tolet. de instruct. Sacerd. l. 1. c. 13. expressly avows, That if a
man be bound by the Bond of Fidelity or Oath, he shall be freed from that Bond,
if he, to whom he is bound, fall into Excommunication; and during that, Debtors
are absolved from the Obligation of paying to the Creditor that debt which is
contracted by words. And the same Tolet. l. 4. c. 21, 22. positively declares,
That Equivocation upon Oath before a Magistrate is lawful.

Thomas a Jesu the Carmelite, de covers Gentium, dub. 4. p. 218. puts this
question, Whether one that denies it, when he is asked by an Heretic whether
he be a Priest, or a Religious man, or whether he heard divine Service, does
sin against the Confession of Faith? To which he answers, No. For that is no
denying himself to be a Christian or Catholic. For it is lawful to dissemble
or hide the Person of a Clergyman, or a Religious man, without a Lie in words,
lest a man be betrayed and in danger of his life; and for the same cause he may
lay by his Habit, omit Prayers, and because humane Laws for the most part bind
not the Subjects Conscience, when there is great hazard of life, as in this
case Azorius has well taught.

And Cardinal Tolet. de Instruct. Sacerd. l. 8. c. 39. n. 4. thus determines a
Case propounded. If (says he) the times be hard, or the Judge unequal; a man
that cannot sell his Wine at a due price, may lawfully make his measures less
than is appointed; or mingle water with his Wine and sell it for pure, so he do
not lie; and yet if he does, it is no mortal sin, nor obliges him to
restitution. A man may swear to positive untruths by the Law of directing the
Intention, says F. Southwel, Tract. de Equivocat. c. 8. p. 42, 43.

If a man has taken an Oath of a thing honest and lawful, and in his power;
yet if it hinders him from doing a greater good, the Pope can dispense with his
Oath, and take off the obligation, says Canus Bishop of the Canar. Relect. de
poenitent.

If a man has promised to a Woman to marry her, and is betrothed to her, and
has sworn it; yet if he will, before the Consummation, enter into a Monastery,
his Oath shall not bind him, his promise is null; but his second promise that
shall stand. He that denies this is accursed by the Council of Trent. Sess. 8.
Can. 6.

I am weary with transcribing such nauseous stuff, and therefore omitting many
more, I shall only add one instance more. Pope Pius V. upon occasion of some
Missionaries to be sent into England, declared, That if they were summoned
before the Judges, they might Sophistice jurare and Sophistice respondere; and
that they were not bound to answer according to the intention of the Judges,
but according to some true sense of their own; i. e. which was made true by the
help of a Mental Reservation. Apud. G. Abbot. de Mendacio, etc. in praef. p. 6,
etc.

By these instances you may perceive that the Doctors and Casuists of the
Romish Church are not of our Explainer's opinion; which to me is a very great
Argument, that he has not dealt so fairly and heartily as he ought to have
done in his Explanation. It may be he will tell us that these were but private
Persons, and that the Doctrine of their Church is not to be measured by their
private Opinions, which if he do, I shall readily own, That the private
Opinions of particular men ought not, in reason, to be charged upon that
Society to which they belong; And if so, then our Explainer ought not to take
it amiss, if we do not receive his Explanation as the Doctrine of that Church
of which he pretends to be a Member. But if the united force of the Council of
Constance, and that of Trent (both which they themselves reckon to be General)
with the concurrent opinions of so many eminent Doctors and Casuists of their
own Church too (none of which, that we know, have ever received the least check
for publishing their opinions) if these, I say, will outweigh any Authority
which this Explanation can pretend to, then what becomes of all this goodly
Profession which he here makes? where shall we find all that faithfulness and
sincerity which he here boasts of? if making and breaking of promises, if
swearing and forswearing, if the violation of all the most sacred Bonds,
wherewith mankind can be obliged, may pass for faithfulness and sincerity, we
may expect great store of it amongst them. And indeed whilst there is a power
given to the Pope to dispense with Oaths and Promises, and a liberty given to
the People to make good all they say or swear by the Law of directing the
Intentions, by the Power of Equivocation, and the force of Mental Reservation,
I cannot see any reason why we should expect better. But if this be the
Faithfulness and Sincerity they boast of, we bless God that we know none such
amongst us; and we hope this will never prove an Argument sufficient to
persuade any of ours to desert the Communion they are of, for a Communion that
allows such things as these. And thus have I given you an account of their
Faithfulness and Sincerity.

2. The other thing which he boasts of is, their Loyalty. For he tells us, They
are most strictly and absolutely bound to an exact and entire performance of
their promises made to the Magistrates and Civil Powers under whose protection
they live, whom they are taught by the word of God to obey, not only for fear
but Conscience sake, and to whom they will most faithfully observe their
promises and duty of Obedience, notwithstanding any dispensation, absolution,
or other proceedings of any foreign Power or Authority whatsoever.

We do indeed firmly believe, That both they, and we, and all Subjects are most
strictly and absolutely bound to an exact and entire performance of all those
promises which we make to Magistrates and Civil Powers, and that there is no
power on earth either Foreign or Domestic that can dispense with our Oaths and
Promises, or absolve us from our Duty and Allegiance. But whether this be the
Belief of Roman Catholic, we are not so well assured: If we will take it upon
the bare word of our Explainer, it is; but having found him faulty and
disingenuous in the former points, we may suspect him in this, and therefore
must not swallow all that he says for Gospel, till we have examined it. We
very well know that the Doctrines of learned and allowed Casuists, and
Practices of those who have greatest authority in the Roman Church have been
quite contrary to this Explanation, and we never found any disposition in them
to so great a condescension, nor ever heard that there was any such Reformation
made in their principles and practices by any public Authority among them. If
our Explainer had produced any authentic Records of any such thing, we should
with a great deal of readiness and rejoicing have embraced them; but we cannot
admit of his bare word as a sufficient evidence in this case.

Our blessed Savior assures us, that no man can serve two Masters, Matthew.
6.24. Whilst therefore those of the Roman Communion do own the Pope as Supreme
Head of the Church, and allow him a sovereign and uncontrollable power over
them both in Temporals and Spirituals, by virtue of which he can dispense with
their Oaths and Promises when he pleases; we cannot see how they can be so
exact in the performance of their promises made to Civil Powers. For, it is not
only possble but often happens, that the Civil Power, under whose protection
they live, does not own the Papacy, nor has any regard for the pretended power
and dominion thereof; and in such a case it is very likely, their commands will
interfere: which if they do (as we know they very often do how a Roman
Catholic will carry himself even, and so exactly divide his obedience to these
different Sovereigns, and their different commands, as to please both, I cannot
as yet imagine. How our Explainer will resolve this case, I know not; but I
very well know, that the Doctors and Casuists of the Roman Church, and their
Popes too, will roundly tell us, That the Power of the Pope is superior to
that of the Prince, and therefore he is to be obeyed in the first place. And if
so, then what becomes of all that Loyalty and Fidelity to Civil Powers, which
our Explainer so much boasts of?

To show you therefore, that notwithstanding this so specious Explanation of
their Faith in this point, we have sufficient reason to suspect the candor and
ingenuity of the Explainer, and the truth of what he says; I shall only
confront him with the declared Doctrines, and avowed Practices of their own
Church in this case.

All the Jurisdiction of all the Kings and Princes of the World depends on
the Pope, says P. Clem. 5. in Council. Vienn.

And Pope Pius 5. in his Bull against Queen Elizabeth, does strictly will and
command all her Subjects to take Arms against that Heretical and Excommunicate
Queen.

The Deposing and King killing Doctrine, dispensing with Oaths of Allegiance,
etc. were made Articles of their Faith, by the fourth General Council at
Lateran, under Pope Innocent 3.

And it is pleasant to observe how nicely scrupulous some of their great men
are in resolving this case, gravely telling us, That private men may not kill a
King till he be deposed; but if once he be excommunicate, then he is no King;
(and then they may kill him without scruple) Or if he be an Heretic (which the
Pope can make him when he pleases) then they may kill the Heretic, but not
the King. Thus Suarez advers. Sect. Anglic. l. 6. c. 4. Sect. 14. And c. 6.
Sect. 22.24. Thus also Azorius the Jesuit. Instit. Moral. part. 1. l. 8. c. 13
And thus Mariana, de Reg. Instit. l. 1. c. 7, etc.

The Rebellion of a Clergyman against his Prince is not Treason, because he is
not his Prince's Subject, says Emman. Sa. Aphor. verb. Clericus.

When a Prince is Excommunicate, before the Denunciation, the Subjects are not
absolved from their Oath of Allegiance, (as Cajetan says well) yet when it is
denounced, they are not only absolved from their Obedience, but are bound not
to obey, unless the fear of Death, or loss of Goods excuse them, which was the
case of the English Catholics in the time of Henry the Eighth, says Card.
Tolet. conc^r. Eccles. in Angl. fol. 336.

It is the Sentence of all Catholics, that Subjects are bound to expel
Heretical Princes, if they have strength enough, and that to this they are tied
by the Commandment of God, the most strict tie of Conscience, and the extreme
danger of their Souls, says F. Creswel, in Philopat. Sect. 2. n. 160, 161.

Nay even before the Sentence is declared, though the Subjects are not bound to
it, yet lawfully they may deny Obedience to an Heretical Prince, says Greg. de
Valentia, Tom. 3 disp. 1. q. 12. punct. 2.

An Excommunicate King may with impunity be deposed or killed by any one, says
Suarez, Desens. Fid. l. 6. c. 6. Sect. 24.

The Pope can make, that he who is a King, shall be no King, and then you are
disobliged, says Bellarm. contr. Barcl. c. 7.

The Secular power is subject to the Spiritual. The Pope has a sovereign power
over Christian Kings and Princes, to correct, depose, and appoint others in
their places. If a King be guilty of Heresy, Schism, or any intolerable crime
against his People; if he be guilty of negligence or sloth in his government;
if he fail in the performance of his Oaths and Promises, or oppress the Church;
the Pope may divest him of his Royal Dignity; says Abrah. Brovius, de Pontif.
Roman. c. 46. p. 621. Col. 2. Which Book was printed at Cologne, Anno 1619. and
solemnly recommended and approved by his Superiors, and Licensed by the
Apostolic Inquisitor.

I might be infinite in instances of this kind, but having almost wearied my
self with raking in such a Dunghill, I am not willing to tire my Reader too. I
shall therefore only produce one unexceptionable Witness more, and that shall
be their great and renowned Champion Bellarmine, out of whose 5th. Book De
Romano Pontifice, I shall take the pains to transcribe some passages; and
having subjoyned thereunto some instances of their practices suitable to their
declared principles, I shall then leave it to the judgment of any indifferent
person, what kind of Loyalty and Fidelity Sovereign Princes (especially those
who are of a different persuasion) may hope to find from their Roman Catholic
Subjects.

Bellarmine in the first Chapter of his fifth Book De Romano Pontifice, having
rejected two extreme Opinions concerning the Pope's power; the one taught and
maintained by Augustinus Triumphus, Alvarus Pelagius, Hostiensis, and others of
his own Communion, viz. That the Pope by a Divine Right has a most plenary
power over all the World as well in Political as Ecclesiastical affairs. And
the other delivered by Calvin, Peter Martyr, Brentius and others whom he calls
Heretics, viz. That the Pope, as Pope, has not by Divine Right any Temporal
power at all, nor upon any account can command Secular Princes, much less
deprive them of their Kingdoms and Principalities; and that Spiritual persons
ought not to exercise Temporal Dominion. He at last lays down a middle Opinion
between both, which he tells us is the common Opinion of Catholic Divines,
viz. That the Pope, as Pope, has not directly and immediately any Temporal
power, but only a spiritual: yet by virtue of that Spiritual power he has
indirectly at least a supreme power in Temporals.

This Opinion he undertakes to explain in his Sixth Chapter, where he tells us,
That in Order to a Spiritual good, he has a Supreme Power of disposing all the
Temporal things of all Christian People.

Which Power is just such over Princes, as the Soul has over the Body or
sensitive Appetite; by Virtue of this Power he may change Kingdoms, and take
them from one and give them to another; he may make and alter, suspend and
abrogate Civil Laws, as the Chief Spiritual Prince, if it be for the safety of
Souls.

In his Seventh Chapter he endeavors to prove this Exorbitant Power of the
Pope by reasons; all which are founded in the Subordination and Subjection of
the Temporal to the Spiritual Sword, (which is a Foundation that will certainly
fail him.) However upon this Foundation he thus builds.

The Ecclesiastical Republic can command and compel the Temporal, which is
indeed its Subject, to change the Administration, and to depose Princes, and to
appoint others, when it cannot otherwise defend the Spiritual good. And again,
it is not lawful for Christians to suffer an Infidel or Heretical King, if he
endeavor to draw his Subjects to his Heresy or Unbelief. But to judge whether
a King do draw to Heresy or not, belongs to the Pope, to whom the Care of
Religion is committed; therefore it belongs to the Pope to judge whether a King
be to be deposed or not. And if any one ask why the Christians of old, did not
depose Nero, and Diocletian, and Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arian? He
roundly answers, it was not because they wanted Right, but because they wanted
Power to do it.

But lest any scrupulous Christian should boggle at those horrid things, which
these declared Principles must of necessity lead them to, as Rebellion, Murder,
Breach of Faith, Violation of Oaths, etc. He will tell them that they are not
answerable for any of these things; For, if the Pope should mistake, and
command Vice, and forbid Virtue; yet it were a sin against Conscience, for the
Church not to believe those Vices to be good, and those Virtues to be evil.

All these instances that I have now laid before you, were of men who lived and
died in the Communion of the Church of Rome, and most of them men of great
Eminency both for their Parts and Places; and therefore very likely to
understand the Religion they professed. Now either these men, or our Explainer
must be very much out, and strangely unacquainted with the Principles of their
Religion; or else the Explainer must industriously design to put a cheer upon
those Persons of Quality to whom he presents his Scheme. For, nothing can be
more different than his Explanation, and this Declaration which these men have
left upon Record. But, I think, the choice is very easy which of these ought
to be believed in this case; and if this Cloud of Witnesses carry it (as
undoubtedly they will) against one single unauthorized Explainer, then
certainly he was in the wrong box, when the so much boasted of the Loyalty of
the Roman Catholics.

And now I shall only subjoyn an account of some few of their Practices,
correspondent to these Principles, and they being put together will, I suppose,
sufficiently discover the mistake of our Explainer.

Leo Isaurus Emperor of Constantinople was excommunicated by Pope Gregory the
IId. his Country given away to the Lombards; by which means he and his
Successors lost all the Western Empire, which the Pope and the French King
afterward shared between them.

Henry the IVth. Emperor of Germany was excommunicated by Pope Gregory the
VIIth. his Subjects absolved from their Obedience, Rodulph Duke of Sueden and
Burgundy set up against him, to whom a Crown was sent by the Pope, with this
Inscription, The Rock gave the Crown to Peter, and Peter gives it to Rodulph.

Childericus King of France, by the Advice and Authority of Pope Zachary the
Is It. had his Head shaven, was thrust into a Monastery, and Pipinus Son of
Carolus Martellus (who was but a Subject and Servant to the King) was anointed
King in his stead.

Henry the IIId. King of France was killed at the Siege of Paris, with an
empoysoned Knife by a Jacobine Friar called Jaques Clement: Which Murder, Pope
Sixtus the Vth. by a solemn Oration in the Consistory September the 2d. 1589.
commended to the Skies, as Rarum, insigne, and memorablile facinus. So
publicly was the King killing Doctrine owned by them at that time.

And what effect this Papal approbation did produce, is evident; for upon this
encouragement King Henry the IVth. Successor to Henry the IIId. was also
stabbed with a consecrated Dagger, by a Jesuit named Ravilliac. How frequent
the excommunicating and deposing of Princes, the absolving of Subjects from
their Duty and Obedience, and the stirring up of Tumults and Seditions against
them by Popes and Papalins, has heretofore been; History is so full, that it
would be an Herculean labor to transcribe all the instances thereof.

Now these declared Principles and avowed Practices of Roman Catholics being
put together, and compared with our Explainer's profession; may sufficiently
evince how much he has abused those Persons of Quality, and how unfairly and
dishonestly he has dealt with them in his Explanation of the Roman Catholick's
Belief in this Point.

But one would think he durst not deal thus, considering what a solemn
Protestation he makes in the Close of his Explanation; For, thus he concludes.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God the searcher
of all Hearts, taking the words plainly and simply in their usual and familiar
sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever. Were we not
so well acquainted with the Power of Dispensations, and the force of Mental
Reservation among them; did we not know that by these Artifices they can elude
the most solemn Protestations, make void all Oaths and Promises, and dissolve
any the most sacred Bonds which can be invented to oblige men; it would look
very uncharitably to suspect any man after such a solemn Protestation. But that
they can do all this, and think they can do it with a safe Conscience,
notwithstanding their Protestation to the contrary, is a ruled Case among their
Casuists: I shall only at present trouble you with one instance, which is very
applicable to the case in hand, and with that conclude.

On occasion of the Powder Plot here in England, an Oath of Allegiance was
thought necessary to prevent such horrid attempts in time to come; which a
Roman Doctor (cited by Arch-Bpishop Usher under this Character, B. P. (...).
Epistol. I. R. Impres. An. 1609.) taking notice of, laughs aloud at the
simplicity of it. His words are worth remembering, Sed vide in tanta astutia,
quanta simplicitas! etc. But see what simplicity here is in so great Craft!
When he had placed all his security in that Oath, he thought he had framed such
a manner of Oath, with so many Circumstances, which no man could any way
dissolve with a safe Conscience. But he could not see, that if the Pope
dissolve the Oath, all its Knots, whether of being faithful to the King, or of
admitting no Dispensation, are accordingly dissolved. Yea, I will say a thing
more admirable; you know, I believe, that an unjust Oath, if it be evidently
known to be such, or openly declared such, it obliges no man: That the King's
Oath is un^, is sufficiently declared by the Pastor of the Church himself. You
see now that the Obligatian of it is vanished into smoke, and that the and
which so many wise men thought was made of Iron, was (...) Straw.

FINIS.

