THE Sad Estate and Condition OF IRELAND, AS, Represented in a Letter from a
Worthy Person, who was in Dublin on Friday last, to the Honorable Sir --
Together with the DECLARATION OF THE Earl of Tyrconnel, FOR THE Disarming all
Protestants, and preventing their Escape out of that Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in in the Old-Bailey.
1689.

CHESTER, March 4. 1689.
I Have at last (I thank God) though with much Hazard and Difficulty, escaped the
Ruins of my Country, for Major Arthur Dillon (who is just recovering from a
Fit of Sickness) having procured a License to be transported, with his Servant;
in that disguise, and under the Name of his Man George, I got away. And as I
cannot approve of the overhasty Flight of many of our Nation, whose dissertion
has perhaps put our Affairs in a much worse Posture there, so, I believe, you
will judge, I rather staid a little too long, by the following sad but true
account of that unhappy Island.

After the Dragoons and other new raised Soldiers had (with Connivance)
destroyed the Cattle and plundered several private Persons, in most Placer of
the Country; last Sunday was Sennight, ten thousand of the neighboring Troops
and Companies were ordered privately to draw near the Town, and the Design was
managed with more Secrecy and better Conduct than one could expect from their
usual Prudence and Politics; for on Monday Morning by break of Day, without
any Alarm of Drum or Trumpet, they seized all the Skirts of the City, and
planted themselves at the Heads and Turning of every Street: At seven a Clock
three select Companies, commanded by Captain Talbot, marched silently toward
the College; and some who went before, by an Irish Stratagem (that is by
telling a Lie to the Porter) got admission into the Gate; which they presently
seized, and drew their Men into the Court. They came prepared to meet with
Opposition, having a Basket of Hand-Granadoes, ready charged, and Orders to
kill every Man that resisted. The Captain (having called for the Vice-Provost
and Fellows) declared, How he was commanded by my Lord Deputy to search
strictly for Arms and Ammunition, being assured, That there was a considerable
Magazine of both lodged among us. We attended him and his Officers to every
Chamber, where they examined all Places, and found but very few Arms: They
quartered upon us all that Day and the next, and kept strict Guards upon our
Gates and Passages: While this was doing in the College, others were employed
in the same Work in all Parts of the Town, and used the Citizens more
barbarously than we were; who had the good Fortune to have a civil Officer.
About two Hours after the Search for Arms the Dragoons and Horse-Granadiers,
went about and broke open all Stables, and seized the Horses, which were driven
to several Quarters of the Town, and there divided by Lot among the Officers
and Troopers. I lost my two Horses, which were too low, I am sure, for any
Service, but nothing would secure them. The Arms that were taken, were lodged
in the Parish Churches, with Guards upon them, where they continued for some
time; at last when all this hurry was a little over, which was not acted
without much violence and pilfering, and some blood, a Declaration was
published (the Copy of which I here enclose) which most Protestants looked upon
as a snare, and specious pretense to plunder their Houses, because if upon
search hereafter any Arms be found (and how easy is it for Soldiers in such
Confusion to drop Arms, and say they found them there) such Houses are exposed
to the extravagancy and rapine of the Soldiers. In the Country things were
managed with more severity, and some few who, made opposition, were plundered
of all, Nay, even those who had my Lord Deputy's Protection, and License too
keep Arms to defend their Houses, were besieged, and more hardly used on that
very score: Among others Sir Arthur Langford, Mr. Barton of Carrickmacross, and
Mr. Price (formerly Treasurer) are sad instances, having lost all their Goods,
and some of them made Prisoners; Sir Thomas Newcomen too (I fear) is in the
same Circumstances, being told, that (though he had a Protection and License
for Arms for twenty Men) they broke into his House, and have not left him worth
a Farthing: I could tell you one hundred melancholy stories of this sort, for
every day brought in fresh account; And on the other side, you cannot imagine
how much this success has flushed the new Soldiers and my Lord Deputy's Party,
they talk with contempt of your English Succors, despise your new Government,
laugh at your Divisions, and speak loudly of Invading you within a few months;
Indeed (if the looser may may be allowed to speak) most of our Miseries are
owing to the daily promises and expectation of Forces from England, for as
those hopes encouraged our Friends in the North and Sligo to Associate; and
consequently expose the poor remnant of Protestants in Leinster and Connaught
to the mercy of their Enemies; So this tedious disappointment will (I fear)
make them desperate, and accept of any Conditions from the Government, and lay
down their Arms, since they find they are so much neglected and forgotten in
England. I forgot to tell you that while all this was doing in Dublin, Soldiers
were put on board every Ship, and placed at all the Passages by Rings-End, to
prevent any ones escaping; these Guards yet continue, and 'twas dismal to see
how many poor people were turned back by the Soldiers after they had been first
rifled and barbarously used; Some endeavoring to escape, were shot at and
wounded, and lest any Ship should steal away the Sails of most of them were
taken to Town; last Thursday Orders were sent to Sheriffs of every County to
seize the Real and Personal Estates of all Persons now out of the Kingdom.
Yesterday a solemn Procession of the Host was to be made through the principal
Street of Dublin, for a blessing upon their Designs; they talked too that a
Proclamation would suddenly be issued for Persons to bring in their Plate to be
Coined; and that the Forces would this day march toward the North. The King
has long been confidently expected, and we have 2 or 3 times had false Alarms
of his Landing in Munster, and made Bonfires on that occasion, but on Friday,
when I came away, there was no such thing, though my Lord Dungan and Captain
Arthur (who Landed in Ireland a week ago) said he was at Sea. What frightened
me most away was the assurance I had that a new Test or Oath would be imposed
on all persons which no Protestant could take with a safe Conscience.

I believe I have tired you with this long Melancholy Letter, I have not now
time to write to others of my Friends, but I know you will communicate this
account, I thank God I am come to a Country, where I can plainly tell all this
Story, and once more subscribe my Name, and own my self

Your most obliged humble Servant, A. A.

By the Lord Deputy-Genral, and General-Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland; A DECLARATION.
TYRCONNEL,
WHereas having been certainly informed, That the Prince of Orange intends to
invade this His Majesty's Kingdom; Who upon the Landing of his Forces, will
endeavor to possess himself of all the Arms, Ammunition and Horses in the
Custody of private Persons, as well to strengthen his own Party, as to weaken
His Majesty's Interest; and having found that several with Horses and Arms went
out of this City to the North of Ireland, and other Places of this Realm, to
join with the Rebels there; for the prevention whereof, and to prevent the
Anger that may happen in leaving Arms and Horses in the Hands of those that are
not of the Army, have thought fit for His Majesty's Service, to seize upon all
the Arms and serviceable Horses within the City of Dublin, and the Suburbs
thereof; and to that end, have given Orders to several Officers of the Army,
with several Parties of Horse, Foot and Dragoons, to seize the said Arms and
Horses for His Majesty's Use: And to prevent any Disorder that might be
committed by the Soldiers in searching for Arms in private Houses, We have
directed the Lord Moyor and several of the Common Council of the City to give
notice to the several Inhabitants of Dublin of Our said Intention. And though
We are certainly informed that the Inhabitants of this City have a considerable
Quantity of Arms and Ammunition; yet to frustrate Our Intentions, have
concealed them, so as very few are produced, to the great prejudice of His
Majesty's Affairs; We do therefore strictly charge all Inhabitants, Dwellers,
and all other Person or Persons whatsoever within the City of Dublin and the
Suburbs thereof, and within the Liberties of St. Thomas Court, and St.
Sepulcher, being not of His Majesty's Privy Council, or of the standing Army,
forthwith to repair with all their Arms, Ammunition, Swords or Baggonets, to
the Church-Door of every Parish where they severally dwell, and to deliver them
to the Officers there appointed by Us to receive the same, as they and every of
them shall answer the contrary at their Peril: Hereby declaring, That if any
Person or Persons whatsoever shall in contempt of these Our Orders, neglect
producing their Firearms, Ammunition, Swords, and Baggonets, according to the
Directions aforesaid, their Houses and all secret Places therein, shall be
searched by the Soldiers with all the Care imaginable; and if upon search
made, any Firearms, Ammunition, Swords and Baggonets shall be found therein,
We do hereby declare, That such Person and Persons where any such Arms shall be
found, shall not only be punished as Contemners of these Our Orders, but must
run the Risque of the ill Consequences which may fall upon them by Disorders of
the Soldiers; hereby further declaring and assuring, that all Persons who
shall comply with these Our Commands, shall be protected in all other their
Goods without the least Molestation or Prejudice; excepting out of this Order
the Swords of all Persons of Quality and Gentlemen, who may keep the same for
their own Wearing.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 25th. Day of Febr. in the 5th.
Year of His Majesty's Reign, and in the Year of our Lord 1688. W. ELLIS.


