AN EXERCITATION ON THAT Historical Relation, Matthew. 15. 1 -- 9. Mark. 7. 1 --
13.

CONCERNING Eating with unwashen hands;

By way of APPENDIX or SUPPLEMENT To the Discourse, concerning INDIFFERENCIES:

AND

More particularly, to Argument or Reason the Fourth; to prove, That
Indifferencies enjoined by Authority do not thereby become necessary; or, That
the Command of Authority does not render indifferent things, necessary. LONDON:
Printed for Benj. Alsop, at the Angel over against the Stocks-Market, 1680.

Matthew. XV. Mark VII. 1. THen came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of
Jerusalem, saying, 1. THen came together to him the Pharisees, and certain of
the Scribes which came from Jerusalem. 2. Why do thy Disciples transgress the
tradition of the Elders? for they wash not their hands when they eat bread. 2.
And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with defiled (that is to say,
with unwashen) hands, they sound fault. 3. But he answered and said unto them,
Why do you also transgress the Commandment of God by your tradition? 3. For the
Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands ost, eat not, holding
the tradition of the Elders. 4. For God commanded, saying, Honor thy Father
and thy Mother; and he that curses Father or Mother, let him dye the death. 4.
And when they come from the market, except they wash, they eat not. And many
other things there be, which they have received to hold; as the washing of
cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables. 5. But ye say, Whosoever shall
say to his Father or his Mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou might be
prosited by me, 5. Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him, Why walk not thy
Disciples according to the tradition of the Elders, but eat bread with unwashen
hands? 6. And honor not his father or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have
ye made the Commandment of God of none effect by your tradition. 6. He answered
and said unto them, Well has Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites; as it is
written, This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. 7. Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, 7. Howbeit, in
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrins the co^mandments of men. 8. This
people draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips; but
their heart is far from me. 8. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold
the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many other such like
things ye do. 9. But in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
Commandments of men. 9. And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the
Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own tradition. 10. For Moses said,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.

AN EXERCITATION ON Mat. 15. 1 -- 9. Mark 7. 1 -- 13.
Sect. 1. THe imposed use of Indifferencics has been (like the Canaanites to
the Israelites) pricks in the eyes, and thorns (or goads) in the sides of, i.
e. matter of much mischief and vexation to, the Church of God almost in all
ages; Especially, in the Jewish Church, when it drew toward the dregs, much of
this sediment appeared. How far the Papal, Antichristian Church is overrun
with this ill humor, is notorious: And it is one great evil which our English
Church now labors and groans under at this day. It Is this, which has been the
apple of contention, and bone of division; the stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense among us, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, in the time of
our Josiah, King Edward the 6th. And after many years freedom from this itch,
it brake out again some years since, to our great disturbance, and scratching
of one another.

Now for the better fixing our judgments concerning either our Liberty or
Restraint in such cases, I shall euter upon a strict examination, and narrow
consideration of this portion of Scripture, which furnishes us with one of the
most pregnant, and pertinent instances, or Historical passages to this purpose,
in the whole New Testament; which I shall examine from top to toe, that thereby
we may discover how far forth it will help us, either one way or other, i. e.
either for Conformity, or Nonconformity, in such like cases.

Sect. 2. The whole passage contains a discourse between Christ, and the
Scribes and Pharisees, concerning the observation of the Traditions of the
Elders, o^casion'd by the Disciples neglect thereof; for which the Scribes and
Pharisees implead them to their Master, and quarrel him about it: In which he
vindicates 'em at large, and blows up the very foundation of their complaint,
by showing the invalidity, yea impiety, of these Traditions. This is the
general prospect of the whole. In handling of which, I shall first distinctly
consider the several particulars; and then make such Reflections upon 'em, and
draw such Inferences from 'em, as they naturally afford, and may be conducible
to my present design.

The Particulars contained in the foregoing General, take as follows. Here are
(1) the Accusers. (2) The Accused. (3) The Accusation. (4) The Defense.

Sect. 3. First, The Accusers; Scribes and Pharisees which were of Jerusalem;
or, which came from Jerusalcm. These may be considered both in reference to
their Condition, Scribes and Pharisees; and in reference to their Habitation,
or the place from whence they came, Jerusalem.

(1) Scribes; this is a Title of Function or Employment; they might be either
Priests or Levites, for we find Scribes of both sorts; Priests, as Neb. 8. 9.
Ezra the Priest the Scribe. So Ezra 7. 11. Levites, as 2 Chronicles. 34. 13. Of the
Levites there were Scribes, etc. 1 Chronicles. 24. 6. Shemajah, the son of Nethaneel
the Scribe, one of the Levites. But which soever they were, they were, as to
their Office and Employment, Teachers and Expounders of the Law in their
Schools and Synagogues; as Ezra 7. 6. -- a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses. v.
10. He had prepared his heart to teach in Israel statutes and judgments. Neh.
8. 1 -- 9, 13. Matthew. 7. 29. He taught them as one having authority, and not as
the Scribes: and so elsewhere. And hence

They were commonly the most learned and conversant in the Law; as is implied
by that question, Matthew. 17. 10. Why say the Scribes that Elias must first
come? and therefore, says Gerard, Doctissimi quique (...) vocabantur: and
Brugensis, Scribae scientiae authoritatem sibi vendicabant. Upon this account
Herod consulted them about the place of Christ's Nativity, Matthew. 2. 4.

(2) Sect. 4. Pharisees; they are generally spoken of as Teachers too, Matthew.
16. 6, 12. -- leaven, i. e. the Doctrine of the Pharisees. These were such as
did separate themselves (as the word signifies) from other men; Yet

Negatively, (1) Not in regard of refraining their society and converse, either
public or private; for, they sat in the great Council with the Sadducees,
Acts 23. 6. and Herodians, Mark 3. 6. went into other men's houses, Mark 2. 16.
conversed with all sorts of men to Proselyte 'em, Mat. 25. 15. and conferred
ordinarily with Christ and his Disciples, as here, and elsewhere: Nor (2) in
refraining the public assemblies, and places of public worship; for Luke 6.
6, 7. there were Pharisees in the Synagogue at public worship. But,

Positively, In respect of a singularity of Holiness and Devotion, which they
pretended unto, and took upon them to have, above others. They Would seem to
transcend the Rule of the State-Religion, and common Devotion of the Nation; to
be in a higher Form than others, and to strain a note above Ela, in the scale
of Holiness; and that in these two things especially: (1) In extreme
ceremoniousness; as in frequent washings, large Phylacteries, etc. and (2) in
extraordinary devotion, as in long Prayers, much show of Fastings; tithing
Mint, etc.

(3) Scribes and Pharisees joined together. They were both of them, as has been
said, the great Preachers and Professors of the Law; and here, as frequently
elsewhere, they join together to oppose and oppress Christ and his Disciples,
and go hand in hand; that what they cannot effect by single strength, they may
obtain by their united forces. Scribes was a title of Function, and Pharisee of
Devotion: Pharisaei perfectioris exteriorum observantiae exemplum, scribae
scientiae authoritatem sibi vendicabant. Brug.
the one were pretenders to more than ordinary strictness in Religion, the
other valued themselves upon the score of their learning: And thus under the
Banners and Colors of pretended devotion and learning, they fight against
Christ.

(4) From Jerusalem. (1) Not of the ordinary and common sort, such as did
belong to every Synagogue in inferior Cities, but of the chief City. Jerusalem;
and such were, likely, Hi doctrinae and religionis totius obtinebant arcem.
Brug. Judaei in Galilaed submiserunt Scribas and Pharisaeos, non vulgares
illos, quales in Singulis Galilaeae Synagogis habebantur, sed qui Jerosolymis
erant praecipui* qui eruditione, solertia, and authoritate, addo etiam, and
m(...)ia reliquos superabant. Ger. Har
of the ablest and bitterest of them, and did excel the other Rusticks in
learning and craft, and perhaps, in malice too. (2) They came a great way:
Christ was now in the land of Gennesarct, Matthew. 14. 34. Mark 6. 53. which was
a great way from Jerusalem, near a hundred miles, as I find by the Map; whereby
we see, what pains wicked men will take to oppose Christ, and create trouble to
his Disciples and Servants.

Sect. 5. From all which particulars it is obvious to observe, That corrupt
Churchmen in high places, are the old. great sticklers for humane inventions,
and ceremonious observances. These great Rabbis of the first magnitude, who
shone with the greatest outward splendour, were the great Engines to withdraw
the people from Christ, and the chief Supporters and Pillars of their old
Mumpsimus customs. And so all along; None greater Enemies ^o pure, spiritual,
Gospelworship, than Ceremony-mongers, and superstitious Zealots. Luther had no
sorer opposites out of Alehouses, and Brothel-houses, than he had out of
Religious Houses, as they called them. None more dangerously wound Religion,
than they, who, before men, would seem the most zealous Patrons and Promoters
of it. It Is often seen, that the more learned, the more lewd: Wickedness is
thereby armed with weapons, both for Offense and Defense. Unsanctified
Learning, or learned wickedness, is (...), as Aristotle speaks. It is like a
Sword in a mad-mans hand, which enables him to cast about sirebrands, arrows
and death, as it is Prove. 26. 18. Nihil novi nec insolens est, ut illi qui
primatum sibi in Ecclesia vendicant, primi etiam sint, qui de opprimendo
Christo and ejus Evangelio* consilia agitent. Ger.
Hence Philosophers are called by the Fathers, Haereticorum Patriarchae; the
ringleaders and Captains of such as fight against Christ.

2. Sect. 6. The Accused; immediately and directly the Disciples, Why do thy
Disciples transgress, etc. but secretly and collaterally, Christ himself; they
shoot at him through the others sides; and seem to insinuate, as if he were to
be blamed for teaching 'em no better, and suffering 'em to walk so disorderly,
without reproving 'em for it: Thus they dealt also, Matthew. 9. 14. -- Why do we
and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not?

But I shall insist no further upon this, but hasten to that which I chiefly
aim at, which is, the two following Points, viz. The Accusation it self, and
the Defense.

3. Sect. 7. The Accusation it self, or the Practice, or Usage concerning which
the Contest and Dispute arose, which is,

In General, a Transgression of the Tradition of the Elders, or Disobedience to
the Injunctions of Authority.

Particularly, Eating with unwashen hands. The former relates to the Authority
enjoining; The latter is the Practice enjoined.

As to the former, the General, I shall consider (1) Who these Elders were. (2)
What was a Tradition of the Elders.

Sect. 8. First, Who these Elders were. The word [Elders] in its primary and
original sense, relates to Age, and denotes, either such as lived a great
while; even till they came to be old; or, such as lived a great while ago;
those of former times; as Deuteronomy. 32. 7. Heb. 11. 2. and so it is the same with
(...), Matthew. 5. 21. and thence it is derived to signify most commonly, both
Dignity and Authority; and so we find both in Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English
(to name no more) the words importing Age or Eldership, viz. (...), Senatus,
Aldermen, do denote both Honor and Power. And

(1) This sense is very frequent both in the Old and New Testament. I shall
mention but a few places of the chief; as Deuteronomy. 22. 15. -- -- the Elders of
City in the gate (the place of Judicature). And they are sometimes called,
Elders of the people, i. e. such who had authority over the people; as Elders
of a City, are they that are in power in that City. Thus Matthew. 26. 3. Then
assembled together the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders of the people. So
c. 27. 1. When the morning was come, all the chief Priests, and Elders of the
people took counsel, etc.

Hence they are commonly joined with [Rulers]; as 2 King. 10. 1. Jehu wrote
letters -- -- to the Rulers of Jezreel, and to the Elders. Act. 4. 8. Ye Rulers
and Elders of Israel; and they are very frequently joined with [chief Priests,
and Scribes and Pharisees;] and then the distinction that was between them, I
conceive may be stated thus; As they were distinguished from the Pricsts, they
seem to be Laymen (as we call 'em), and as distinguished from Scribes, they
were such as were not brought up wholly in the study of the Law, or at least
did not make that their Profession; but were some of the Nobility and Gentry,
admitted to be Members of the Sanhedrim, as is most evident from these places
following, Acts 22. 5. The High Priest does bear me witness, with all the
estate of the Elders; from whom also I received letters unto the brethren, and
went to Damascus, to bring them which were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to
be punished: and c. 24. 1. Ananias the High Priest descended with the Elders,
who informed the Governor against Paul. Matthew. 26. 59. Now the chief Priests
and Elders, and all the Council, sought false witness against Jesus, etc. Mark
15. 1. The chief Priests held a consultation with the Elders and Scribes, and
the Whole Council. So that nothing is more clear, than that they were Members
of the Council, and persons in, and of, Authority.

I have been the more full in this point, because Grotius in loc. thinks that
these Elders here mentioned, though they were learned and wise men, and so
possibly might be Members of the Sanhedrim upon that account; yet that the
mention made of 'em here, does not relate to any such capacity they were in;
but only, as celebrated Teachers, who were not only famous in their
Generations, but were had in great veneration and esteem in aftertimes, and
their judgments and dogmes were of great authority. And so Beza takes 'em too,
only for the ancient Doctors, and not for persons in authority. But even
Grotius himself elsewhere (viz. in Acts 4. 5.) gives this account of 'em,
Seniores, idem quod Senatores, and consules vrbium. Elders are the same with
the Senate, or Court of Aldermen, or, at least, Common-council-men, and
'Burgesses of Cities: And the places forementioned do most evidently and
undeniably evince, that they were persons in authority, and members of the
Sankedrim (as I said before) or great Council of the Nation: And therefore

Sect. 9. (2) They were the proper Judges of Ecclesiastical affairs, to whose
cognizance matters of Religion did appertain. Hi doctrina and religionis to^ius
obtinebant arcem, and inquisitionem proinde, censuramque doctrinarum sibi
arrogabant. Commoti igitur sama crebrescente de Jesu, emiserunt e suis quosdam
(sicut etiam Marc. 3. 22.) qui observarent quid doceret, quidque faceret, in
Galilea, Jesus, novus ille Doctor, ab iosis nec missus, nec probatus, says
Brugensis.

And particularly, It was the peculiar privilege of those Doctors who were
Members of the great Council to frame such Decrees, Constitutions or
Traditions. This I gather from that passage of the Targum on Eccles. 12. 12.
where it is said, (...), which the Translation in our Polyglot Bible renders
Magistri Sanhedrim, scil, ductores viarum; as if (...) were to be taken
according to the proper signification of the word, from (...) ambulavit;
whereas it is most usually taken in the Metaphorical sense, for Consuctudo,
ratio, mos, ritus, judicium; and among the Rabbis and Talmudists it signisies
(says Buxtorf) Constitutio juris, sententia, decisio, traditio decisa; and usu
ac consuetudine recepta and approbata, secundum quod incedendum and vivendum.
Lex Talm. in voc. (...); and accordingly it is to be rendered here, Doctores
synedrii, qui sunt Domini consuetudinum, sive constitutionum juridicarum. The
Doctors of the Council, who are the grand Masters of Traditions. And hence

(3) We may easily imagine the reason why the Scribes and Pharisees here, were
so much concerned at this neglect of the Disciples, viz. because their own
Copyhold was touched, and their own authority lay at stake, inasmuch as they
were the Successors of these Elders; so that the slight that was put upon the
one, redounded to the disparagement of the other. Non mirum Scribas violatione
traditionum seniorum cito offensos fuisse, quod co and ipsorum authoritas
elevari videretur, qui jam Seniorum locum tenerent, illorum successores, and
institutorum propagatorcs, says Brugensis. Hence Christ calls 'em your
Traditions.

So then, The Elders here meant were such as lived in former times, who were
persons of great Dignity and Authority, to whose cognizance matters of Religion
did appertain, and to whom it belonged to belonged to form and frame these
Constitutions or Traditions.

Where, by the way, you may take notice (and that you may take the more and
better notice of it, know, That it is the Observation of the prodigiously
learned Dr. Stillingfleet) That the word [Elder] or Presbyter, according to the
common use of it, has a higher Character, and is of more excellent import, than
the word [Bishop]; the former noting Dignity and Authority, (as has been
showed); the latter, only matter of Duty, Charge, Trouble and Business. His
words are, (...), a name importing Duty more than Honor, and not a Title above
Presbyter, but rather used by way of diminution and qualification of the power
implied in the name [Presbyter]. Iren. p. 286. But this by the by. Thus you
see, Who these Elders were.

2: The next thing to be spoken unto, is to show, What the Traditions of these
Elders were: And here I shall consider (1) their Nature. (2) Original. (3)
Validity, or, what stress they laid upon'em.

Sect. 10. First, What a Tradition is. A Tradition, in general, is something
delivered from one to another: and it is twofold, Di-vine, and Humane.

(1) Divine, which is, either matters of Doctrine, delivered either by God
himself, or some immediately inspired by him; and so, both the Verb (...), and
the Noun (...) are used concerning the points of Christianity. Thus the Apostle
Paul received from God, and delivered to the Church the Doctrine of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 3. yea, the whol^ Doctrine of the Gospel in general is
a Tradition, delivered or conveyed to us, Romans 6. 17. 2 These. 2. 15. Jude 3.
Again, Divine Traditions respect matters of Practice also; and these are
Constitutions, or Ordinances appointed by God, or some immediately inspired by
him, for the use of the Church, as the word seems to be taken, 1 Cor. 11. 2.
Now I praise you Brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Ordinances (Margin, Traditions) as I have delivered them to you. And more
plainly 2 These. 3. 6.

(2) Humane; called here, Traditions of the Elders; your Traditions, v. 3, 6.
your own Traditions, Mark 7. 9. the Traditions of men, Mark 7. 8. Col. 2 8. and
of the Fathers, Gal. 1. 14. And these likewise are either Doctrinal, concerning
some points of Doctrine, as Matthew. 5. 21, etc. and therefore are called
expressly the Doctrine of the Pkarisees, and of the Sadducees, Matthew. 16. 12.
Concerning which, Grotius observes, That that which the Greek Philosophers
called (...), Christ here calls (...), a Doctrine, Instruction, Article, or
point of Faith; or else, they are Practical, being customs and external
observances, invented by men, and delivered from hand to hand from Father to
Son: and such Traditions were these here of the Elders; and those Col. 2. 20,
21. And these are the Traditions under Consideration.

Now such a Tradition, is an Ordinance, (...), institutum hoc constitutionem
vertere possumus. Eras.
Institution, Canon, Constitution, Resolution, Decision, or Determination of
their Forefathers the Governors of the Church, delivered down from one to
another, enjoining the observation of such and such Rites, Ceremonies or
Practices.

The former of these sorts, viz. Divine Traditions, are the Rule and Ground of
our Faith, Worship and Obedience; The latter, Humane, do naturally produce
Superstition and Will Worship: and of this sort there were multitudes upon all
occasions, so that the whole Talmud is little else than a Collection of 'em.
I Will give you a taste, and but a taste of 'em. It was a Tradition, that on a
Festival-day it was not lawful to blow the fire with a pair of bellows, because
that had some resemblance of a Mechanic work; but they might blow it through a
hollow Cane. Again, On a Festival-day it was not lawful to lay wood on the fire
in an artificial manner, so as to resemble a building. But enough of these.

Sect. 11. Secondly, What was the ground they went upon, or the occasion of
their first broaching these Traditions? In general, it was, as they express it,
(...) To make a hedge to the Law, that men should not break in upon it to
transgress it: and this was a specious color for all their Traditions; for
they pretending to make Constitutions to fence the Law from violation, and to
raise the observance of it the higher, they multiplied inventions and fancies
of their own brains, and set 'em up for Laws, and so made the Law indeed
nothing worth. I shall give you an instance but in one of 'em. The written Law
forbad, Thou shall not seethe a kid in his Mothers milk, Exodus 23. 19. Now to
make sure, as they pretended, that this Law should not be violated, they fenced
it with this Tradition, Thou shall not seethe any flesh whatsoever in any milk
whatsoever.

Thus we see, how very apt men are to set their posts by God's Pillars, to
light up their Candles to his Sun, to put their varnish upon his Gold, and,
like Botchers, to patch their inventions upon his Institutions. The Jewish
Rabbis, under a specious pretense of Piety, brought in whole loads of this
kind of trash, which they called Sepimenta legis, but were indeed but
impedimenta, because God's Commands were thereby frustrated, as our Savior
Christ shows here, in the sequel of this discourse. This is the general reason:
But

As for the particular grounds of particular Traditions, I shall have occasion
to mention some afterward.

Sect. 12. Thirdly, What was their Validity? Of what account they were among
the Jews, and what value they put upon 'em, appears by many passages in their
Authors. It is a saying of the Talmudists, (...) Verba Cabalae aequiparantur
verbis Legis. Here they set them cheek by jole (as we say) with the Commands of
God: but this is not all; they set 'em even above the Law of God it self, and
make that to lacquey behind: for this is another saying in the Talmud (as
Grotius quotes it) Plus est in verbis Scribarum quam in verbis Legis; There Is
more weight in the words of the Scribes, than in the words of the Law. And Dr.
Lightfoot quotes another to the same purpose, The words of the Elders are more
lovely than the words of the Law, and more weighty than the words of the
Prophets. Hence they say of this Tradition in particular, That be that eats his
bread with unwashen hands, sins as grievously as if he lay with a Whore. So
says R. Fose in Talm. Sota. c. 1. yea, says R. Akiba, he deserves to dye for
it; and accordingly, water being once brought to him both for drinking and
washing, and the greatest part of it being casually spilt, the remainder he
used for washing, saying, That it is better to dye, than to transgress the
tradition of the Elders. And this is a saying too, among them, Whosoever dwells
in the land of Israel, and eats his ordinary food after a cleanly manner, and
speaks in the holy language, and says over his Phylacteries morning and
evening, may be confident that he shall obtain happiness in the world to come.

But lest any should take these Traditions for matters of Counsel only, or bare
opinion, which laid no manner of obligation upon them, and because a passage of
Grotius, formerly quoted and animadverted upon, may seem to look that way
(though what has been said already under this last head, does abundantly prove
what an high opinion they had of them in point of their obligatoriness) Yet
further, as I showed before, that the word [Elder] denotes persons of a public
Character, and such as were in places of power and authority, and not only
persons in a private capacity; so I shall further prove, by several Arguments,
that the Traditions of these Elders were not points of opinion only, but
matters of injunction and command.

Sect. 13. (1) This Tradition is expressly called (...) a Precept of the wise
men, both by Maimonides in Hilchos Brachos, c. 6. sect. 2. (...). Washing the
hands is a precept of the wise men, to which we are absolutely bound to yield
obedience, according to what is written, Deuteronomy. 17. 11. According to the
sentence of the Law which they shall teach thee -- thou shall do. And also by
the Talmud, Washing of hands is by reason of the command of the wise men. And
accordingly,

(2) These Traditions are called, Commandments of men, here by Christ, Mark 7.
7. and opposed to the Commandments of God, v. 8. and what is called in one
verse, a Tradition, is called in the other, Commandments of men; so that they
seem to be convertible terms, Mark 7. 7, 8. In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. For laying aside the
Commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of men, etc.

(3) The word [transgress] (Why do thy Disciples transgress the tradition of
the Elders?) implies, that they held them obligatory; and that these Traditions
laid an obligation upon them; for, why else do they tax the Disciples for the
transgression thereof, if they did not take'em to have the nature of a law?
For, Transgression properly belongs to a law, or something that has a binding
power in it, 1 John 3. 4.

(4) The drift and design of our Savior's Answer and Vindication, is to show
that the people were not obliged thereby, and that these Traditions were of no
force or validity at all; which shows that they looked upon 'em as obligatory.

(5) These Elders, who were the Authors of these Traditions, were members of
the Senate, and Rulers (as was proved before), and consequently, a Tradition, or
Decision of their's, had the nature of a law, and was of a binding power, being
the act of the whole body; as we find it was in this particular case: for the
whole body of the Council espoused the quarrel of this Rite; for they
Excommunicated R. Eliezer, because he slighted this Ceremony of washing of
hands; and then when he was dead* they commanded a great stone to be laid on
his Coffin, in token of their detestation of him; or to note, That his Coffin
was to be stoned; says the Talmud, in Edajoth, cap. 5.

(6) The Hebrew Edition of Matthew by Munster, renders [traditions of the
Elders] by (...). Now (...) is rendered by Buxtorf, Pactum, decretum, statutum,
constitutio, sententia; from (...) decernere, statuere, definire.

And thus we have dispatched the consideration of the General ground of their
complaint, viz. A transgression of the Tradition of the Elders, by showing, Who
these Elders were: What a Tradition of the Elders was, both as to the Nature,
Ground, and Validity thereof.

Come we now to the particular cause of their quarrel, viz. Eating with
unwasten hands And here many things offer themselves to our consideration: As

Sect. 14 (1) This Washing is called by the Jews (...) Lifting up the hands
(viz. to wash) for dinner; because in washing they lifted them up in a formal,
ceremonious manner (as we shall see anon), or, as St. Mark expresses it, (...)
diligently.

(2) The Rabbis say it was to be used only before the eating of ordinary
bread. Thus Maimon. in Hilchos Brachos, c. 6. sect. 1. Quicunque comedit panem
super quo convenit recitare benedictionem istam Benedictus, etc. qui educit
panem e terra, opus habet lavare manus ab initio and fine, etiamsi sit panis
communis. (The Reasons whereof the learned Reader may see in Buxtorf's
Discourse De lotione manuum, sect. 11.) And therefore you may observe that
express mention is made of bread here several times, Matthew. 15. 2. Mark 7. 2,
5. And therefore they allowed a man to eat fruit, cheese, herbs or fish with
unwashen hands.

(3) This washing was from (...), the ends of the singers, wherewith they took
their meat, (...) usque ad juncturam, to the joining; which some understand, of
the joining of the fingers to the hand, but most generally, of the joining of
the hands to the arm, at the wrist (and not of the joining up at the elbow, as
Capellus contends;) for which Buxtorf produces many passages in his Vindic.
Exercit. in hist. Institut. Coen. Domin. advers. animad. Lud. Capelli. sect. 55.

Sect. 15. (4) For the Manner, it was performed, either by pouring the water
upon the hands by another person, or by one's self, if none else were at hand
to do it; or else by dipping the hands in the water. If it were done by
pouring, the water was to be poured upon the hands two or three times. First,
If the hands be dirty, to cleanse 'em from the dirt; (2) To take away the moral
uncleanness (as they accounted it). (3) To cleanse them from that second water,
which took the moral uncleanness to it self, and therefore must all be washed
off.

Several other Rules and Directions are given, both as to the Quality and
Quantity of the water; as also concerning the Vessel that the water is to be
put into, which may be seen in the forementioned Author, sect. 24 -- 28.

(5) They were to lift up their hands (whence it was called Netilas Jadajim, as
was said) that the water might not run back from the hands to the fingers, and
so defile them again: for they held, that the water that was poured upon the
hands did contract moral defilement thereby, as was said.

(6) They were to pull off Rings, Plasters, or any such thing that was upon
the hands, and to rub 'em well, and then dry 'em thoroughly.

These things I have run over briefly, that I might hasten to the following
particulars, which are more to my purpose.

Sect. 16. (7) This usage or practice of washing the hands before meat, was not
contrary to the Word of God, or any where forbidden by it in particular; It is
no where said in the whole Bible, Thou shall not wash thy hands before meat, no
more than it is said any where, Thou shall not baptize with the sign of the
Cross; Thou shall not wear a Surplice, etc. Nay,

(8) It was so far from that, that they pretended a particular ground from
Scripture for it, viz. that command, Levit. 15. 11. Whomsoever he touches that
has the issue, and has not rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his
clothes, etc. The account of which you have at large in the Talmud, Massecheth,
Col. 1. (as it is quoted by Buxtorf in the forementioned Discourse, sect. 4. 5.)
in these words, (...), Lotio manuum ad communem and prophanum cibum est propter
cohaesioncm Trumae, (concerning which, see his Lex. Talm. Voc. (...)). Imo
etiam propter proeceptum sapientum. Quale proeceptum? Avai dixit, Illud
proeceptum, quo jubemur obtemperare verbis sapientum. Rabba dixit; Imo propter
id quod R. Eliczer ben Erech dixit, qui docuit, ex eo quod scriptum est Levit.
15. 11. Omnis autcm quem tetigerit seminisluus, and manus suas non abluerit
aqua, etc. collegisse ac decrevisse sapientes, lotionem manuum esse ex lege.
Grotius in loc. gives another account of it, viz. That these Jewish Rabbis
thought that if any uncircumcised person, or any one of their own Nation
legally unclean, had touched either the meat or drink, or any other thing that
did touch the meat or drink, as their hands wherewith they were to take the
meat or drink, or had touched the pots wherein the meat was boiled, or the cups
out of which they were to drink, that then the meat or drink was defiled, and
did communicate its defilement or uncleanness first to the body, and then to
the soul of the person that did eat or drink thereof: whereupon, as an Antidote
or Remedy hereof, these cleanly persons prescribed such a ceremonious,
methodical, artificial kind of washing. But I take the former account out of
their own Authors, to be the most authentic, and pertinent.

Whereby we may perceive that this Tradition of theirs has the advantage of our
Ceremonies, for there is no particular precept alleged for the establishment
or countenancing any of them; yea, there is little or nothing of Reason can be
said for 'em. (And in this respect indeed they may be called Innocent
Ceremonies; as we call those Innocents, who have nothing of Reason in 'em;) but
their Defenders, when assaulted with Reason, are fain to shelter themselves
under the wings of Authority, and cry King's Truce, as boys do, i. e. They are
commanded by Authority, and therefore we must yield obedience, when we are
enjoined nothing that is contrary to the Word of God: But though they pretended
warrant from Scripture, yet

(9) They did not enjoin it as immediately binding the conscience, or commanded
by God directly, but only by consequence; and therefore they called it (...),
(as was said before) a precept of the wise men, and said it was (...) one of
the words or commands of the Scribes, but that it was not (...) any of the
commands of the law.

Nay (Eastly) it might seem to be a point of Civility, and a piece of
cleanliness, which no doubt but both Christ and the Disciples might use upon
occasion, though only as a matter of civility, wherein Religion was not
concerned either one way or other, whether it were done or not.

And this too is more than can be said on the behalf of our Ceremonies; for
there is no such, either Decency, or Convenience in the use of them.

But yet for all this Christ here opposes and conjemns this Tradition, which
brings me to the last Point to be spoken unto, viz.

4. And lastly, (Sect. 17.) The Defense, Plea or Vindication that Christ makes
in the behalf of his Disciples in this particular; which is (1) by way of
Retortion, or Rccrimination, Why do you also transgress the conmand of God by
your tradition, Matthew. 15. 3. (2) By way of Reprehension, or taxing them for
their hypocrisy, Mark 7. 6. He answered and said unto them, Well has Esaias
prophesied of you hypocrites, etc. (3) By way of Instruction to the people,
Matthew. 15. 10. And he called the multitude, and said unto them, Hear and
understand, etc.

1. By way of Retortion, or Recrimination, Why do you also transgress the
Command of God by your Tradition? For God commanded, saying, etc. They accuse
the Disciples for transgressing the Tradition of the Elders, and Christ accuses
them for transgressing the Command of God, by their observing these Traditions;
which was certainly much more blameworthy than the other. And here I observe,

(1) That in those words, v. 3. he undermines the very foundation upon which
all this tottering building of Traditions stood; For it was a prin^iple among
them, That the Traditions of the Elders were to be observed most religiously,
without any exception, contradiction, or dispute; but now Christ here proves,
That some of their Traditions did palpably and evid^ntly contradict and
enterfere with the Law of God* and therefore they were not all of 'em so
strictly and inviolably to be observed, as they held. And then,

(2) As to this particular instance he gives, v. 4 -- 6. I observe, He does not
so much reply to their particular question, nor argue against this Tradition in
particular, which the Pharisees here stood up for, but chooses rather to
instance in one which did more evidently and by plain consequence overthrow one
of the Commands of God: so that hereby He seems to me plainly to intimate, and
insinuate, That all fuch Traditions, i. e. Ecclesiastical Canons,
Constitutions, Insunctions, and obligatory Determinations, concerning
unnecessary things, (whereby men endeavor to render that pr^ctice necessary,
which God has left free) are contrary to the Law of God, and cons^quently
invalid and non - obligatory. Understand it, of what is not necessary, neither
in its own Nature, nor by any Circumstance; according to what has been
delivered in the foregoing Discourse. Now that this is the drift of Christ in
these words, I prove thus:

Either He does here by this one instance argue against, and condemn all
Traditions in general, as well as this one, or he does not. If he does not,
then his arguing is inconsequent and unconcluding, as to the point in h^nd: For
the Pharisees might reply, Well! suppose you can pick out one Tradition, which
you say does plainly derogate from a Command of God, yet what is that to the
case before us? This that we implead your Disciples for, is none of those, but
founded upon a particular law; and therefore that stands firm and ought to be
observed, as not liable to this exception; and so, they are guilty for not
observing it. But now that Christ should argue thus loosely and incoherently is
by no means to be admitted. Shall He who gave to man the faculty of Reason, be
defective in any point of Reason himself? As the Psalmist argues concerning
God's Knowledge and Providence, Psalm. 94. 9, 10. He that planted the ear, shall
not he hear? He that formed the eye, shall be not see? -- He that teaches man
knowledge, shall not he know? So may we say in this case. True, the Reason of
Christ's discourses sometimes lies very deep, that it is hard for us to fathom
it with our short understandings, and to attain to a clear apprehension of it:
but however, we cannot without blasphemy admit of any flaw in it, or deny it to
be firm, valid and concluding.

But then, if He did here argue against all such Traditions in general, my
Observation stands good, and I have gained my Point. And hence it will follow,

(3) That to observe such Traditions, and Institutions, is so far from being a
Duty, that it is a sin; because thereby the Law of God is transgressed.

Sect. 18. 2. Christ's Reply is by way of Reprehension, and taxing their
hypocrisy, Matthew. 15. 7 -- 9. ^e hypocrites, etc. The people indeed had a
great veneration for them, and looked upon them as great Devoto's and
Religionists: but Christ puts off their vizor, uncovers their nakedness, and
lays open their hypocrisy; and that, by applying to them that prophecy of
Isaiah, This people draws nigh, etc. i. e. they pretend a great deal of
Religion in their outward carriage, and seem to be very diligent in all
external duties, but all is but from the teeth outward: their Religion is but a
mere carcass, without any life, or soul, or spirit in it; the heart is wanting.
Here he opens the fountain of this evil, which was, The placing all Religion in
outward ceremonies, and superstitious observances.

V. 9. But in vain do they worship me] i. e. They shall not only not get any
good by such worship, but shall bring upon themselves the wrath of God, and
consequently a great deal of evil and mischief, by their thus -- teaching for
Doctrines] i e. instead of Doctrines, the commandments of men.] The word
[Doctrine] is usually taken for those points either of Faith or Duty, which are
delivered in Preaching; and here it must relate, particularly, to matters of
worship, as is evident, both because that is the business in h^nd, which Christ
is here speaking of; and also, by comparing these words with those of Isaiah,
whence they are taken, viz. Isa. 29. 13. where the words run thus: -- and their
fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men. Their fear toward me, i. e.
their worship of me; as fear is taken, 2 King. 17. 32, 33. And then by [the
commandments of men] is meant, those Traditions of the Elders before mentioned;
what he calls [your traditions] and [your own traditions] before, here he calls
[the commandments of men.] i. e. All such humane inventions and institutions in
God's worship, which have no good ground, nor warrant from the Word of God,
though they may pretend some. Ea quae fundamentum habent in persuasione mere
humana, and non divinitus tradita, says Grotius.

So that the sense of the whole clause is this, -- Teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men] i. e. By their thus preaching up, and pressing the
observation of their Traditions and humane Inventions in the worship of God,
instead of those things which are of divine Institution and Appointment, they
render their worship vain. It Is the property of Scripture alone to be
prositable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3. 16. Hence Titus is required to snow
uncorruptness in doctrine; Tit. 2. 7. i. e. to deliver the pure truths of God
not dashed with the water, nor alloy'd with the lead of humane inventions,
whereby it is corrupted, as wine is with water, and gold with lead. So that, as
the matter of all our Teaching is laid down Positively, in that Commission,
Matthew. 28. ult. Teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you: So
here, teaching and urging any thing in the worship of God, not only contrary
to, but besides, the Word, is condemned in these words by Christ; and they that
take their measures in Worship, from the Commandments of men, their worship is
vain, bootless, and unprofitable, yea mischievous and abominable: And such
persons Christ pronounces to be Hypocrites; and such we must take 'em for,
except we will contradict his judgment. Your zealous assertors of, and great
sticklers for, the observation of humane inventions in God's worship, are great
hypocrites in Christ's account; and they that urge and impose such things as
strictly, or more strictly than the observation of divine Institutions, are
guilty of gross hypocrisy, whatever they pretend, as to Decency, Uniformity,
Authority, or the like. For, though a practice be really a matter of Decency
and Convenience, and thereupon some Rules and Directions may be given by
Authority about it; yet it ought not to be enjoined as strictly, or as much
stress laid upon it, as upon the substantials and vitals of Worship: as for
example. In point of Time, or Place, or Gesture, or Habit, it is to be supposed,
and I think we may well take it for granted, that generally, neither Ministers
nor People are such bruits, and so void of understanding, as to perform Duties
with such undue Circumstances, at such inconvenient Times, in such inconvenient
Places, with such rude Postures, in such undecent Habits, as may render the
service, or worship notoriously undecent, and wholly unprofitable, and
inconsistent with the Glory of God, and the good of Souls: or, if any
particulars should be guilty of such foul miscarriages, then let Governors
take notice thereof, and censure offenders proportionably to the demerit of the
crime; and not perdere substantiam propter accidentia, imbroil the whole Church
by, and silence hundreds or thousands of inoffensive Ministers for
noncompliance with. Impositions about such matters. Certainly the greatest
evil that can be imagined to follow upon some irregular, undue, circumstantial
miscarriage in worship, is not proportionable to the thousandth part of that
mischief which we have always found has followed upon these Impositions.

Sect. 19. 3. The last method that Christ uses for the Vindica^ion of his
Disciples for their Nonconformity to this Imposition, is by way of
Instruction, to inform the people, What it is that really and properly does
pollute a man, Matthew 15. 10 -- 20. Mark 7. 14 -- 23. Where, as before he
undermined the foundation of all their Traditions in general, so here he
overthrows the groundwork of this Tradition in particular, by teaching and
proving, that eating with unwashen hands defiles not a man, Matthew. 15. 20. and
if so, then there is no need to wash before meat. But this being besides my
present design, I shall give it a discharge from any further attendance. And,

Sect. 20. For a close of all, I shall wind up the substance of all that has
been said in a narrow compass. Here was (1) A Law, Precept, Injunction,
Constitution, or call it what you will, it was something they looked upon as
obligatory; and that (2) made by lawful authority, yea, the Supreme authority
of the Nation: and this (3) about a lawful matter, viz. that which was not
anywhere forbidden by the Law of God, nor contrary to any command; yea (4) it
was a matter of civil Decency: and (5) that which they pretended some ground
from Scripture for: And yet for all this (6) this Law or Command did not
oblige: for then the neglect thereof would have been blameworthy; which yet it
was not, as appears by Christ's Vindication of his Disciples for it: though
they did not obey this Command, nor observe this Custom, yet he does not in the
least blame ^em for it. Nay,

(7) The Observation of it upon such an account, was not only not necessary,
but unlawful; as appears, in that Christ blames and taxes the Pharisees for
this and such like observances; and therefore (Lastly) Nonconformity herein was
so far from being a sin, that it was their Duty, and Conformity or Compliance
had been a sin; from all which I infer, That

A lawful practice, enjoined by lawful Authority, is not thereby, and purely on
that account, made necessary: but there is something else required, viz. That
the matter of the law be necessary antecedently to the law, either in its own
Nature, or in respect of some Circumstance (as has been showed in the foregoing
discourse about Indifferencies), or else it obliges not.

FINIS.
These Books following are Printed for Benjamin Alsop, at the Angel and Bible
over against the Stocks-Market.
MElius Inquirendum: or, an Inquiry into the Sober Inquiry, etc.

The Non-conformists Plea for Peace: the first Part: by Rich. Baxter.

A Defense of the Non-conformists Plea for Peace: against Mr. J. Cheyneys
Answer, called, The Nonconforming Conformist, etc. To which is added, a Letter
written by the Author of Melius Inquirendum.

The Royal Charter of Confirmation, Granted by King Charles the II. to the City
of London. Taken from the Records, and Translated into English by S. G.

A Seasonable Warning to Protestants. Being an Exact History of the Parisian
Massacre, August the 24th. 1672. With the Popes Bull to Encourage and Justify
the Massacre and Rebellion of Ireland.

A Word to Sinners, and a Word to Saints: by Tho. Gouge, Minister of the
Gospel. With any other Books of the same Author.

Jacob's Ladder: or, the Devout Souls Ascension to Heaven: by Jo. Hall, B. D.

Young's English Scholar: in Spelling, Reading and Writing. Enlarged: the 4th
Edition.


