THE CREED OF Pope Pius the IV. OR A Prospect of Popery TAKEN From that
Authentic Record.

With short NOTES.

IMPRIMATUR,

Jun. 29. 1687. Guil. Needham.

LONDON, Printed for L. Meredith at the Angel in Amen-Corner. 1687.

The CREED of Pope Pius IV. etc.
THE words, Representing and Misrepresenting, have of late made a great noise
among us; some Gentlemen of the Roman Communion having made it their business
to persuade the World, that we of the Church of England have entertained a very
strange and false Idea of their Religion, and according to our own Notions of
it, represented it as theirs, which they tell us is downright Misrepresenting.
It is not my design to engage in this Controversy, it has been sufficiently
done by other hands, and so sufficiently, that the Answerer in his Answer to
the Amicable Accommodation, I think had good reason to say, that the matter was
drove as far as it would bear. Nor is it my intent to justify every thing,
which, in heat of discourse or disputation, has been charged upon that Church
by some of our own men; for though perhaps they have said no more than what
they have warrant for from some eminent Schoolmen or Casuists of that Church,
yet I do not think it reasonable that the particular opinions of private men,
though never so eminent in their way, should be charged upon the whole Society
of which they are Members, unless they have been owned by some public and
authentic act of that Society. Being unwilling therefore to run my self upon
that Rock, I have steered another Course, and have made choice of one of the
most solemn, public and authentic Acts of their Church. Viz. The Bull of Pope
Pius IV. printed with the Acts of the Council of Trent, and shall charge
nothing upon them but what is owned and contained therein. This Bull was dated
at Rome in the year of our Lord 1564. in the Ides of November, and the Fifth
year of his Pontificat. In this Bull a Form of Faith is drawn up, extracted out
of the Council of Trent, which every one who enters into Holy Orders is bound
by Oath not only to believe, but to maintain and defend, and teach the people
under their charge, and that under pain of the displeasure of Almighty God, and
of his holy Apostles Peter and Paul. And if we may not take this for the
Standard of their Faith and Religion, I must confess I do not know where to
find it. But I do not know that this ever was, nor do I think it will now be
disowned by them, and therefore from hence you may take a prospect of their
Religion, and see what it is that will be required of those who join in
communion with them.

The CREED.
Art. I. I believe in one God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth,
and of all things visible and invisible.

II. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, begotten of
his Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God,
begotten not made, being of one Substance with the Father, by whom all things
were made.

III. Who for us men, and for our Salvation came down from Heaven, and was
incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made man.

IV. And was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, suffered and was
buried.

V. And the Third Day rose again according to the Scriptures.

VI. And ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of the Father.

VII. And he shall come again with Glory to judge both the quick and the dead,
whose Kingdom shall have no end.

VIII. And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of Life, who
proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son
together is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the Prophets.

IX. And I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church.

X. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of Sins.

XI. And I look for the Resurrection of the Dead.

XII. And the Life of the world to come. Amen.

Thus far his Holiness thought fit to hold a good correspondence with Primitive
Christianity, and thus far we can keep pace with him; All these Articles we
willingly receive, and firmly believe, because we have good warrant from the
holy Scriptures so to do. But if the Church of Rome, or any other Church shall
presume to decree any thing against the written Word of God, or besides the
same, and impose it as a new Article of Faith necessary to be believed in order
to our Salvation, we must beg their pardon, if we cannot so readily comply with
them. For as we believe that Jesus Christ is the Author, so we believe he is
the Finisher of our Faith. And as he perfectly knew the whole mind and will of
his Father, so did he carefully communicate the same to his Apostles and
Disciples: For, says he, All things that I have heard of my Father, have I
made known to you. John 15.15. And as we believe that the Apostles were
instructed and commissionated by him to preach that Faith which they received
from him; so we have no reason to doubt but that they did faithfully transmit
the same to their Successors, the Primitive Fathers of the Christian Church;
nor need we to question but that the same Faith has been carefully conveyed to
us, both as it lies dispersed in the holy Scriptures, and as it is summed up in
those three ancient Creeds, viz. the Nicene, the Athanasian, and that commonly
called the Apostles Creed. Whatsoever therefore we do not find in these Creeds,
nor contained in holy Scriptures, nor can be proved thereby, we dare not
receive it as an Article of Faith, nor can we think it necessary to Salvation.
And here we are left behind, not being able any farther to keep pace with the
Church of Rome; but we may comfort our selves in this, that we are left in good
company, having Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, and the Primitive Fathers with
us. Here therefore let us take up our stand, and from hence take a view of
Popery in the following Articles.

Continuation of their Creed.
Art XIII. I most firmly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, and all other Observations and Constitutions of the same Church.
NOTES upon it. Ecclesiastical Traditions are to be received with equal
veneration as the Holy Scripture. Sess. 4. Council. Trid. Decr. de Canon.
Script. -- pari pietatis affectu ac reverentia, etc.


XIV. I do admit the Holy Scriptures in the same sense that holy Mother Church
does, whose business it is to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
them; and I will interpret them according to the unanimous consent of the
Fathers. NOTES upon it. By holy Mother Church you must be sure to understand
the Church of Rome, and if the Scriptures do not speak according to her sense,
you must by no means admit of them.


XV. I do profess and believe that there are Seven Sacraments of the new Law
truly and properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and
necessary to the salvation of mankind, though not all of them to every one,
viz. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and
Marriage, and that they do confer grace; and that of these, Baptism,
Confirmation and Orders may not be repeated without Sacrilege. I do also
receive and admit the received and approved Rites of the Catholic Church in
her solemn administration of the abovesaid Sacraments. NOTES upon it. You must
by no means ask questions here, as, In what part of the New Testament may I
find that Christ did institute these Seven Sacraments? Or, Where may I meet
with the promise annexed, by virtue of which they do confer grace? Or, Where
and when did our Lord make all these necessary to salvation? These are idle and
frivolous questions, you must believe as the Catholic Church believes, and do
as she does, but by Catholic Church, you must be sure always to understand the
Roman Church, though in so doing, you believe a part to be the whole.


XVI. I do embrace and receive all and every thing that has been defined and
declared by the holy Council of Trent concerning Original Sin, and
Justification. NOTES upon it. Though St. Paul call Concupiscence Sin, yet you
must not do so. Decret. de Peccat. Origin. Sess. 5. Conc. Trid. Though Christ
tell you that when you have done all that is commanded, still you are
unprofitable servants, you have done no more than your duty. Yet, if you will
be a true Catholic, you must believe, that the good works of Justified persons
do truly merit increase of grace here, and eternal life hereafter. Sess. 6.
Can. 32.


XVII. I do also profess, that in the Mass there is offered unto God a true,
proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead; and that in the
most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist there is truly, really* and substantially
the Body and Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that there is a conversion made of the whole Substance of the Bread
into the Body, and of the whole substance of the Wine into the Blood; which
conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation. NOTES upon it. Though
Christ, by being once offered, has put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
and therefore need not to be offered again, Heb. 9. yet you must believe that
he is daily offered, and it may be in 10000 places at once, a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And why should you not
believe so, seeing the Catholic ( i. e. the Roman Catholic) Church has
defined and declared it to be so? If you say that you find nothing for it, but
much against it in holy Scripture, this is to appeal from the Judgment of the
Church to your own, which by no means must be allowed: But how do you know that
there is any thing in Scripture against it? you will tell me you see and read
it there. But do you think it is fit for you to trust your own eyes against so
plain a declaration of the Church? Because you see and feel and taste, and
thereupon judge a consecrated Host to be really Bread still, do you think it is
fit for you to believe so, when the Church has told you the contrary? Have a
care, this is a dangerous point. If you will be a true Catholic, you must
resolve to renounce all the evidence of Sense and Reason, in this matter, and
to live by an implicit faith.


XVIII. I confess that under one kind only, whole and entire Christ, and a true
Sacrament is taken and received. "NOTES upon it." Though Christ left you a
whole Sacrament, yet you must be content with half an one. Though Christ, after
his Supper, instituted, and administered this venerable Sacrament under both
kinds of Bread and Wine, though in the Primitive Church this Sacrament was
received by the faithful in both kinds; yet all this notwithstanding, you must
now rest satisfied with half of it, and that for diverse good causes and
considerations, as to instance, lest you spill the Wine upon your Beards, etc.
And will you still stick to the Institution of Christ against such a
declaration of the Church? have a care, there is an Anathema provided for you,
and the censure and punishment of Heretics will fall to your share. Council.
Constant. Sess. 13. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. Can. 3.


XIX. I do firmly believe that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls kept
prisoners there, do receive help by the suffrages of the faithful. NOTES upon
it. Though in holy Scripture there be no mention made of any other place after
this life, but either Heaven or Hell; yet holy Church tells you there is
another called Purgatory, and why should you not believe her? Though Christ
tell you, that when you have done all that is commanded, you are still
unprofitable servants, having done no more but what was your duty to do; yet
why should not you believe as the Church believes, that some men may do more
than their duties, and by an over measure of merits help others?


XX. I do likewise believe, that the Saints reigning together with Christ, are
to be worshipped and prayed unto, and that they do offer Prayers unto God for
us, and that their Relics are to be had in veneration. NOTES upon it. Though
you be no where commanded to pray to any other but only God, though there be
but one Mediator between God and Man, viz. Christ Jesus; yet why should you
deprive your selves of the benefit of such powerful Mediators, as the Saints
in Heaven may be, when the Church teaches you to make use of them?


XXI. I do most firmly assert, that the Images of Christ, of the Blessed Virgin
the Mother of God, and of other Saints, ought to be had and retained, and that
due honor and veneration ought to be given to them. NOTES upon it. Though by
the second Commandment you are forbidden to make to your selves any graven
Images, or to bow down to them, or worship them: yet this notwithstanding, why
should not you comply with the Doctrine and Practice of the Church, in making to
your selves graven Images, bowing down to them, and in praying, lighting
Candles, and burning Incense before them?


XXII. I do affirm, that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in the
Church, and that the use of them is very beneficial to Christian people. NOTES
upon it. Though your sins be great and heinous, yet if for a sum of Money you
can procure a Pardon; if the price be set, and nothing wanting but to pay the
Money with one hand, and receive the Indulgence with the other; Vide Tax.
Camer. Apostol. why then should you not comply with the Doctrine of
Indulgences, which is so comfortable in it self, and so advantageous unto you?


XXIII. I do acknowledge the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church, to
be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and I do promise and swear true
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the Successor of St. Peter the Prince of the
Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. NOTES upon it. If you can believe that a
Part is the Whole, why should you not believe the Church of Rome to be the
Catholic Church? If you can believe that the Church of Jerusalem, and all
other Churches in all parts of the world received their Religion from Her, why
should you not believe that she is the Mother of all other Churches? If you can
believe that any one Church in the world has a Sovereign Power and Authority
over all other Churches; why should you not believe the Church of Rome has,
and consequently is Mistress of all other Churches? If you can believe that
among equals there is any Superiority, why should you not believe that St.
Peter was Prince of the Apostles? and consequently that the Bishop of Rome, as
his Successor, is Bishop of Bishops, and Prince of all Pastors? If you can
believe that Jesus Christ did constitute and ordain any particular Person upon
Earth to be his Vicar General in his absence; why should you not believe that
the Bishop of Rome, for the time being, is the Man? But if you can believe none
of these things, I cannot help it.


XXIV. I do undoubtedly receive and profess all other things which have been
delivered, defined, and declared by the Sacred Canons and Ecumenical Councils,
and especially by the holy Synod of Trent; and all things contrary thereunto,
and all Heresies condemned, rejected, and Anathematized by the Church, I do
likewise condemn, reject, and Anathematize. NOTES upon it. If you can believe
that all and every thing, which at any time has been delivered, defined, and
declared, by any General Council, especially by that of Trent, does exactly
agree with the Canon of holy Scripture. Or, if you can believe that all and
every thing, which at any time has been condemned, rejected, and Anathematized
by such Councils, is really Heresy, and justly condemned by them. Then why may
you not believe as the Church of Rome does, and receive this as an Article of
Faith? But if you cannot believe these things, who can help it.


Thus have I given you a Prospect of Popery without any misrepresentation or
prevarication, from a very Authentic Record; viz. The Creed of Pope Pius IV.
which is received, professed, and sworn to by every one who enters into Holy
Orders in that Church; and in the close thereof we are told, that the Faith
contained therein is so absolutely and indispensibly necessary, that no man can
be saved without it. The Creed it self, you see, contains Twenty four Articles.
The Twelve first of which, we firmly believe and readily embrace, being well
assured that they contain nothing in them but Primitive Christianity, and that
they are well warranted by the Word of God. The Twelve latter we reject as
Innovations and Additions to the Catholic Faith, that Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, and which has been delivered down to us in the holy
Scriptures, and the Three Ancient Creeds. In these you have the main Body of
Popery, as it stands distinguished from Primitive Christianity; the Novelty and
unwarrantableness whereof it were no hard matter to demonstrate, but that has
been done already by better hands, and was no part of my design in these
Papers. I intended only to give you a full view of Popery from an
unexceptionable Record, and leave you to consider of it. And having this done,
I have only this request to make, that those, into whose hands these Papers
shall come, would sit down, and seriously consider, whether it be fit or safe
for them, to mingle such stuff with their Common Christianity.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for and Sold by L. Meredith at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
BIshop Taylor's Opuscula. The Measures of Friendship. With Five Letters to
persons changed and tempted to a change in their Religion. To which is now
added his Moral Demonstration, proving that the Religion of J. Christ is from
God. Price bound 1 s.

Two Treatises: The First concerning Reproaching and Censure; The Second, An
Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. To which are annexed, Three Sermons
Preached upon several Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late
Learned and Reverend William Faulkner, D. D.

Some Queries to Protestants Answered, and an Explanation of the Roman
Catholics Belief in four great Points considered. 1. Concerning their Church.
2. Their Worship. 3. Justification. 4. Civil Government. Price stitched 6 d.

A Vindication of the Church of England from the soul Aspersions of Schism and
Heresy unjustly cast upon her by the Church of Rome. In Two Parts. Price
stitched 1 s.


