THE Anatomy of a Iacobite. OR, THE JACOBITES Heart Laid Open, WITH A Sure and
Certain5 Method FOR THEIR CURE.

Addressed to the AUTHOR of A Letter to a Friend, Concerning a French Invasion,
to Restore the Late King JAMES to His Throne, etc.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed in the Year, 1692.

The Jacobites Heart Laid Open, etc.
SIR,
YOUR Letter was Read by none with Greater Delight than my Self, to Consider
the Pitch of your Reasoning, in a Cause so Important as this.

And I Congratulate your Good Success in the Words of King Lemuel. Many have
done Nobly, to this Theme, but thou Excellest them all.

The Jacobites Despised the Swarms of Pamphlets have hitherto come out against
them; and made it their Sport to Toss them like Chaff in the Air.

But now, Sir, their Eyes are all Fixed upon you, Entering the Stage like
Almanzor, they Buckle their Armor Close, and bend all their Force against you.
They Know, and Feel, that this Letter of yours is deservedly Esteemed, by all
in this Government, as the most Celebrated, and Top-Piece of the Party, and
thought Unanswerable.

That it may Continue and Increase its Reputation, it will be Necessary, that
you, Sir, should know, and Refute all the Poor Objections which the Jacobites
Start against it. Some of which I have gathered together, for your Service; but
more, that the Honor and Justice of the Present Government might, as far as
possible, be Vindicated, and even these fame Jacobites Reclaimed; of which we
have Reason to Conceive Great hopes, if you be able to Satisfy their Scruples.

First, Their Arguments from Principles, and Reason. Secondly, Matters of Fact,
which they Charge upon this Government, and are to them an insuperable
Prejudice against it.
Both these I have set down, Full and Broad, in their own Words, that you may
miss nothing of the Force of their Objections: And I hope you, Sir, nor any in
the Government, will take it. Amiss from me, seeing I only Repeat their Words,
and that in Order to the Necessary Vindication of the Government: Which if you
Perform, to Satisfaction, (for you or none must do it) we will leave these
Jacobites nothing to say, or nothing but what will Expose them.

And let us Deal Fairly, and upon the Square with them, and hear the uttmost of
their Defense, the sooner we shall have done.

And we need not fear to give them this Liberty, for, we can sew the Jacobites
in Bears Skins when we please, cry out upon them, Would you have the French,
would you have Popery come in? We can easily make such a Noise, as that they
shall not be heard.

Therefore let us Venture, for once, to give them a hearing: We do not suspect
them for any Inclinations to Popery, notwithstanding of all this: On the
Contrary, they were the Men who stood in the Gap against it, when it threatened
us most, and are still ready, and I doubt not would be as forward as any, to do
so again.

Much less can they be suspected to have fallen out with the Country of England,
so as to desire the French might Conquer it. They have Estates, and would be as
loath to lose them as other Men; and no doubt, love their Liberty and Property
as much: And pretend as Great Regard, as any People, to the Laws of England,
which, they say, do Justify them, and Condemn us, who Support this Government.

But they plead greater things than these: The Law of God, and His Express
Command; which, if true, will supersede all our Arguments drawn from smaller
Topics. The People of Athens Rejected a Method which Themistocles proposed to
them, Plutarch Life of Aristides
much to their Advantage and Security, and which could be easily effected, upon
the only account, because it was not Just: And shall not Christians, say these
Jacobites; Depend as much upon the Protection of God, in their Obedience to His
Revealed Will, as Heathens, upon their general notions of Justice, which were
much more Fallible?

They say that the Folly of God is Wiser than men: He can bring Good out of
Evil; and turn all the Seeming good and prosperity of the wicked into evil and
mischief upon their own heads. And therefore, that all your Politics, and
Conjectures what may happen, is not so sure a Foundation for men to venture
their Souls upon, as the Revealed Will of God.

In short, the Jacobites seem to bring the Matter to this Issue: That we must
either Deny the Scriptures, or Answer their Objections out of the Scripture:
And they seem very apprehensive, that the first of these will be chosen: That
it is chosen by too many already.

They say, there are Examples in all Ages, of men going against their visible
Interest, to preserve a Good Conscience.

They tell you of the Protestants in Q. Mary's time, who fought for her against
Q. Jane, a Woman of vast Endowments of mind, and a Protestant.

That these Protestants had as sad a prospect in what they did, as can be
supposed in the Restoration of K. James.

You may say that they met with it accordingly: Q. Mary broke her word to them,
and persecuted them with Fire and Faggot.

But this will be no Argument against the Jacobites; for they say, that the
Protestants did their Duty, in adhering to Q. Mary, else they had been Rebels,
and not Martyrs.

That her Persecution proved infinitely to the Good and Establishment of the
Protestant Religion, which has lived Great, and in Reputation with all the
world ever since, upon the Fund of that Loyal and Christian Principle of
Non-Resistence. And they say, that the Church of England has Suffered more, by
forsaking that Principle now, than She could have done by a Persecution, which
would still have added to her Glory.

They call themselves the only stay that has kept the Church of England from
sinking utterly in the opinion of all good Christians, by their present
Suffering for that Old Doctrine of their Church, Non-Resistance.

They say, That a Church is more Destroyed by the loss of her Principles, than
of her Livings: Pureness of Doctrine, not Outward Pomp, or Legal
Establishments, denominate a True and a Holy Church.

They say, Rebellion brings greater Destruction than Persecution: That not
three hundred suffered, during Q. Mary's five years Reign: That a thousand
times as many have perished within these three years in Ireland, besides those
have been lost in Scotland, at Sea, and in Flanders.

They say the Protestants in Q. Mary's time, were in much more Deplorable
Circumstances, than we were in K. James' time: He was well advanced in years,
when he came to the Crown, and the three next Heirs Protestants. Q. Mary a
young Woman, Married to the King of Spain; the Princess Elizabeth declared to
be Illegitimate, by Act of Parliament, and sent to the Tower in order to a
further security: And after her, the Royal Line run out of sight into Popish
Families.

The Reformation was but young and tender then in England: The Parliament were
papists, and popery set up as the Established Religion; and all places
Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military were put into the papists hands.

In K. James's time, the Protestants were two hundred to one papist; and he
could never have got a Popish Parliament. The K. of Spain was then as
Formidable to England, as the French King is now; and had much greater
pretense: He was Married to our Queen, and all our Acts of Parliament were in
his name; he was styled King of England.

There were great Objections against Q. Mary's Title to the Crown. The validity
of K. Henry the VIII's Marriage with her Mother was disputed all over
Christendom; and the whole Nation was Sworn, by Act of Parliament, to adhere to
the Issue of Queen Ann, who was Mother to the Princess Elizabeth. 26 Hen, VIII.
C. 2.

Yet all this notwithstanding, neither did that Protestant Princess pretend to
the Crown; neither did the Protestants contend for her, during her Elder
Sisters Life; though it was given out, That there was a Design of imposing a
False Son upon the Nation, to Cut off the Princess Elizabeth's Succession, who
was next Heir to the Crown: Public Thanksgivings having been through the Nation,
for Queen Mary's being with child; and some foolish Friars, even in their
Sermons, giving out before hand, That it must be a Prince of Wales, which their
Pryaers had obtained, to prevent a Protestant Successor, etc.

But none of these things had any Witchcraft then, in that sober age of
Protestancy, to prevall with the Protestants, to lift up a hand against the
Right of Queen Mary, though a Bill of Exclusion had past against her, in her
Fathers time; and the Nation had sworn to adhere to the Princess Elizabeth, the
next Protestant Heir; (But they did not think their Oaths ought to bind them
against the Right) and notwithstanding that Queen Mary did plainly, and without
any Disguise, endeavor to Defeat her Sister Elizabeth's Succession to the
Crown; having first got an Act of Parliament to Establish her own Legitimacy,
and consequently, to throw off her Sister as Illegitimate.

But secondly, She had sent her Sister Elizabeth to the Tower, in order, as was
generally believed, to Cut off her Head: Speed tells, That a Warrant was once
Signed for her Execution. Yet not to Rescue her, nor to Assert her Right of
Succession, nor for any other cause whatsoever, would our Loyal Protestant
Forefathers take Arms against the Popish Queen, either in behalf of this
Princess Elizabeth, or of Queen Jane, another Protestant, against whom they
Fought to set up Queen Mary. And thought they consulted best in so doing, for
the preservation of the Protestant Religion, by asserting its Principles, though
to the Loss of its Legal Establishment, and all other (visible) worldly
Advantages.

These things the Jacobites urge: And they Glory in the wonderful protection
which GOD, at that time, showed toward these Protestants, in their Faith and
Dependence upon Him; turning all the whole Scheme to the Protestants advantage;
taking away Q. Mary without their Guilt, and giving her Condemned Sister Forty
Four years Possession of her Throne, to Establish, Adorn, and make Glorious,
that poor, despised, and persecuted Principle of Non-Resistance.

They tell us likewise of the Case of Theudas, and Judas of Galilee, ( Act.
5.36,37.) who took Arms against the Romans, in Defense, both of their Religion,
and their Property. It was against the grievous Taxing which was then imposed
by the Romans, that Judas rose in Arms, and Drew away much people after him.

They say, That all the Declamations in this Letter to a Friend, against the
Jacobites, will hold as strongly against the Protestants in Q. Mary's time: But
much more strongly against Gamaliel, and other Jews, who Condemned Theudas and
Judas, in behalf of their Lawful Governors, the Romans, who were professed
Heathens, Idolaters, Despisers, and Persecutors of the Law of Moses; yet
Fighting against them, though in Defense of the True Faith, was inferred to be
Fighting against God, ( Act. 5.39.) And Christ would not be Defended by
Resisting a Heathen Magistrate.

The same do the Jabobites think of fighting for a Religion, in a Case, which
that Religion does not allow to be a Good Cause of fighting for it: They think
this to be fighting against that Religion.

On the other hand, If we should fight to the visible prejudice of the outward
profession, and Legal Establishment of our Religion, in pursuance of a
Principle of that Religion. This the Jacobites would call a fighting for our
Religion: That is, To Maintain, Assert, and Honor the Principles of our
Religion, (which only are the spiritual part of Religion) though to the Loss of
Temporal advantages, and outward ornament: (which are but the Outside, and
Trappings of Religion.) Therefore they go not upon the Outward advantages, but
upon the Justice of their Cause; for the love of which they have forsaken all
their Outward Advantages.

Upon the whole, they say, That unless you can prove their Principles to be
Unjust, all you Argue against them is against the Law of God, against Justice,
against Reason, and all Christian Religion: And that Humane politics are too
weak to overbalance all these.

Nay, they pretend, that even Humane policy, and the Good of the Nation is on
their side.

That K. James's Tyranny (suppose it as bad as you will) would not have Cost
the Nation so many Lives, so much Money, nor been so hard to be Redrest, after
his Death, as the present Revolution.

Now they complain, That all this is not sufficiently Answered in this Letter
to a Friend, where it says, page 28. (which is all the Answer given to it in
that Letter) that, If they, (the Jacobites) say they would fight for him, (K.
J.) I give them over, (says the Letter) as professed Enemies to the True
Religion, and the Liberties of Mankind. And, This I hope, (says the Letter)
may satissy the Non-swearers, that they are not bound in Conscience to Fight
for the late King, etc.

Now these perverse Jacobites do say, That they can see no Reason why the
Author of this Letter's Giving them over, should be a Satisfaction to their
Consciences:

They call this Scolding, instead of Answering: Whereas they pretend that their
Principle is pursuant to the True Religion, and most for the Good and Liberties
of Man kind, to Save men from the Great Destruction of Civil-War and Rebellion,
which, they say, is infinitely of more mischief to man kind, than any Tyranny
ever was in the world.

And that Religion loses more Ground, and lessens more in the Opinion of
mankind, by a change of principles, which have been long professed, than by
suffering persecution, in Defense of those Principles.

These things they think a full and sufficient Answer to all this whole Letter
to a Friend: And therefore do insult and rejoice, that no Answer is possible to
be given to them; since this Best Answer, which is yet come out, has not one
word against the Truth or Honesty of their Principles; only argues from
Inconveniences that may attend them, which is incident to the best actions in
the world, especially, if Christianity have any Truth in it.

And therefore I do earnestly Advise, in behalf of the Present Government, that
the Ingenious Author of this Letter to a Friend, would study something to be
said as to the Truth, Honesty, and Religion of the Revolution, lest the
Jacobites Triumph!

But I must not forget one thing, which the Letter to a Friend (page 5/6) does
mainly Insist upon, as the Chief Argument why, if K. James should Return, we
were to expect no Mercy from him, which is, his Barbarous treatment of the
Protestants in Ireland, after he went over thither, in the year 88/89.

The Jacobites are Glad that they have got this hold against Us; for they
insist upon it, That K. James showed, not only Great Lenity and Compassion, but
Care and Concern for the Protestants in Ireland, while he was there, insomuch,
that they can hardly instance any Request ever they made to him, which was
denied. He was so far from Disobliging them, that he really Courted them, to
the no small Disturbance of the Irish, who thought themselves not so much
Regarded, as their Merit (in their own conceit) above that of the Protestants
did require.

The Jacobites Appeal, in this, to the Magistrates, and Representatives of the
Chief Towns in the North of Ireland (which was the only part of the Kingdom,
where they stood out in Arms against K. James, viz. Derry, and Enesk^llen) and
among them Belfast was the Richest, and most populous of any of the Cities in
the North: And consequently, which had most occasion to make application to the
Government, upon several Emergencies.

And the Jacobites do put it upon that Issue, that the then Sovereign of
Belfast (who was, and is still an unsuspected Protestant) will not say, that
one of the many Addresses to K. J. was rejected, or not fully and readily
Answered, which he made in behalf of that Town, or of the Protestants in those
parts of the Country: And that the Orders, which K. J. gave upon these
addresses of the Protestants, were not duly and punctually observed; and where
any Breaches were made upon them by the Irish (who were very ill pleased with
them) which was but seldom, they were not severely Punished for it; as far as
K. J 's. power did extend. But as it was, he made these his Protections very
effectual to the Protestants: And this will be justified, not only at Belfast,
but by the Rest of the Magistrates, and other Men of Note in all the North, and
in the whole Kingdom of Ireland, during K. J's being among them.

And this the Jacobites are positive in, notwithstanding all that is
endeavored in a late Book, called, The State of the Protestants of Ireland,
under the late K. James's Government, etc. which they pretend to Disprove in
Matter of Fact; and say, They would expose it to the world, if any, who think
the contrary, would, for a Trial, obtain for them the Liberty of the Press.

That Generosity would become the Author; that he might Fight his Adversary
upon Equal Terms.

But, in the mean time, till that can be done, they do proclaim it (and I am
sorry to find that they have the suffrage of the Irish Protestants here, and
even of the English Army which went over thither) That the Protestants of
Ireland Suffered more; and the Country was more Ruined by K. W.'s Army, than by
K. J.'s.

They tell us, from the Mouths of Gentlemen, coming over every day from thence,
That last Winter there was a great Famine in that Country, the poor Irish being
suffered to Starve in the Highways, eating dead Horses, and Carrion.

This I had from several Gentlemen, who have seen it.

The Jacobites infer from this: That the Consequences of that War are not over,
as yet, in that Kingdom; no, nor in this: For who can tell the Issue of the
present War with France? when our Taxes will be at an end? and whether it be
not possible that England may be Drained as poor as Ireland? They say, we are
engaged in a Contest, like that of York and Lancaster, which lasted above a
hundred years, and Rooted out many of the Noble Families of England, with vast
Consumption of Blood and Treasure.

They say; That when all this is put into the Scales, it will infinitely out
weigh all the Frightful Apprehensions of K. J.'s Reign.

And consequently, that his Return would be the Greatest Blessing to this
Nation: That nothing he can be fancied to do in the short Remainder of his
Reign, carries any proportion to the Continuance of this War to our Posterities.

And they say, That his Mild and Gentle Carriage toward the Protestants of
Ireland, when as many of them as could; to a very small number, were in actual
Rebellion against him, and they were the most bitter and implacable Enemies he
had, and are so still: They say, that his Tenderness, and Preservation of
these, under all these provoking Circumstances, is a great specimen of his
Nature, and what we might expect from him, if he should Return again into
England.

But chiefly for this Reason, That if he came into England, his Interest would
be to preserve England: and with all his objected Faults, I think none ever
doubted, but that he always endeavored what he thought was for the Good of
England.

But on the other hand, it was certainly his Interest to have Destroyed, at
least to have Disabled the Protestants in Ireland: because he was morally
assured they would Join with K. W. when he came over; which they did as soon as
they were able, and were the men, who had the chief hand in the Victories
abtain'd against K. J. at the Boyn, Athlone, Agram, etc. and of whom the Irish
were most afraid, as Doctor Gorge, Secretary to Schomberg, in Ireland,
Witnesses under his hand.

And if K. J. had Destroyed these Enemies of his (the Irish Protestants) when
it was in his Power, for a whole Summer together, he had not, in probability,
been Driven out of Ireland to this day; at least you will Grant me, that it had
not been so easily done.

Now Consider, say these Jacobites, If K. J.'s Good Nature, though Baited by all
the violence of the Friars, and Irish, who would fain have Destroyed these
Protestants, to Secure themselves: If All this, and his own visible Security
(for who would not Destroy his Enemies!) could not prevail upon his natural
Goodness and Clemency; to Suffer, or Connive at the Irish, (for it needed not
have appeared to be His Act) to Destroy these Protestants: What Malice can
Suggest, that it was his Design to Destroy them?

The Jacobites speak not in this of all the Irish, they say, we cannot Deny
that many of them have Approved themselves Loyal and Gallant Men; not only in
Foraign Countries, but now at Home, where, though Vn-Disciplin'd, Unarmed, bred
many Ages in Servitude, and Unacquainted with War, yet, without Aid of any
Foraign Troops (except at the Boyne) made such Defense, as Obliged K. William,
in Person, to Raise the Siege of Limerick, and Employed the whole Power of
England, Assisted with the best Troops of the Dutch, Danes, Brandenburgers, and
French Refugees, for Three Years together. But there is among the Irish, as,
among our Selves, a Violent and Bigoted Party: And the Jacobites tell us, that
when some of these, Proposed to K. James, that they would Rid him of the Fear
of those Irish Protestants, who were in Rebellion against him, if he would only
Connive at it, and not interpose on their behalf, his Majesty heard it with
Horror, and Indignation, and said, What! Gentlemen, are you for another Forty
One? And that he Watched over the Protestants, to Preserve them, and did
Preserve them; even at that time, when they, who had been thus Protected by
him, and had Sworn Fidelity Anew to him, Rose up, as one Man, against him, when
Schomberg Landed with an English Army. August. 89.

And when, upon Schomberg's Approach, K. James's Army were Obliged to remove
nearer Dublin, even Then, he gave strict Orders to Major General Maxwel to
preserve Belfast, Lisburn, and other Protestant Towns which they left to the
Enemy, from being either Burned, or Plundered by the Soldiers.

Which Towns, if Schomberg, had wanted for his Winter Quarters, instead of Ten
Thousand Men whom he Buried at Dundalk, he might have left the greatest part of
his Army there under Ground.

And the next Day after the Boyne, when K. James left Dublin, he gave positive
Orders, and his great Care was, to Save that City from being Burned, or the
Protestants Plundered.

Which, had it been done, in all probability, the Reduction of Ireland had been
prevented, at least, for a much longer time, than that, which (by the
Convenience, and Accommodation of these Towns, which K. J. spared) K. W. took
to Effect it.

From all this, these Jacobites do Urge, That if K. J. took such pains to
preserve his Enemies, under the greatest provocations, what Reasonable Man can
think that he would seek to Destroy England, if it were his own, and he in
quiet Possession of it? And therefore the Jacobites do insist, That it must
needs be the Interest of England to call Home K. J. rather than run the hazard
of his Forcing his Way, while he desires nothing so much, as to Return, without
Blood, by the Invitation of his People, and not by the Excessive Power of
France; with whom we are now at War, upon no other Account than that of their
asserting the Right of K. J. And the Issue of War, who can tell? Sure, we do
not think it impossible, that France may Conquer us!

Dr. Sherlock, in his Thanksgiving Sermon, last 29. of May, Thinks our
Deliverance from the French, this Summer, so Miraculous, that he could find
nothing to Compare it to, but the Deliverance of the Children of Israel out of
the Red Sea. And the Impartial Enquiry into the Causes of the present Fears and
Dangers of the Government; Page 2. says, Had not the Good God prevented that
Fleet's (the French Fleet) coming by contrary Winds for Five Weeks together,
they had certainly compassed their Design, before any of the English or Dutch
Fleets could have been at Sea, or made the least Opposition.

And it is as certain, that if the French Fleet had made their Full Advantage,
of the Victory they obtained over the English and Dutch Fleets, in the Year 90.
If they had but Burnt the Transport Ships, which were then attending K. W. in
Ireland, and carrying the Provisions for his Army, in which they could have met
with no Opposition; there is none now but sees, that if they had done this,
they had Destroyed us at that time; it was persectly in their Power; and they
were Advertised of it.

Now some Jacobites would have us believe, That the French King would not have
lost that Advantage, and suffered his Fleet to Ride Victorious, a whole Month
together, upon the English Coast, without attempting to Burn their Ships, or do
them the least Injury; if it had not been for K. James's interposing, on behalf
of the English; and to Save their Fleet; From the same Principle which made him
Discharge the Irish, when he was in Ireland, to set out any Privateers, (which
they offered on their own Expense,) to Disturb the Trade of the English; and he
would not permit any of the English Ships, which came to Ireland, while he was
there, to be Seized, but suffered them to Load and Unload, and pursue their
Voyages, of which there were several Instances.

And he showed so much Concern, for the Loss and Disgrace of that part of the
English Fleet at BANTRY, where they were worsted by the French, that the Irish
took great Offense at it; like that of Joab against David, for Mourning at his
Victory over Absalom: The Irish said, That the English had his Heart, they had
only his Presence among them.

He cannot be got off that Opinion, That the English are to be Won by Good
Nature, though his FATHER Lost his Head, and himself Three Crowns, in trying the
Experiment; and if he persuaded K. L. to Try it once more; we can impute it to
nothing but his Goodness.

Thus say the Jacobites, and their Story has so much pretense, that it is hard
for us to Assign any other Reason, why the French Fleet lay perfectly Idle, and
made no use at all of their Victory in the Year 90. At least to Burn the
Transport Ships in Ireland, which would have Ruined us absolutely, and kept K.
W. a Prisoner there. Which, if true, may be put among the Miracles have been
shown for our Preservation: First, A Miracle of good Nature in K. J. to be an
Advocate for his Enemies; and a no less Miraculous Complaisance in K. Lew. to
Lose the Benefit of a Victory, which might have put him out of danger, of the
Advantage our Fleet have had against him in 92.

But instead of that, the French Fleet lay as if they had been Courting our
Shore, landing at Hastings in a Friendly manner, and spending their Money
amongst us, but hurting no body: They showed us their Humanity, after we had
Tried their Courage: If this was not Natural to the French, the Miracle is the
greater; and whence should it proceed, but from K. J. say the Jacobites?

But suppose it to be as some of us do imagine, That the French King, being
perfectly Master of his Business at home, does on purpose delay Restoring K. J.
till K. W. has by this War drained us of all our Money, and it be then out of
our Power to Force K. J. when Restored, to Join in Confederacy against France:
Which is a Notion some have set up of late: Suppose, I say, that these should
be the French King's Measures, then the Jacobites tell us, that the more Money
we give to K. William, the more we are doing the French King's business for
him: And that unless we can Conquer him at Land, of which we have but a very
slender prospect, it is certain he must Drain us, if he can make us continue on
the War. And therefore, that he desires we should give seven or eight Millions
more next Sessions: If he did not, there are some who tell us, that it is in
his power to hinder it, even by Bribing the Parliament Men. We all know what a
Noise the French Pensioners made in King Charles the II's Parliaments; and we
remember since the French Faction were the Major Number among the Burgers of
Amsterdam.

Let no Man suppose it an impossible thing that men may be Bribed to Destroy
their own Country, there are Examples of it in all Ages. Jugurtha Bribed the
Senate of Rome to have sold their Country, if he could have found a Merchant.
Vidit urbem quam venalem and quandoque Perituram, si habuisset Emptorem --
cecinerat. L. Flor. Lib. 3. Cap. 1. and we believe the French Monarch to be as
Powerful, as Rich, and as Cunning as Jugurtha King of Numidia in Africa; and
the Romans as Great and Brave, as the English themselves; and their Senate as
Zealous of Liberty and Property, as our Parliaments.

Now, say the Jacobites, all this is prevented, and these Designs of the French
King's (if these be his Designs) are totally frustrated, if we take Home our
King: Then we shall preserve our selves a considerable People, and True Old
England still; whom nothing but a Miracle can Ruin, while it continues upon
its Old Foundations of Vnalienable Hereditary Monarchy: But in this Hurricane
and Earthquake of State, which has set us upon Original Contract, and the
Election of any Prevailing Faction, who call themselves, The People (who the
Jure-Divino-men say never were, and it is impracticable ever should be truly
Represented) they tell us, our selves do confess, that nothing but Miracle has
Preserved us hitherto; and they say, by the same reason, that Miracle must
Preserve us, if the War does continue.

The Dutch MOB (though all our Money is spent among them) are crying for Peace,
and will get Peace before us: They think all those to be French Pensioners who
are for continuing the War, and now and then mind them of the Fate of the
De-Witts. Trade is the Circulation of their Blood; and if a Sufficient Stock be
not Preserved, all other Receipts are useless: We must not Bleed our selves to
weak; if we stop not while we have Money in our hands, it will be too late
after: And it will be a Miracle indeed if Jugurtha do not then find a Merchant
for us.

And the Jacobites desire us to Reflect what a Condition we are in, when we
must trust to Miracles every Year to Save us out of the hands of the French? Is
this a Nation to be Despised? Is there no hazard to be apprehended from them?

But if we can Secure our selves, and have their Peace and Friendship upon no
harder terms, than to Receive our Rightful and Natural KING, which the
Jacobites say, Is our Duty by the Laws of GOD and Man; Then they Appeal to
every True and Sensible Englishman, whether they do not seek the Good of
England, more than those who would continue such an expensive and dangerous
War, wherein they cannot hope to prosper if they Fight in opposition to the
Revealed Will of God; and whether they do or not, in the present opposition to
K. J. the Jacobites desire no more, than that we should Dispute with them upon
that Head.

Now whether our Lives, and Religious Conversation be such, as that we ought to
expect that God should Work Miracles to Rescue us, rather than send a Rod, to
Scourge us for our unexampled Looseness and Prophanity (not to name what they
eall Rebellion, in the present Case) the Jacobites say, is a Consideration
worth our most serious Thoughts.

Jamaica is now struck with an astonishing Perdition: And except we Repent -- (
Luke 13.3.) The Jacobites wish this may not be a Forerunner of Judgments to
England.

The Relations of that Earthquake from Jamaica, do speak of the mighty
Looseness and Prophanity of that Country, especially of Port Royal, where the
Judgment fell most heavily; and that there were several small motions of the
Earth (such as we had on the 8th. of this Sept. 92. in London, and other parts
of England:) Some weeks before that dreadful Overthrow, wherein the Earth
opened her mouth, and swallowed up Houses and Churches; and Men descended (like
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram) with their Wives, Children, and all that appertained
to them, alive into the Pit. And the Jacobites desire us to Observe, that this
was for Rebellion in the State (of Dathan and Abiram, with Two Hundred and
Fifty Princes of the Assembly, Famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown,
against Moses) and for Schism and Usurpation in the Church (of Korah, and Two
Hundred and Fifty Levites against Aaron, their lawful Superior and
Metropolitan) and they got the Generality of the People on their side: For it
is said, That Korah gathered All the Congregation against them ( Moses and
Aaron) Numb. 16.19. And as this Destruction of Korah, etc. did not Convert the
Israelites; for ( ver. 41.) On the morrow all the Congregation were gathered
against Moses and Aaron: So we are told from Jamaica, That they were Robbing
the Houses, which were sinking, and themselves with them: And that the Boldness
and Impudence of the Prostitutes there, is nothing abated. How far London does
Equal or Exceed Fort-Royal in these Sins, especially in a Hardness of Heart,
and Insensibility of God's Judgments, and contempt of His Ordinances, and that
chiefly among the Gentry, and better sort, of more free and generous Education,
of which, they think it a part to ridicule and despise all that is Sacred; Or,
how far we ought to reckon the Punishment of Jamaica to be our own, since they
are part of us, and learned their Sins from us, I leave to the Meditation of
the Reader:

Whom I would have likewise observe, that though Earthquakes are less frequent
in England; than in those Hotter Climates, yet God has often shown us, we are
not Exempt from that Judgment; of which we have frequent instances in our
Histories, even of the like dreadful Effects, as that in Jamaica. In the 13
Year of Q. Elizabeth, the 17 of Feb. Sir Richard Baker tells of a prodigious
Earthquake, which happned in the East part of Herefordshire, at a little Town,
called Kinnaston, where a Hill, with a Rock under it, lifted it self up a great
height, and traveled from Saturday in the Evening, till Monday Noon, with
Trees, Cattle, and all things upon it, leaving a Gaping distance Forty Foot
broad, and Eighty Else long, overturning Churches, Houses, removing Trees,
Hedges, Highways, made Tilled ground Pasture, and turned Pasture into Tillage.
That on the 24. May, in the Sixth Year of Rich. the 11. there happened so great
an Earthquake, that it made Ships in the Havens, to beat one against another.
That on Christmass-Day, in the 24. year of Hen. the II. in the Territory of
Derlington, in the Bishopric of Durham, the Earth lifted up it self, in manner
of an High Tower, and so remained unmovable, from Morning till Evening, and
then fell with so horrible a Noise, that it frighted the Inhabitants
thereabouts; and the Earth swallowing it up, made there a deep Pit, which is
seen at this day: For a Testimony whereof, Leyland says, he saw the Pits
there, commonly called, Hell-Kettles. And next year, the 25. of his Reign, the
year of Christ, 1180. a Great Earthquake threw down many Buildings, amongst
which, the Cathedral Church of Lincoln was Rent in pieces the 25. of April: And
that in the Reign of Hen. I. The Earth moved with so great violence, that many
Buildings were shaken down.

And Malmesbury says, that the House wherein he sat, was lifted up with a
Double remove; and at the Third time Settled again in the proper place: Also in
diverse places it yielded forth a hideous Noise, and cast forth Flames at
certain Rifts, many days together; which neither by water, nor by any other
means could be suppressed.

There are other Earthquakes Recorded, and Prodigious Signs in England, Anno
1165. 12 H. II. An. 1276. III Edw. An. 1428. 5. H. VI. and An. 1580. 22 Eliz.
an Earthquake caused the Great Bell at Westminster to strike against the
Hammer, and several other Clock-Bells both in London and the Country; a piece
of the Temple Church fell down; and some Stexes fell off from St. Paul's Church
in London, and St. Peter's at Westminster; diverse Chimneys lost their Tops; and
Ships on the Thames, and on the Seas, were seen to Totter by this Earthquake,
as we are told in the Licensed Account of the Earthquakes in England, since
the Norman Conquest.

And in the Fourth year of King William the II. on Saint Luke's day, above Six
hundred Houses in London were thrown down with Tempest; and the Roof of Saint
Mary le Bow Church, in Cheap Side, was so raised, that in the Fall, six of the
Beams (being twenty seven foot long) were driven so deep into the Ground (the
Streets not being paved with stone) that not above four foot remained in fight.

This brings into my mind the violent Storm that happened, on Sunday the 12. of
Jan. 89/90. about two a Clock in the Morning, which blew down several Houses in
London, and tore up by the roots, and split to the Ground, and broke off in the
middle, above forty of the Old Elmes in St. James's Park: And which was
followed by that Hurricane K. W. carried into Ireland, five Months after, in
June 90. which spilt an Ocean of Blood, and Ruined that Flourishing Kingdom.

Add to this the Dreadful Thunder on the 12. Aug. following, which London yet
remembers with Astonishment, having not in this Age (if ever) Heard the Like
before; it Tore down the great Wooden Crown over the Gate of St. James's
Palace, which faces St. James's street: And many do take Notice, That this 12.
of Aug. 92. and last 12. of Aug. 91. there was unusually Great Thunder and
Lightning, though not Equal to that of 12. Aug. 90.

I will not go out of my way to Discourse of Brognostications; as there is a
Superstitious use of them, there is likewise a Religious. The Lights of Heaven
were Ordained for Signs, as well as for Seasons, ( Genesis 1.14.) and the Jews
were blamed for not discerning The signs of the Times, ( Mat. 16.3.) And Christ
names several signs, which shall be forerunners, and a warning to Men, of the
Judgments He sends upon the World: And among them, names Earthquakes ( Mat.
24.7.) and calls these, The beginnings of sorrows: And the Prophet says, that
When God's judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the world should
learn Righteousness (Isa. 26.9.) Great Earthquakes shall be in diverse places
-- and Fearful sights, and Great signs shall there be from Heaven -- ( Luke
21.11.) There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars; and
upon the Earth distress of Nations, with perplexity, the Sea and the Waves
roaring (ver. 25.) By the Sea and Waters, it is observable, That in all the
Prophetic Representations of the Bible, is always meant People, Multitudes,
supposed from their Resemblance of Inconstancy and Wavering, whence David (
Psalm. 65.7.) compares the Raging of the Sea, to the Madness of the People.

Who did not Apply the Waters failing from the Thames in K. J.'s time, so that
Men went over on Foot to Southwark, to that general Defection of the People
from him at Salisbury, and afterward? and that Extraordinary Inundation, and
Irruption of the River Liffy at Dublin, December 87. which broke down their
Bridges, opened their Merchants Cellars, and carried their Goods floating to
the Sea, before their Faces, and undermined several Houses, Boats going in
their Streets; who does not Apply this, and the like in many other Rivers in
Ireland at the same time, to that violent Irruption of these People, and flying
into Arms before that time next Year? which has made a Desert, and an Aceldama
of that Noble Kingdom, more than one half of the Souls in it, having Perished
in three years following, and much more than the half of those remaining are
Ruined: And our Savior's Prediction ( Luke 21.26.) fulfilled both upon them,
and upon us, viz. Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after
those things which are coming on the Earth.

To be Timorous at every thing that happens is Superstitious:

But it is Stupidity, and Irreligion to become Insensible of what God is a
showing upon the Earth; and not to Regard the Operations of His Hands. It is
and always has been, the forerunner of Destruction. Quos perdere vule Jupiter
-- Zach. (14.5.) Mentions an Earthquake, and Amos dates his Prophecy by it,
which God sent in the Reign of Vzziah, a Forerunner of that exterminating
Leprosy, with which God Smote him, for Invad^ng the Priest's Office; which the
Jacobites apply to our Lay-Deprivation of their Bishops: whence arises the
present Dispute of Schism, which is the First Example of it amongst the
Episcopal Church of England, since the Reformation.

And if the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, lately Published, be Truth,
our Presumption will exceed that of Vzziah's: Therefore it will be extremely
necessary, That a speedy Answer be given to that Book, which weighs very much
with some People of Good Judgment: For we cannot Deny it to be Writ by a Master
of Reason and Learning.

And the Jacobites thinks it is not sufficiently Answered by the late
Preclamation, Dated the 13th. of this present September, 92. tempting Men with
Rewards, to Discover the Author, Printer, Publishers, etc.

This the Jacobites foretold would be the Return the New Swearing Bishops and
Clergy would make, though they pretended, That they desired nothing more, than to
Dispute the Matter fairly in Print, to the satisfaction of all Parties.

The Consequence of this, is more visible than that of the Earthquake; for
every Body does already make the Application. That our State Bishops, crying
out thus for help to the Brachium Seculare, shows that they are weary of the
Dispute; and to many it seems to be nothing less than a yielding of the Cause.
What Effect this may have upon England, I cannot tell, especially at a time
when all the Nation were made to expect, from the Possessing Clergy, a
Conviction from Scripture, Reason, and Antiquity of all that could be said
against them by the Deprived: And that Mr. Hody had (in Their Name) cast the
Gantlet, as himself braggs in his Letter to a Friend, Printed at Oxford, this
Year, 1692. page 19. and compares himself to Sampson, Rouzing up himself
against the Philistines (viz. The Deprived Bishops and Clergy) page 4. And that
he had plainly given them a Fall, and made them hold up Dirty Hands, page 2.
and abundance of such Tantivy in Almanzor strain, in Defense of his Oxford
Treatise against Schism; which he Dedicates with great Pomp, (Summo,
sapientissimo, sanctissimoque, vere Orthodoxo) to their New Archbishop: And
after all, when his Adversary enters the Lists, to Hide himself behind a
Proclamation, and his Party send for Constables and Baylifs to their Aid.

If this should turn the Nation against them, and their Cause; that alone would
have Consequences, as to England, worthy to be foretold by an Earthquake: But
as to other Countries where this Earthquake has been, let them Apply for
themselves. We have already heard of it from Paris, Holland, Cologne, and the
Confederate Camp in Flanders, where our News tells us, it happened the very
same Minute as in London; and was like to have shook the House down over King
William's Head, and Chafed him from his Dinner, as our Gazzet gives the
Account. At the same time our public News, and private Letters tell us of a
prodigious Storm and Tempest in Scotland, which continued without intermission
the 7th. 8th. and 9th. of September (the Day of our Earthquake, and the Day
before, and the Day after) with a Violence not known in this Age, the Drops of
Rain being observed to be as big as Hazel Nuts; and swelled the Rivers to that
degree, that several Ships were carried to the Sea, and lost, and the men
perished: Stacks of Corn were swept off the Land; Houses, and their Inhabitants
Drowned, the Bridge of Lies damaged, and many other Mischiefs done.

The Jacobites say, they make no Comparisons nor Applications, yet cannot but
take Notice of Things strange and unusual, when they happen.

But above all, of that Extraordinary Mark which GOD sent with our Earthquake,
in England; which was a strange sudden swimming in the Brain, and unaccountable
Giddiness, that some thought themselves Seized with a Fit of Apoplexy, others
of the Palsy, some Staggered in the Streets, and were sick Head and Stomach,
like Sea-sickness. I felt this Effect of it very sensibly, but did not own it
till I heard it Generally Complained of all over London, and it stayed with
some Twenty-Four, with others Forty-Eight hours, after the Earthquake was over.

I am told, That the small Earthquake, which preceded the Great one at
Jamaica, had the same Effect upon the Inhabitants there.

The Jacobites will say, That it is a sign of Infatuation, that our Brains are
turned to run headlong ( Impatient, or Incapable of Conviction) to our own
Destruction: For they say, they can meet with few or none of us, who can give
any Rational hopes of our Success against France, but confess that something
Desperate must be attempted. And what can it be, say they, but Infatuation, to
Oppose all the Laws of God and Man, and to Refuse an Honorable and
Advantageous PEACE, to Play out a desperate Game? Unless we trust to the
Religiousness of our Lives, to have Interest enough with Heaven, to work a
Miracle for us, to Disable the French all on a sudden. For it must be suddenly,
or it may come too late.

And the Jacobites plead for themselves, That they ought not to be esteemed as
Enemies to the Nation, because they are unwilling to Trust the Fate of England
upon such a Sandy Foundation, as our own Godliness; or the Weakness of the
French: Which Hopes we must expect to fail us, at some time or other, if we
believe there is a God in Heaven, unless we can Defend the Justice, the Truth,
and Honesty of our Cause.

And therefore the Jacobites do provoke us upon this point.

And I must confess, that without saying something to this point, we do not
Answer them.

Which is the reason has moved me to Write all this, That I may persuade the
Learned Author of the Letter to a Friend, to afford us another Edition of that
Ingenious Letter; and to give Satisfaction to these Demands of the Jacobites;
some of whom, we are bound in Charity to believe, are Honest, and Well-meaning
Men, and therefore do deserve thus much at our hands.

If we will not vouchsafe them an Answer to this, we leave them Ground to say,
That we shift the Question, and seek to put them off with Politics, when they
require Satisfaction in a Matter of Conscience.

Though even in Politics, they think, That the weightiest Considerations, for
the Good of the Nation, are those which they offer. But they do not lay the
Stress upon this; That which they insist upon is the Law of God, the Laws of
the Land, and Natural Justice; against which, they say, our poor Fallible
Politiques ought not to Prevail.

This is what the Jacobites say in the General; and they pretend it is a
sufficient Answer to all the Arguments in the said Letter.

But for greater Plainess, let us Apply what they have said to the Arguments in
the Letter, in the same Words, in which they are set down in the Letter.

Page 24. of the Letter, The Question is Resolved as to Conscience; and his
Reasons he puts by way of Questions, to the Protestant Non-Swearers.

The First Question is, Whether they can think themselves bound in Conscience
to Fight for Popery against the Protestant Faith and Worship, that is, to Fight
for Heresy and Idolatry against the True Faith and Worship of Christ, or to
Fight for Antichrist, and against Christ? Can any Consideration make this
Lawful?

To this the Jacobites Answer, That no Consideration can make it Lawful.

But then they say, That if the Christian Faith, and Protestant Principles do
Condemn the Deposing Doctrine, they Fight against both, who Fight for the
Deposing Doctrine.

And this the Letter to a Friend does Confess in plain Terms, in the same
place, viz. That we must not Fight against our Prince for Christ, because
Christ, in such Cases, requires His Disciples to Suffer, and not to Fight for
Him.

And the Jacobites are still ready to maintain, that the Doctrine of
Resistance, and Deposing Kings, are Contrary to the Christian and Protestant
Principles.

And that to Practice Popery (viz. The Deposing Doctrine, Dispensing with
Oaths, etc.) will be a means to Introduce, not to Extirpate Popery.

And therefore, without speaking to this Point, all the Declamations this
Author can make, are to no purpose.

They say the Protestants, who fought for Queen Mary against Queen Jane, fought
For the Protestant Religion, and against Popery, though they fought to set up a
Popish Queen, against a Protestant Queen, who was in Possession, and Reigning
in London.

And they say that Theudas and Judas ( Act. 5.) fought against the Jewish
Religion, though they fought to set it up, and to pull down the Idolatry of Rome.

And all this, because the Principles of a Religion are more to be Regarded,
are more the Religion than its Legal Establishment.

The next Question this Author asks these Jacobites, is, ( Page 25.) Do they
think themselves bound in Censcience to Fight for their Prince, against the
Laws and Liberties of their Country?

To this the Jacobites Answer, That the Laws of the Country are expressly On
their side, against Resistance of their King, or altering the Hereditary
Monarchy, upon any pretense whatsoever.

And they say, That we do as good as Confess all this, when we will not stick
by the Rule of the Law in this Revolution, but fly to Original Contract to
Overruled the Law.

He asks, Have the rest of mankind no Rights, but only Princes? Is there no
such thing as Justice due to our selves, nor to our fellow Subjects?

They Answer, The Greatest Right and Security of Subjects, is to Preserve the
Laws, and chiefly the Prerogative, which is the Greatest Barrier 'twixt
Property, and the Encroachments of their Fellow Subjects, which in Civil-War
are infinitely more Destructive to Property, than any Tyranny in the Sovereign.
And therefore, that the Greatest Justice we can do to our selves, or to our
fellow subjects, is to beat down all these Popular pretenses to Sedition and
Rebellion.

He says, A Nation which Fights against its own Laws and Liberties, is Felo de
se.

Witness Ireland, say the Jacobites, where, in three years, one half of the
Nation have been Destroyed upon this Popular Pretense: Many more than a hundred
Neroes successively would have put to Death.

What will be the Fate of England in this Revolution, none yet can tell, but
the Jacobites fear the worst.

They say that England, in this Quarrel, Fights against its own Laws, and
therefore is Felo de se.

Can any Englishman (says this Author) whatever Opinion he has of the late K.
James's Right, think himself bound in Conscience to maintain his Right?

The Jacobites think this a very strange Question.

But the Author Adds, By giving up his Country to France, to make him King, and
all his Subjects French Slaves?

First, If the Thing be Right, and according to God's Laws, the Jacobites
desire this Author to Answer it, whether he would not do it, whatever Nation in
the World were concerned in it?

Secondly, They say, That Recalling K. James, is the only probable way to
prevent our being French Slaves.

The Victories of France run in a full Tide against us, while, they say, our
small Successes are brought to pass by great Chances, even by Miracles, and
seem to no other purpose, than to keep us in heart, to give all the Money in
the Nation to Foreigners, and continue Obstinate till it be past Remedy.

We Play (says the Jacobites) like a Gamster, who Stakes his whole Stock every
cast of the Die; one Unluckey throw breaks him: and it is a Miracle if that
throw do not come, if the Play continue long.

On the other hand, he that Plays against us Manages his Stock, he lays up
beforehand, and has already in his Treasury the whole Expense for the Year 93.
he Drains his People by Degrees: We Squeze our Orange all at once: He Manages
by Rules, and leaves nothing to Chance; we leave all to Hazard, see what will
come on it: He lives upon his Interest, we spend off the Principal from Hand to
Mouth, and our Money is spent before it comes in, great part of which goes to
pay the Extraordinary Interest, upon which we Anticipate our Revenue: So that
(if we trust not to the Dice) we have certainly the worst of the Lay; and
nothing can save us but a sudden ending of the Game, which we must lose, if
Management does Determine it, while the Enemy has the greater Stock.

Now suppose France should Conquer us in this Quarrel (for nothing is
impossible) whether (say the Jacobites) would we be in the blame, who persuade
to accept of the Peace which France presses upon us, upon no other Conditions
than to Receive our King again? (which they say we are bound in Conscience to
do) or will not all the Mischievous Consequences of such a Conquest ly at their
Door who Reject this offered Peace, rather than Return to their Duty, or own
that they have done amiss?

If we answer that we have not done amiss. The Jacobites desire no better than
to bring it to that Test, to dispute the Justice of the Cause, without
Consideration of Politiques.

And even in Politiques, they ask us, whether they Judge wisely, who are for
continuing a War, wherein we must trust to Miracles for our Success? and that
too when we Fight against what most of us do acknowledge to be King James's
Right? or else he could have no Right to seek for it again, which he has by Dr.
Sherlock's own Confession.

But says our Author p. 25/26. Can any Prince have more Right to be King of
England, than the Kingdom of England has to be England?

The Jacobites desire this may be further explained. It is a fine round saying,
and no doubt must be true; But they see not how we can apply it to the present
Case.

They say that England is most England when its Government is Monarchical and
Hereditary, when its Monarch is Irresistible by Force, even in Case of Male
administration, or upon any pretense whatsoever; for then the Door is for ever
shut against all popular pretenses for Rebellion, which our wise Legislators
have found by experience to be infinitely of more dangerous Consequence to
England (as to all other Governments) than the Arbitrariness of the Governors:
and therefore have made Non-Resistance an Act of Parliament; It is our Law say
they, the Law of England, it is our Constitution.

And therefore that England is least England when you break in upon her
Constitution, over-turn her Laws, and, (being wiser than your Forefathers)
open the Door to Eternal pretenses for Rebellion, and Restless Revolutions:
They say that we are trying the experiment over again of York and Lancaster, of
King Charles and Oliver, and that England was then least England: and so they
say it is now; and that we may see it plainly by its Tottering, Uncertain,
Aguish Disposition, in danger to be Swallowed by France, if we will desperately
stand that Test) to be drained by the Confederates (which they say is in a
pretty good forwardness) or to be divided at home, and make England the seat of
the War, and share the Fate of Ireland; which is most of all to be dreaded.

All this, say these Jacobites is owning to our Revolution, and cannot be
Remedied but by Returning our Laws and Constitution to their old Channel.

But, is it not an unaccountable tenderness and scrupulosity of Conscience
(says our Author p. 26.) to be so concerned for any one Prince's Right, as to
Sacrifice the Rights and Libertyes of all the Princes of Europe to his?

To this Question the Jacobites answer, That they will Sacrifice no Man's Right
to another: But if one Man will Invade another Right (as they pretend the P.
of O. did to K J.) and if a Confederacy of the Neighborhood should, for their
own Ends, support the Man who did the Wrong, they say that all Honest Men are
bound in Conscience to Act against that Confederacy: And if this should turn to
the Loss of any of the Confederates, the Guilt lies at their own Door.

The Jacobites wonder we should bring so plain a Case as this. And they say,
that standing by the Oppressed in such a Case as this, is asserting the Rights
and Liberties of Mankind: And that taking part with the Invaders of other Men's
Right, is Sacrificing the Rights and Liberties, not only of all the the Princes
of Europe, but of every Man in the World.

But our Author Supports his Position, in these following words, It is to no
more purpose to Dispute with men who do not feel the Force of this Argument at
the first hearing, than to Reason with Blind-men about Colors.

And the Jacobites think this may be said as to their Arguments, which are
founded upon the Natural, and Universal Notions of Right and Wrong; against
which, if any Man Dispute, he is supposed to have Denied, First Principles, and
so to be heard no longer. They say, That all their Arguments are for Supporting
Right; and that Ours are for Defending Wrong.

Therefore I see no Remedy, but that we must come to the Right or Wrong of the
Cause with them; and must suffer our selves to be Determined by the Scripture,
and by the Laws of the Land, as Established in former Parliaments. If we Refuse
this Test, we shall have the Cry of the Nation against us, for as yet they are
not quite wrought off their Good Opinion of Scripture, Laws, and Parliaments.

What follows in our Author upon this Argument, is (say the Jacobites) an
Effeminate breaking out into passion, when Reason sails, viz. They have no
Sense left, nothing but a Stupid and Slavish Loyalty -- their senseless mistake
of the true meaning of this word Loyalty; by which they will needs understand
an absolute Obedience without Limitation or Reserve; when most certainly, it
signifies no more than Obedience according to Law.

Thus our Author, In return to which, the Jacobites say, they pity his
Passion, and pass by his Complements, of stupid, slavish, senseless -- only
Admonish him for the future, that it is a certain sign of a Lost Cause, for
while a Man thinks he has the better of the Dispute, he is pleased: But he
grows angry, only at an Argument which is too hard for him, he bites that as a
stone that is thrown at him, because it hurts him.

But say the Jacobites, we will not take that advantage of his passion, as to
overlook any thing of his Argument. He says, That most certainly, Loyalty
signifies no more, than Obedience according to Law.

Say the Jacobites, No more it needs, while the Law makes our Obedience
Absolute, and without Limitation, by Declaring it not to be Lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King, or those Commissionated by
him.

And therefore the Jacobites do humbly mind this Author, that the senseless
mistake he speaks of, concerning the Meaning of the Word Loyalty, belongs to
the Parliament (however he meant it) as well as to the Jacobites: For several
Acts of Parliament do Enact Non-Resistance upon any pretense; and if that be
not an Absolute Obedience without Limitation, then this Author, say the
Jacobites, does wrong us, for we never carried Absolute Obedience farther than
Non-Resistance, where, with a safe Conscience, we cannot yield an Active
Obedience: Allow us that, say they, and we will seek no more. But if you will
not, then Rail at our Parliaments and our Laws, say they, call them senseless,
slavish, and what you will, but excuse the poor Jacobites for following of
these, till they be Repealed.

But Secondly, the Jacobites Answer, That Sir Edward Coke, the Great Oracle of
our Law, tells us, in Calvin's Case, That Allegiance is prior to all Municipal
Laws: That the World was long without Municipal Laws: And yet Allegiance was
then Due from Subjects to their Sovereign. And this he calls Natural
Allegiance, because it arises not from the Obligation of any Municipal Law, but
from the Law of Nature, from that Natural Relation there is 'twixt the
Governors and the Governed.

When this Allegiance comes to be Recognized in the Municipal Laws of any
Country, it is then called a Legal Allegiance, not that it was Created by the
Law (for it was prior to the Law, as has been said) or that it receives more
strength by the Law; but it is Published, Ascertained, and Recognized by the
Law, which alters nothing of its Force and Obligation, which it had before the
Law. And hence the Natural, and the Legal Allegiance, are not two Allegiances,
but the same Allegiance Considered under different Modifications. As the King
is the same King before and after his being Crowned, or Recognized by
Parliament.

Therefore Sir Edward Coke tells us, The Law did allow the Allegiance of the
Subjects in Scotland and England, to be the same after King James the 1st. came
into England, though the Municipal Laws of both Kingdoms did disser in many
things.

So that our Author's Most certainty (say the Jacobites) that Loyalty or
Allegiance signifies no more than Obedience according to Law, is most certainly
otherwise, for though our Allegiance be according to Law, because it is
Acknowledged and Recognized by the Law, yet it is prior to the Law, and
therefore takes not all its Force from the Law; and Consequently signifies
something more than Obedience according to Law, viz. That Obedience which was
before the Law, and which the Law it self owns to be so.

These are all the Arguments, every one in this Author, concerning the
Resolution of our Conscience as to this Revolution.

The remaining part of this Letter from p. 26/27. is only Reflecting upon the
carriage of the present Jacobites while K. James was upon the Throne: which is
not Material to our present business, for if they failed in any thing then,
that is nothing as to the Guilding of our Conscience now, this is nothing but
personal Reflection, and is below Men of Argument that search after Truth. This
Author there takes a great deal of pains to Convince the Jacobites, that they
ought to have Fought better than they did against the Prince of Orange, when he
came over to Dispossess his Father.

This the Jacobites will readily Grant, and what will this Author gain by it?

But he makes an excuse for them. p. 28. They did not expect (says he) what
followed; they desired to have their Laws and Liberties secured, but not that
the (King James) should loose his Crown.

And to this the Author makes answer in these Words, But since he would leave
his Crown, who could help it? For no body took it from him.

The Jacobites say they are astonished at this. That they could not have
expected this from so Celebrated a Pen as that of this Author.

They ask whether this Author, or any Man in England thinks that K. James left
his Crown Voluntarily?

And whether Frighting a King out of his Kingdom he not a taking it from him?

And then to cry as this Author here, who could help it? For no body took it
from him!

The Jacobites say, they suspect this Author to be turning toward
Trans-sub-stantiation, (he can never be too old to Learn) for if he can
persuade us out of our Senses in one case, he may in another.

Now (say the Jacobites) to see K. James Invaded by the P. of Orange, and made
a Prisoner by him, removing his English, and clapping Dutch Guards upon him,
Commanding him out of his Bed and Palace at two a Clock in the Morning, and
after, Possessing his Crown, and then to say, that no body took it from him, is
the same as to say that no body now possesses it. It is to bid us believe
nothing we see, hear, or Feel.

And is this the Foundation, say they, upon which you would settle our
Conscience, and hazard our Damnation?

If any body took K. James's Crown from him, then (say the Jacobites) will you
allow us to be in the Right, and your selves to be in the Wrong? You must do
so, if you lay any stress upon this Argument.

But if no body took it from him, then perhaps he has it still, and we have him
still at White Hall, it is only a Decoptio Visus; and we have been but Dreaming
of Battles in Ireland and Flanders; Ireland is not Destroyed, nor have any Men
Perished there!

And now come Popery, we are ready for you, we will never Plead our senses
against you any more.

Thus the Jacobites insult. And I confess it is the point I can least answer;
for, as they say, either K. James did Voluntarily Relinguish his Crown (which
no body in the World believes) or he was Frightened from it, and chose rather to
Lose it for some time, and take his, hazard of Recovering it again, rather than
ly at his Enemies Mercy to take that away, and his Life together when ever he
Pleased (which no doubt was the Case) and I have heard many blame the ill
Conduct of suffering him to Escape; and Create us so many troubles: Would any
think him Safe, if he were in our hands now? Therefore it is a Demonstration
that it was his safest Course to Escape when he could.

Our Author has a witty Sarcasme upon this ( p. 2.) King William (says he) wont
Abdicate nor Steal away.

The Jacobites Laugh at this, and ask our Author, whether he would not Advise
K. W. to make his Escape, if he were in the Circumstances, in which K. J. was
then? Suppose K. J. should Invade, and Conquer K. W. Suppose the Engish should
Desert K. W. as they did K. J. and that K. J. had made K. W. a Prisoner, and
put him under French Guards, would not our Author, or any Friend of his,
persuade him to Abdicate and Steal Away, if he could?

This the Jacobites say, was poor and impotent in this Anthor, to strain
himself for a Reslection upon K. J. to renen a Blow at him, and then to have no
more to say against him. But to return to our Argument. The Jacobites do
further insist in behalf of K. J. That suppose his Fears were too Great, yet it
was to Save his Life that he fled. And will any say that this was no Force upon
him? And shall our Author ask, Since he would go -- as if it were Obstiuacy,
not Fear that pressed him? and, who could help it? as if it were against our will
that he went, and that we were able and willing to protect him.

And when he is thus Frightened away, and Forced to leave his Crown behind him
to Save his Life, and then we bestow this Crown upon another, and to Declare
him to have no more Right to it, to say this is not a Taking it from him, the
Jacobites allege is Nonsense, even to the Degree of Madness. And the Case
being thus stated, they must needs Gain all mankind to their side; Men may
pretend what they will, but it is not in a Man's power to Believe as he pleases.

And therefore, Sir, I do earnestly entreat you to think of some Topic or
other, to Answer these Jacobites, otherwise the Consequence must be Fatal to
the Government, to let them have all the plausibility on their side.

Whether you will pitch upon the way of Scotland, to Fore-Fault the King; and
plainly own, as they do, his Forfeiting his Crown for Maladministration, and
therefore that they took it from him, by their Superior and Original Authority,
and Deposed him Justly: Which I think a much easier way than ours. Or whether
you will set up Conquest, or what other Method to satisfy Men's Consciences, I
submit to your better Judgment: But something must be done other than to say,
that No body took K. J.'s Crown from him, for such a Paradox can never pass
upon any Man of Honesty or Common Sense.

And in your Managing this Cause, I shall desire likewise, for the Honor of
the Government, That you would avoid giving the Jacobites such a handle to
Retort upon us as you do p. 28/29. where you insist upon the Perjury, Mocking
of God, and Deceiving the Government, in those who have taken the New Oath to
K. W. and Q. M. and yet should Act against them.

Here you could not but Imagine, That the Jacobites would Retort upon us, the
Breach of our Oaths to K. J. And for us to Preach up the Obligation of Oaths in
one Case, and Cry them down in another, is exposing our selves to the utmost
Contempt; unless you had shown some Difference 'twixt these Oaths, which you
have forgot.

As they did (the Jacobites say) who had the Penning of the Late Proclamation,
13. Sept. 92. against High-way-mer, and Robbers; and yet showed us not the
Difference 'twixt Robbing or Stealing Pence, and a Crown, why the Lesser
Stealth should be Criminal; and the Greater Glorious: as if Kings only, of all
Mankind, were Divested of having any Right or Property; If they have, then
forceing their Right from them is Robbery: And the Laws do secure the Right of
the King beyond that of the Subject: Making a Trespass, a Scandal, or an
Assault against a Subject, Treason against the King. And yet this Proclamation
begins, Whereas in Contempt of the Laws and well Established Government of this
Kingdom, many Robberys have been of late Committed -- as if (say the Jacobites)
Robbing the King of his Crown were not a greater Contempt of the Laws, than
Robbing a Private Man of his Purse? Unless Princes be Exempt from the Eight
Commandment, either in an Active or a Passive Sense, viz. That they can neither
Rob, nor be Robbed. Because all they get is their own, and what others get from
them is all well gotten. These are Excellent Principles, and the only
Foundation of our Government, as the Jacobites do object. And therefore we
should do well to keep off these tender Points, and not give these Jacobites
occasion against us.

You upbraid the Papists. p. 4. for knowing how to expound Providence to
flatter Superstition.

And you know how the Jacobites upbraid us with expounding Providence to
flatter Success, though it were in Rebellion, Treachery, and all Wickedness,
Which if it Succeeds, it Immediately Commences not only Right but Divine, as if
Commanded by an Angel or a Prophet, or the Mouth of God Himself, according to
Dr. Sherlock, etc. What strange Sermons (say these Jacobites) have we from your
Bishops and Top Divines, proving the Lawfulness of this Revolution from
Providence, by which they mean Success. Which was as much made use of, and
almost in the same Words, by the Rump Parliament, Oliver; and all the Canting
Tribe.

God came from Nasby, and the Holy one from Marston Moore! Selah!

This will Justify the French King in all his Conquests, and gives Mahomet the
better of Christ. And yet (say the Jacobites) we are Deafned with it from your
Pulpits.

You might likewise have Forborne that little piece of Wit ( p. 10.) of
reckoning the Loud and Zealous Ladys of the Jacobire side: For you know where
that is to be Retorted at home!

With the help of these Loud Ladys, you say, they (the Jacobites) are enough to
make a Noise, but as they were not hands enough to hinder the late Revolution,
neither can they (say you) make another. Here you make them very
inconsiderable, when you are upon your vapouring pin, as the Jacobites do
deride you: For they observe, that either your Memory or your Courage fails
you, ( p. 19.) where you make the number of the Jacobites the Great
encouragement to the French King, to Restore King James: For, say you, Without
a hopeful Conspiracy in England, the French King is too wary to make such an
Attempt. And ( p. 21.) Were it not for them (our Factions at home) we need not
fear its (France's) united Force.

Nor are you less afraid of the Zealous Ladys you have provoked, some of them
may be upon your Top, but you Court them again ( p. 21.) where reckoning the
Miseries of a Civil War, you Reckon the Loss of Husbands, but not of Wives,
this sure will touch them in the sensible part, and Charm their tender Hearts!

This was a great deal Tweeter, than what you have six Lines above, where,
comforting us, as to the Taxes, and other Prices of this Revolution, you say,
While we have left wherewithal to Maintain our selves, we have no such great
reason to complain. This might have been spared, because you know we have lest
a great many Jacobites in a Condition not to Maintain themselves.

It had been also advisible, if you had thought fit, to have let alone that
Gentile Rub you gave King James ( Page 20.) We know the Late King too well to
take his word.

For this raises the Devil of an Objection, which the Jacobites have against
us, of our present King, not keeping to his Declaration, besides many Breaches
of Promises since, Dispencing with the Law, and all those Grievances, even
Countenancing Popery, of which we Complained in K. J.'s time.

In all whose Reign, we had no such Example of Favor shown to Popish Priests
and Friars, as was seen the Sessions at Old Bailey, held 31. Aug. and 1. and 2.
Sept. 92. Where two Friars, by name, Graham and Thursby, were Indicted for the
Murder of a Coffee-Man in Holbourn, having first behauched his Wife in her
Religion, and he was Jealous in her Chastity, as her self confessed in Court,
where she came, and was admitted as an Evidence for Graham, who run her Husband
through, but she declared, That her Husband run himself upon his Sword.

These Friars had the Interest (they say it was by means of the Prince
Vaudemont) to have a Promise of their Pardon from K. W. then in Flanders. But
it was thought the best way, to prevent the Noise that would make, to have them
Acquit upon their Trial; toward which all things being Disposed, and the
Necessary Orders given, the Conduct was committed to Judge -- who had shown
himself so zealous against the Deprived Bishops, that he corrected the Crier of
his Court, for stileing one of them by the Title of Bishop, when he called to
have room made for him to come into the Court, whither he was Summoned, as an
Evidence in some Cause Depending: It is likely the Crier had not otherwise made
the people know whom he meant: But the Judge had better Skill in the Force of
an Act of Parliament-Deprivation (which Hody himself, nor his Prompters behind
the curtain, do pretend to take away the Character) that when he chid the Crier
for giving the Deprived Father the Title of Bishop, What Bishop? (says Judge)
come Doctor Lloyd, what have you to say --

This Learned Judge altered his Countenance, and was all sweetness to these
Friars, which was observed by the whole Court; and when one Objected, that they
were Popish Priests, whom the Laws Discharged out of the Kingdom, upon pain of
Treason: His Lordship tempered that Man's Heat, with the Gravity and Calmness
of a Judge, telling him, That was not the Cause before them -- In short. The
Wife gave Evidence: The Judge Summed it up: The Jury Acquitted: And All the
People took Notice.

But it is not to be omitted, say these Jacobites, That in the Printed Account
of the Trials that Sessions, this of the Friars is left out: Which I have heard
some say, was never done before, in any case, and durst not have been done now,
but by Order.

But they say, what need we Instance Particulars? It is Notoriously known, That
Popish Priests have of late not only owned themselves as such before the
Privy Council, but pleaded it as an Argument for their Indemnity, and
Protection Pursuant to the Secret Articles 'twixt King William, the Emperor,
King of Spain, etc. And they have been allowed it.

It is true, we excuse all this upon the account of Necessity: But that does
not stop the Jacobites Mouths. They say, that Necessity is as pleadable by one
King as another. And besides, That we have Created this Necessity, of which we
Complain. And that if Papists must be Countenanced, what matter is it whether
it be to Gratify the Confederates, or the French, who are less Papists than
either Spain, Savoy, or the Popish Germans; and not more Persecutors than any
of these. All this the Jacobites do Retort upon us.

Again, ( p. 22.) abusing of the French King, you say, He has no Scruple of
Conscience about the Rights of other Princes; all he can get is his own.

Dear Sir, did not you Reflect that this is the very Reproach which the
Jacobiees cast upon King William? with this aggravation, that he has no Scruple
of Conscience, not only about the Rights of other Princes, but of his Father
and Uncle: And if he can catch his Crown too, it shall be his own.

And if he did this for Religion, why may not the French King do the same for
his Religion, and see to get King William's Crown if he can? Is the one more
Impious than the other?

King William gives it for one Reason of his War with France, to Restore the
Hugonets, and other the French Subjects to their Rights by Law: To Re-settle
their Parliaments in their Ancient Authority, free from the Encroachments which
have been made upon them by their Kings, etc. And he has the same Grounds of
War against Denmark and Sweden. Let them look to it!

Now (say the Jacobites) if it be Lawful for Princes thus to look into one
another Kingdoms; and take upon them to redress what they find amiss in the
Governments of other Nations; why do we blame the French King to endeavor to
Re-settle King James having the Laws of England to plead on his side? Dr.
Sherlock himself in his Recantation, allows King James to have still the Legal
Right; and upon that Ground, a Right to Regain the Crown if he can. Why should
the French King Rectify the Encroachments of our Parliaments against our
Kings; as well as we take upon us to Rectify his Encroachments against his
Parliaments?

We shall make a fine World of it when every Prince must Govern his Neighbors
Country; or, as a Modern Author Words it, when one Prince must Interpose 'twixt
another Prince and his Subjects, when he uses them Cruelly.

If Loss of all we have, and frequent Imprisonments contrary to Law, without
Information upon Oath, if double Taxes, and Twenty other such Treatments be
Cruel Usages: Then by this Argument, say the Jacobites, the French or any other
King, may interpose 'twixt K. William and his Subjects. And they appeal to you
or any Man in the World, whether making the Refusal of an Oath, which is
against a Man's Conscience to be a Premanire, as it is in Ireland, be not some
Degrees worse than any French Dragooning as it is Painted to the Worst? And
then Imposing this upon all Women as well as Men above eighteen Years of Age,
may be Aggravated, say the Jacobites, upon these Principles, to Provoke all
Kings and States, to Interpose 'twixt these Subjects and their Prince.

Good Sir; I beseech you to Dis-ingage the Government from these Intanglements,
which its Convert Advocats, and False Friends have brought upon it.

But by none more than your self, Sir, in this Letter to a Friend, p. 28/29.
Where, speaking of the Oath to K. William and Q. Mary, you expound Faith and
Allegiance to the lowest Sense that possibly can be supposed even by Jacobites,
and you make it to exclude, under the Guilt of Downright Perjury, any Attempt
against their Persons or Crowns to whom we have Sworn, or to hold any
Correspondence with, or to give any Assistance to their Enemies.

This you did to deter the Swearers to K. William and Q. Mary, from
Countenancing the French Invasion, or to Assist the Late King in Recovering the
Throne. But did you foresee, Sir, That this Rule you set down will Involve all
those in Downright Perjury, according to the very lowest Sense of Allegiance
that can possibly be made, even by Williamites, who held Correspondence with
the P. of Orange, or Assisted him in this Revolution. Sir, you are one who
Turned late: And to save your own Credit, and new Hypothesis, would make
Perjured Miscreants of all who came into this Revolution before your self. Now
the Fish is Caught, you come in for a Snack, but give all those to the Devil,
who provided Hooks or Nets.

Sir, I am not now Personating the Jacobite, I speak plainly in behalf of those
who had a Hand, and Glory in it, in bringing about this Wonderful Revolution.
They cannot think their Part to be wholly Diabolical, in the Contrivance and
Effecting of that which must be all over Divine to you in the Enjoyment of
their Labors, and Dangers; You cry that K. James went no doubt as was
determined of him: But to them by whom he was Betrayed! And yet you will take a
Share in the Price for which he was Sold.

Besides, if it was such a Damned Design in them to bring in the P. of Orange;
his Highnesses's Design could not be very Heavenly; But you are content to make
a Rogue of him too, to save your own Bacon. Sir, this deserves some
Animadversion from the Government; For all your skill will never persuade plain
Honest Englishmen, that it was Knavery and Downright Perjury in all the
Subjects of England, who Placed the P. of Orange upon the Throne: And yet when
he is there by such Wicked Act of theirs, that this can give him Divine
Authority, and their own Wicked Act, Absolve them from their former Lawful
Oaths, and Oblige them in Conscience to Maintain and Defend their said Wicked
Act, and to Swear never to Return from it. This all Men will call Swearing
never to Repent. And to give such an Account of our Revolution, by one who sets
up now for the Chief Advocate of it, is Betraying it, and Exposing it more than
all Jacobites, or Professed Enemies can say. It shows us to stand upon such
Ridiculous Foundations as must Nauseat all who pretend to Common Sense. And it
Confirms the Jacobites Irrecoverably in what they think to be Loyalty; while
they see us Defend our selves like Fools and Madmen, by Arguments which
evidently Destroy our Cause.

And, Sir, you needed not have done this, you might easily have avoided these
sort of Stumbling Blocks: Therefore I advise you to avoid Excursions, March on
straight your Road, Tread warily, say no more than you must.

And do not go out of your way for the pleasure of Lashing the French King
himself, for it does not always turn to Advantage. p. 23. You pursue him to
the Boyne, to Athlone, to Agrim, to Limrick, and say we Beat him in all these
Places, and in a Word (say you) we Beat him out of Ireland: And have now got a
Habit of Beating the French.

This indeed, Sir, with all due Deference to your Judgment, is horribly
Ridiculous: Or, you speak without Book, and know not what you say, for it is
most certain, that at Athlone, at Agrim, at Limrick, there were not above Forty
or Fifty French in the whole Irish Army: And there were more than Twenty times
as many in K. William's Army. Therefore to cry we have Beat him (the French
King) that we have got a Habit of Beating the French!

If you had a mind to have Beaten K. Lewis, you should have sought him in
Flanders, not in Ireland, (where he never was) how very Comical, do you think,
would this Passage of your Letter look to him if he saw it? Would he not desire
you to remember Namure, and Steenkirk, and ask you how you came to forget your
Habit there?

Do not Mistake me, as if I did in the least derogate from the Courage of the
English. No, They showed it at Steenkirk to admiration, and had they been
Supported, might have done Maricles; surely no Men upon Earth would go farther
under Good Conduct: They are too Good to be always, and rashly Exposed and
made the Subject of Dutch Railery, who have Painted the English Fighting in
this Battle with Lions Paws, and Calves Heads. i. e. under such Commanders.

But it is exceeding Childish, thus to Undervalue other Men, and Vapor of our
Victories over the French in Ireland. It hinders Men from laying weight upon
any thing else that we say. And does no small Service to the Jacobite Cause,
while it is made so easy for them to Expose us.

As they think it is likewise in a later Instance, viz. A True Account of the
Horrid Conspiracy against the Life of his Sacred Majesty, William the Third,
etc. Published by Authority, and Printed in the Savoy, 1692. Giving an Account
of the Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of the Chevalier de Grandval, in the
Camp. 13. Aug. 92. For being concerned in the said Conspiracy.

There p. 7. K. J. and his Queen are made Partys in this Conspiracy, and to
have Encouraged those Officers who were to do him that Service, as it is there
Worded.

And I have heard the Hawkers cry that Paper about the Streets, by the Name of
The Horrible and Bloody Conspiracy carried on by the late K. James, and the
late Q. Mary, to Murder his Sacred Majesty K. William.

Of this the Jacobites do highly Complain: and say, That the Sins of these
Nations are yet increasing, That instead of their Repentance, for the now known
Notorious Slanders, which, in order to the present Revolution, were
industriously spread abroad against King James, as that of the French League,
the Prince of Wales, the Earl of Essex, and that Mass of Calumnies laid upon
him in Ireland since; They say that instead of Repenting for these, we are yet
going on to load him with new Crimes, which the Jacobites are confident they
can prove as false as any of the other.

They will never believe that King James would give his Consent to de Wit or
Glenco any Body: They say it is not in his Nature. Which all that know him well
will allow.

But the Jacobites say, that it is not all the Williamites can make this any
Objection against King James: Because many of them, even Officers of the Army,
have declared, and do it openly, that they think it a good Act to Stab King
James, as much, and more than any common Thief or Robber; because, as they say,
he does greater Hurt than they, and is the Occasion of greater Bloodshed and
Confusion.

I have heard several of them (when they were not drunk) say, That they would
stab him with their own Hands, and go an Hundred Miles barefoot to have the
Opportunity.

But for King Lewis, They think it a meritorious Act to rid the World of such a
Monster, to give Peace to Christendom, and to revenge the Cause of the poor
Hugonots.

As for these Men (how numerous soever) the Jacobites say, they must be silent,
and not blame King James if he had such a Design, because it is pursuant to
their own Principles.

But the Jacobites lay no stress upon this, nor plead for Assassinations, which
they detest; but they insist against the Truth of the Matter of Fact, and that
King James never had any such Design, nor knew of this Conspiracy of Grandval,
if there was any such Conspiracy.

And now, Sir, give me leave to tell you some of those Grounds upon which the
Jacobites do not believe this Conspiracy, at least that part of it which
concerns K. James, and that even before they receive a full Account of it from
St. Germains, which can be best done there; and when they receive it, they
promise to communicate it for farther Satisfaction. In the mean time take what
follows, for the Reason of their present Infidelity in this Case.

First, It is said, p. 7. of the abovesaid Account of this Conspiracy, in the
very Sentence of the Judges, That Colonel Parker (one of the Conspirators) was
with Grandval and Leefdale, (two other of the Conspirators,) to take leave of
K. James at St. Germains, before they began their Journey, ( viz. to K.
William's Camp, to perpetrate their intended Design, where Parker was to be a
main Actour, and together with Grandval to rescue and bring off Dumont, with
Fifteen Hundred French Horse, after he had shot K. William.) Now instead of
Parker's going as above designed to Flanders, and having taken leave of K.
James with the other Conspirators, in order to their said Journey, it is
notoriously known that Parker came straight to England; which the Jacobites
think totally inconsistent with all that fine Story, and to give it flatly the
Lie.

But they rest not upon this, they give a positive disproof to the Allegation,
by showing that Colonel Parker was not at St. Germains the Sixteenth day of
April, 1692. on which day the Sentence of the Judges (p. 7.) says, that he
(Parker) was there with King James, and in Consultation with Grandval and
Leefdale about the said Conspiracy: Which 16th of April, if it should be
New-style, will be the 6th Old-style, when Parker (the True Account says) was
at St. Germains.

For disproof of this, they give you a Journal of Colonel Parker's coming from
St. Germains to England in April, 1692. which they have from Undeniable
Vouchers, viz. Colonel Parker having taken his leave of King James at St.
Germains, he went to Paris Sunday the Third of April (Old Style) 1692. on
Monday and Tuesday, the Fourth and Fifth, all Day and Night, he was actually at
Paris, on the Sixth, by Five a Clock in the Morning, at Paris he took Coach to
Saint Dennis, and that Night he lay at Boumont, the Seventh at Bovay, the
Eighth at Poy, the Ninth at Abevile, the Tenth he took Post to Callis, where he
Embarked for England; he was Shipwrackt on the Kentish Shore, where soon after
he was taken Prisoner, and carried before the Mayor of Rumney, and on the
Thirteenth he was sent Prisoner to London with a Guard.

His being at Paris the Fourth and Fifth, and taking Coach from thence on the
Sixth by Five in the Morning, can be proved by at least Twenty Credible
Witnesses; and all along from thence to the Thirteenth by Three Undeniable
Witnesses.

But all this, the Jacobites say, proves the Matter of the True Account to be
only False. They allege other Circumstances in that Trial which make it wholly
Ludicrous, and utterly Incredible to any Man of Sense.

Such is that of Du-mont (the Man who was to kill King William) having a Secret
to charm People's Eyes. Indeed nothing less could secure a Man to kill a King
at the Head of his Army, as this was to be done, viz. when the King should ride
along the Lines. The other two Conspirators ( Grandval and Leefdale,) it is
said were to keep with those that followed the King; and when every Body was
pursuing after Du-mont (who was Invisible, having a Secret to charm People's
Eyes,) they should have time to escape and save themselves.

This was the Scheme and Manner of executing the said Design which was
contrived by the Marquess of Barbesieux, Son to the Marquess of Louvois, as
also Secretary of State to the French King, Mounsieur Paparell, and some of the
Ministers in the highest Employments, and of the greatest Credit in the French
Court, as the True Account says.

If they could contrive no better than this, the Jacobites think we should not
find so much trouble in our War with Frarce.

They desire to be excused if it be not in their power to believe, that the
Great Ministers of France could concert their Business no better than this.

Not to name several lesser Matters, as that Du-mont was to shoot at King
William, at an hundred paces distance, (he might have come nearer being
Invisible.) If King William had been alone, there was hazard of missing, or not
killing kim at that distance: But consider him surrounded with his Officers and
Attendants, and that his Stature is not so Great as to be hit over other
People's Heads, at a hundred paces distance, you must then shoot through two or
three likely before the Bullet could come at him: But perhaps Du-Mont had an
Invisible way of taking aim too, and could charm his Bullet to follow his
Directions.

It was likewise pretty difficult which was contrived by the Marquess of
Barbesieux, Paparel, etc. page 5, 6. viz. That after Du-Mont had shot King
William at his Grand Guard, the Prisoner (Grandval) and Parker, (who was in
England,) with fifteen hundred Horse from the Grand Guard of the Duke of
Luxemburg's Army, were to rescue Du-Mont, and bring him off; the said Du-Mont
giving timely notice to the Prisoner (Grandval) of the intended Execution. Thus
the True Account.

The Jacobites think this almost as impracticable as the other Contrivance of
the Charm. For Du Mont was to watch his Opportunity to shoot King William as he
went to visit the Grand Guard, and had no choice left (by this Contrivance) but
to charm King William to stand still, and in the same Posture he liked, till he
could give timely notice to the Prisoner of the intended Execution: Or if he
had a Familiar to fly swiftly with the Errand; yet after he had shot King
William, he would need another Secret to charm Peoples Hands from falling upon
him, till his Friends should come from the Duke of Luxemburg's Grand Guard to
rescue him.

But this True Account ends with a Material Objection, viz. That it was like
enough Monsieur Barbesieux would disown that he gave any such Orders, or that
he was any ways concerned in a Business of this Nature. To which Grandval
replied, let him deny what he pleases, yet if I were put upon it; I would make
it appear very plain, for I have an Original Paper under Monsieur Barbesieux's
own hand, which I have Lodged with a Friend of Mine, who will not part with it
to any one but my self, and no Body else knows with whom I have Entrusted it.
Thus ends The True Account.

To which the Jacobites reply, that either the Prisoner was then put upon it
(since as the True Account tells us in the same place, that he sought to
Justify himself upon the Orders he had received from the Marquis of Barbesieux)
or when, or how was it he could be put upon it, if not to Defend his Life? And
when he thought that proving the Marquis Barbesieux Orders to him would be a
Justification of him, why would not he Produce the Orders? Was not he then put
upon it? Would he give such a Ridiculous Answer as to say he had left them with
a Friend whom no Body knew, and who was Engaged not to part with them to any
but himself, after he had, without Torture, so frankly Confessed all the rest of
the Conspiracy? No. ^ay the Jacobites, this has not Common Sense in it, this
would be rather to Provoke and Defy his Judges, than to Plead for himself, To
say he had Evidence, but would not Produce it. There must be some other meaning
in it.

And the Jacobites say, they can think of nothing else, but that Grandval has
been put upon to give this Evidence to Blacken K. James and the French Court,
with promise of Life in ultimo ^ticulo, and then has been taken Short (as we
know others have been in the like Case) of which in likelihood he being
Apprehensive, kept this pretended Original Paper of Barbesieux as a Pawn for
his Life, that if they carried the Jest too far, and gave him short Turn, they
should never get that Paper of Barbesieux, for he had left it with a Friend
whom he (...) Engaged not to part with it to any one but himself; and no Body
else knows (says he) with whom I have En^d it.

And these Jacobites are the rather Induced to believe this, not only because
they can put no other Meaning upon that Passage of Grandval: But because that
Council of War which (...), was Composed of the Men in the World most Violent
and Reg^ed against K. James, ^. Some of his own Deserters, and Prayers, Men
highly Obliged, Rait'd, and Trusted by him, and who had basely Deserted and
Betrayed him, past hopes, they think, of his Mercy; and a few Dutch Men, whose
Affections and Candor to K. James or the French are very well known.

Those were the Council. Ginckle (lately made Earl of Athlone) General Van
Scravenmore, and Lieutenant General Talmash; the Marquis Da la Forest, the Here
Van Weed, Count Noijelles and the Here Zabel Majors General, and the
Brigadeers Churchill and Ramsey; Cornelius Van Wou, and Richard Vthwayt, Judgas
Advocates Assisting, who have shown as much Integrity as Ingenuity say the
Jacobites.

Sir, These are some of the Objections which I have heard the Jacobites Urge,
to Invalidate this pretended Evidence of Grandval against K. James. And he came
not off so well as the Sham Spy who was to be Hanged at Notingham, when
Princess Ann was there: But Grandval is taken out of the way to give farther
Evidence; Therefore it will concern the Government that something be said to
this, least the Reflection which this Account of Grandval is thought to bring
upon K. James, return double upon our selves. And though this has been Published
since the Writing of your Letter to a Friend, yet I know of no better Hand to
whom to Recommend so necessary a Vindications of our Proceedings in this
Matter, and therefore I Entreat that you would Consider it together with the
other Jacobite Objections which I have offered to you in this Paper, to receive
your Answer, for the Good of the Nation.

And do not think that this is sufficiently done by those Papers that have been
cried about the Streets, and Licensed by the Government, telling us of several
Apparitions to Private Soldiers in K. Williams's Army in Flanders, giving
Account of this Design of Assassinating K. William, and God's Miraculous
Providence in Detecting; Preventing, etc. This may pass perhaps among some of
the Vulgar, for whom I suppose it was Designed; But it Nauseats Men of Sense
exceedingly. It looks like putting this story upon us, and they wonder at such
poor Arts. It had been much easier believed if these Visions, and Du Monts
Charm had been let alone.

But, Sir, you cannot readily conceive the Horror and Astonishment which the
Jacobites do Express at our carrying on this Sport (as they call it) so far as
to Bantre Allmighty God with it in the Proclamation for a Public Thanksgiven,
Dated. 22. October. 92. Where it is told that Forasmuch as it has Pleased
Almighty God of His Infinite Goodnoss in Answer to the Prayers Humbly and
Devoutly offered up to Him -- To Disappoint and Defeat the Barbarous and Horrid
Conspiracy for Taking away His ( K. William's) Sacred Life by Assassination --
And this Thanksgiving Day ordered to be Religiously kept with greater
Strictness, and under greater Penaltys than is usual in Proclamations of that
Nature, viz. Not only, as they Tender the Favor of Almighty God, but, upon
Pain of Suffering such Punishments as Their Majesty's can justly Inflict for
the Contempt or Neglect thereof.

And which is yet more Dreadful (if that Conspiracy be a Sham) in the Public
Printed Form of Prayer for the Thanksgiving-Day, in the End of the Litany,
these Words are added -- More especially we adore Thy Great Goodness to Him (K.
William) in the Discovery and Disappointment of that Bloody and Ba barous
Attempt, Designed upon His Sacred Person by His Cruel and Implacable Enemies --
and in the Communion-Service, O Most Merciful God, who of thy Infinite Goodness
have Preserved our Sovereign Lord King William from the Treacherous Practices
of Wicked and Blood-Thirsty Men, etc. -- Add to this the Noise was made with it
in Pulpits upon that Ringing-Day, the Repetition of the Tirue Account
abovesaid, being a great part of many of their Sermons.

J. Cant. himself had it up in his Thanksgiving-Sermon that Day at White Hall.
p. 25. Where he Blesses God For the Preservation of our Gracious Sovereign,
from that Horrid and most Barbarous Attempt Designed upon his Sacred Person.

Good God! What Name will this Pageantry deserve, if this Blot be not cleared
from all the bovesaid Objections?

Sir, This requires your utmost Pains, if you have any Kindness for the
Government. This is indeed a Terrible Prejudice against us, it makes us worse
than Hembent, or mere Atheists: For to Mock God is more Provoking (I had almost
said more Atheistical) than not to Believe a God at all.

If this be let go, without something said to it, it will, as the Assyrians
said of Judith, Deceive the whole World, Turn all Mankind against us, and make
us the Abhorring of all Flesh, who can Play with things Sacred, and Laugh at
God to his Face!

The Jacobites likewise take Great Notice, that we should choose one of the
Fasts of the Church (the Vigil before Saint Simon and Saint Jude) for our
Thanksgiving-Day. As if we Designed to do Despite to the Constistution of the
Church of England, like the Phanaticks in Scotland, who usually Appoint their
Fasts upon the Lords Day, Christmas, Easter, or other Solemnitys of the Church.
It was some of this Dutch Leven, say the Jacobites, that made us pitch upon
Ash Wednesday, viz. 13. of Feb. 88. For the Day of our Inauguration, and
Accession to the Crown. Either that we thought the greatest Fast of the Church,
ought, in Contempt of that Constitution, to be turned thereafter into a
Jubilee; or otherwise that the Day of Ashes and Execrations; was the fittest to
Solemnize such an Inauguration as claimed a Propriety (say they) in almost
every Curse was pronounced that Day.

The 27. October. is Marked in our Calander and Rubric as a Day of Fasting or
Abstinence; and was, or ought to have been, Proclaimed as such in all the
Churches and Chapples of England the Sunday before, as is Appointed in the
Rubric, immediately after the Nicene Creed, in the Communion Service.

Now comes Jo. Cant. (say the Jacobites) and Litensing the Form of Prayer for
this Thanksgiving-Day, Commands us to break the Canons and Rubricks which are
still unrepeal'd by any Lawful or so much as Pretented Authority. And they ask,
in good Conscience, which we ought to Obey? They say, we may perceive by these,
and many other things which they can Name, what Firm Friends our New Bishops
are like to prove to the Church of England, as by Law Established, which used
to be the Word. But we have seen strange things to Day!

Escotia Fresbyter profugus -- (says the Jacobites) a Scotch Dusckify'd
Facovian Superintendent, to show the Rock from whence he was Hewn, and not to
be behind his Arch Brother Jack, in his Zeal against set-Forms, and Fasting his
Foe, kept his Visitation at Abington, on their own Dear Fast Day; whereby he
Preserved his Clergy, for that Turn, from Attending their Churches, and
Officiating in the Luniversary Superstition, and showed them Good Example not
to Starve the Flesh for Pampering of the Spirit. Forgive this Excess. But now
we are upon Scotland.

I have one thing more to beseech you most earnestly, which is, to Remove, if
Possible, a Monstrous Scandal which the Jacobites have taken at our Government
in the Matter of the Lord of Glencoe, in Scotland; who upon the 13. Feb.
91/92, at Five a Clock in the Morning, with Thirty Eight of his Servants and
Tenants, were Barbarously Murdered in their Beds by Captain Campbel of
Glen-Lyon, and his Soldiers of the Earl of Arguil's Regiment, who were
Quartered upon them, and Lived in Terms of Friendship with them: And they
pretend that all this was done by K. William's Express Command, and Produce
Orders for what they have done; and stand upon their Justification, and are to
this Day Unpunished for it.

This Story is not much known in England, but it makes a Great Noise in
Scotland. insomuch that I am told, that Sir John Lawder there did Refuse to
accept of the Employment of Lord Advocate in Scotland (which answers to that of
Attorney General in England, but of much greater Honor and Authority) unless
he could have Liberty to Prosecute Glen-Lyon and the other Murders of
Glen-Coe. But that could not be Granted him; and another is put into the Place.
This Story of Glen-Coe is told at Large in the Answer to Docter King's State of
the Protectants in Ireland, under the Late K. James's Government. To which I
referr you.

Now, Sir, give me leave I beseech you, do not you agree with me that there is
an Absolute Necessity to Search into the bottom of this Mystery? There is none
can be so Wicked as to Imagine that any part of the Blame can ly at K. William's
Door; and therefore it is for his Honor to have it exposed, and let those be
Examplarily Punished, who have Dared to Vouch Royal Authority for the most
Barbarous Massacre under the show of Trust and Friendship.

It may be Supposed that K. William does not yet know of this, or is not at
Leisure from his Greater Business to Examine into it at this Juncture: But,
Sir, it will well befit you, in the mean time, to think of something to be said
to Qualify the Out-crys of the Jacobites upon this Occasion.

If any thing, they say, had appeared under K. James's Hand, though Counterfit,
as the Trial of Grandval, toward the Assassination of K. William, they would
have thought themselves Obliged to have Inquired, and Detected the Forgery;
otherwise that they could not have sufficiently Vindicated his Honor. At least
K. James himself would have Disowned it, which if he Scrupled, or Neglected to
do, after it came to his Ears, it would indeed be a Ground of Suspision, that
could not easily be Rubbed off.

Therefore, Sir, for the Kings Honor, for the Satisfaction of the Nation, and
the silencing these Jacobites, for the love of Truth take some Pains in these
things: Your Circumstances do enable you to Enquire more Effectually than other
Men, and to know the Truth, in which we beseech you to let us all Participate;
at least so far, as that yours and others Silence herein, Confirm not the
Jacobites, and make others doubt, that all the Cry about Glen-Coe and other
Matters, have not been without some Cause.

Sir, The Jacobites Report upon us, That the Ass^ssinations and Shamm-Plots
which we charge upon others, discover their Father by their Phizz, and
comparing them with others of the same Production, they plainly tell who it was
that Begat them. This Method, they say, has been some Body's Practice, ever
since his appearing in the World: He began with the De-Witts, and brought about
a Glorious Revolution there. He would make one almost in Love with Evil, to see
how much Good it Produces!

His Enemies, and who pretend to know him well, say, that his Nature is so
incapable of Mercy, that his Revenge can never be satisfied with less than
Blood. They tell how he Boasted to K. J. himself, then Duke of York, Anno.
1679. That it had cost him above 1200 Lives, by Execution in cold Blood, to
bring his Army to that Discipline it was in.

The particular Instances, and manner of Manageing these Crueltys, they say,
exceed all former Examples of a Ferile and Implacable Disposition, and if they
were put together, would fill a History. They say, you will see full Proof of
this in The Netherland Historian, Printed at Amsterdam, Anno. 1675. And
Translated out of the Dutch.

The Book first opened to me at p. 117. Where is the Story of Colonel and
Quarter Master General Pain and Vin, who, they say, was pitched upon as the
Sacrifice to save the Reputation of the States, and the New-made State-holder,
upon the Irruption the French made into their Country, in December 72. When
they took and Destroyed Boode grave, S^mmardam, etc. The blame was laid upon
Colonel Pain and Vin, his Cowardice and Correspondence with the Enemy, else
they had Routed the French (no Doubt!) Therefore his Highness had Colonel Pain
and Vin brought before a Council of War, which, 10. Janu. 72/73. Condemned him
to perpetual Banishment, etc. But found nothing worthy of Death against him.
But this could by no means Satisfy his Highness, who by his Letter, there
insented of the 19. Janu. 73. Ordered a Second Trial, and to proceed with all
Strictness, etc. Which was done: And the Council of War 16. Janu. 73. Persisted
in their former Sentence, only added (to appease the Wrath of his Highness)
that the Prisoner should be brought to the Place of Public Execution, and
there by the Hangman to have a Sword Swayed over his Head Thus Resolved at
Alphen the 16. Janu. 73. But his Highness's Thirst was not thus to be Asswag'd,
it must be Quenched (as Soloman in the Siege of Rhodes, says to his General, By
Rhodium Blood or Thine --) If not by French, yet by firth Blood as was in his
Power to Spill. Therefore he Orders a Third Trial, and himself Sat Judge, and
his Highness in his own Person (for no other would do it) Condemned the
Prisoner to Death, with particular Directions for speedy Execution: Which
Sentence (says the History) on the 23. was Pronounced at Alphen, and the same
Day Executed, his Head being Cut off at the Third Stroke, but he to the very
last, kept to his former Protestation, against his having had any Communication
with the Enemy, whereof some were suspicious, but Accused him of bare
Cawardice. Thus that History.

And there was some body would have had Admiral Herbert brought to a Second
Trial for his being beat at Sea by the French in the Year 90. But that Trick
would not do here (say the Jacobites) at least so soon.

Sir, I will not take up your time with Hundreds of such Instances which the
Jacobites do Urge, nor do expect that you should Answer them all particularly.
It will be Troublesome, but if you can find something to say to them in the
General, it will do well.

But I cannot Omit that never-Dying Story of the De-Wits, because the Jacobites
do make so great Noise with it. They desire us to observe the several Steps and
Degrees, by which his Highness Advanced himself to the State-Holdership over
the bellys of these Brothers, whom the 'bovesaid Dutch History, p. 70. Calls
the Greatest Wits and Posititians of the World. And they say, you will find
many Strokes in all that Management of the same Refined Politics, as in this
Revolution.

First, that his Highness's Partisans had taken care to have it Spread through
the whole Country, that the De-Wits had Secret Designs to Betray them to the
French.

The Nation being thus Substantially Poisoned with an ill Opinion of their
Governors, next, the Mobb is set on Foot to Demand of their Magistrates, that
his Highness should be amde State-Holder without Delay. This was prettily
Coppy'd, say the Jacobites, by Lord L. who Headed the London Mobb into
Westminster Hall, with Papers in their Hatts, Demanding his Highness to be made
King, when the two Houses of Convention seemed to be Doubtful about the Matter.
But after this they soon came to a Conclusion.

The English Mobb upon this Revolution, did imitate their Masters in Holland,
as if the same Spirit had possessed them, and they had both Acted upon the same
Cause and Principles.

But in this there was a Remarkable Difference, that as the abovesaid History
tells, p. 45. They turned out all the Ministers of the De-Wit and Louvestayn
Faction: But here K. James's Arbitrary Ministers are still employed, though all
the Complaints in his Highness's Declaration are only against these Ministers,
and no otherwise against K. James than by an Innuondo, that he must of
necessity Design to Reign Arbitrarily, whenever it should be in his Power,
because he made use of such Ministers, it must be supposed, with that Prospect
of Arriving at full Arbitrariness in time by the help of their Administration.

In the next place the Jacobites do Observe, That as our Present Revolution was
brought about by Dissolving all our Former Oaths and Obligations, so it was in
Holland. 25. of Feb. 72. says the bovesaid History, p. 7. His Highness was made
Captain General over the Forces of the State, but with all possible
Restrictions, an Oath having been taken of him, That he should never seek to be
State-Holder of any of the Provinces, nor accept of it, if he should be desired
to it. Yet he was made State-Holder within Four Months after this. viz. in
June. 72.

The States had likewise made a Perpetual Edict against Electing a
State-Holder, and Sworn to it.

But the History tells. p. 44. That 29. June. 72. The Lords thus Terrified (
viz. by the Threatenings of the Mobb) Discharge themselves, and also his
Highness of their Oath concerning the Perpetual Edict, and so made him
State-Holder -- As also the Magistrates of most of the Citys of Holland and
Zealand, were, about that time, either through Actual Insurrection, or
Threatened Peril, Forced so to Advance his Highness; Whereupon by the Deputys of
the Citys, having a Voice, the Assembly of the States of Holland, the Perpetual
Edict was Mortified, July 1. and so by the Annulling that Oath, the Members
made Capable to Elect a State-Holder. Thus the Historian.

In this Revolution, the two Brothers, the De-Wits were Non-Swearers. But in
Vain, for Cornel. De Wit Ruart of Putten, and Old Burgo-Master of Dort, by the
Persuasions of his Wife, and the Lords Present, but Principally by the
Threatenings of the Citizens, was Constrained thereto: says the History. p. 44.
And if ever any thing fell out to be Wondered at (says he, p. 45.) it was this
-- That both the Brothers the De-Wits were by Indisposedness hindered, one at
Dort, the 29. June, the other at the Hague, July, 1. and 3. to be Present at
the Council: And the Case was so Precipitated, that there was no time to Advise
with these Lords: For who knows, but by their great Subtilty they yet might
have found some hindrance to this Work.

The De-Wits finding it Impossible to withstand the Torrent of this Prince,
carried upon the Shoulders of the Mobb, who had broke throw all the Dykes and
Fences of their Laws, Sanctions of Oaths, and Perpetual Edicts, etc. Resolved
to Appease him by Sacrifice, and giving up all their Power and Authority which
might stand in his way, or be an Eyesore to his Ambition.

Accordingly Johan. De-Wit, Great Councellor, and Pentionary of Holland and
West-Frizeland, having upon the 1. of Aug. 72. Complemented his Highness upon
his Illustrious Character and Advance (says the History, p. 63.) did on the
4th. in the Assembly of the States of Holland lay down his Office of
Pontionarship. His Brother Cornel. De-Wit Ruart of the Land of Putten, had
before viz. 24. of July been brought Prisoner from Dort to the Hague. And being
thus Humbled at the Feet of his Highness, they thought they might have lived
safe, at least as to their Lives, under his Protection. For they feared no
Trial but that of the Mobb, being Confident, that as to all Matters of the
State, they could sufficiently clear themselves in any Judicature, where they
could be heard. And nothing of it was ever so much as. Objected against them in
any Judicature: Only blown about amongst the Populace, by the Humble Servants
of his Highness: Who, some say, did underhand Promote those ill Measures,
which they afterward did Aggravate against the De-Wits, and that on purpose to
Disgust the Nation at them; as Great Britain's Complaint, says Sunder. and
others set on by his Highness, served King James, who made these Blotts, They
knew so well how to hit.

But our Scene is now in Holland. His Highness could not forget the Opposition,
which the Ruart Cornel. De-Wit gave him at Dort, about 29. of June. 72. Where
his Highness first set up for State-Holder-ship. But the Ruart would have
Preserved the Constitution of the Government, to which, both his Highness and
they were Sworn: And he would have minded his Highness of his Declaration, and
that upon Oath, made but Four Months before, viz. 25. of Febru. 72. When he was
made Captain General, that he had no. Aim at the State-Holder-ship, that he
would neither seek it, not accept of it, if it should be offered to him. Though
some, say the Jacobites, at that time were so hardened against any good Opinion
of the Sincerity of that Prince, that they believed (as it proved) that an Oath
would never keep him back from the State-Holdership, or even from a Crown, if
he could make his way to it.

But the Fall of the Ruart De-Wit from all his Greatness and Authority, could
by no means Satisfy his Highness's Fury. And since no Miscariage, as to the
State, could be laid to the Ruart's Charge, one of his Highness's Domestiques
(says Sir Will-Temple in his Memories. p. 21.) the 'bove quoted History, calls
him a Barber. p. 67. Accused the Ruart for endeavoring by Money to Engage him
in a Design against the Prince's Life. But no other Witness appearing, he was
Sentenced to be Banished; without any Crime in the World Specified or Named in
the Sentence, which is inserted in the 'bovesaid History, p. 67. and says only
as the Ground of their Sentence, that having considered what was in the Case to
be taken Notice of, or might any ways be serviceable in it, do Declare the
Prisoner to be Banished, etc. any way Serviceable! Serviceable to what? Say the
Jacobites, to Please the Prince's Spleen. Was there ever such a Naked Sentence?
It speaks as plainly as the Judges Durst, that they did not think him Guilty,
but being Accused of a Design against his Highness's Life, and the Accusation
carried on by one of his Highness's own Domestic Servants, they must consider
what they could find in the Case to be Serviceable to his Highness. Yet it was
not Serviceable, he will not be Served by Halves. Banishment will not do, where
the Thirst is after Blood. And since the Judges will not go the length, nor the
Law will bear it, the never-sailing Mobb must be Roused up again. The History
p. 28. says, they were set on by the Instigation of the Barber. This was a
Diligent Officer.

We know (says a Later Dutch Account, Written in Amsterdam 6. Nov. 76.) that
the Household Servants of Zuylestain, the Bastard of Prince Henry, and other
Ruffians were Employed in the Massacre of the De-Wits, and Stirred up all the
Towns against their Rulers, and with Violence and Force Promoted the Prince and
his Interest.

In short. Both the De-Wits were Tore in pieces by this Godly Mobb, thus set
on, and Instigated. And no Statesmen of the Age left a Greater Character,
either of their Ability, or Integrity. Sir Will. Temple in his Memoires p. 22.
speaking of John De-Wit, says, Thus ended one of the Greatest Lives of any
Subject in our Age -- after having served, or rather Administered that State as
Pentioner of Holland, for about Eighteen Years, with Great Honor to his
Country and himself.

The Jacobites Observe that his Highness could not find even. Dutch Judges or
Jury would believe such Great Men ought to Dye, or would be Guilty of such mean
Plots, and poorly contrived, only because his Barber told him so. And one of
them was not so much as Accused. The History owns, p. 70. That no certain
Evidence, or Canfession of the one, or Accusation of the other have been made
known.

But, Sir, these are Old Storys. There is a Later Instance which I have heard
from the Jacobites, and they say it is of a Piece with all the rest.

In the Year 89. when the States of Holland and Amsterdam Contended against
having a Foraign King for their State-Holder, and Mien Here B. was sent over to
Act on the Part of the State-Holder; and finding Difficulty's arise, the Old
Politic was again set on Foot, say the Jacobites.

Koin the Jew (who is Famous' for Contriving, and bringing on the General
Impost upon Coffee there, whether they Drink any or not) Swore against two of
the most Troublesome of these Burghers. That they offered to Bribe him to Poison
the State-Holder. They remembered De-wit, Pain and Vin, and well knew the
Consequence, and the Meaning of such Accusations: And were glad to Learn how to
give their Votes as they ought to do: and others took Warning, so the Point was
Carried.

But when the Trial of the Burghers came on, there was but a single Evidence,
as there was against De-Wit; and the Jew was believed as little as the Barber.
But had not so good Luck. For upon the Burghers being acquit, the Jew was
Banished the Territorys of Amsterdam. They durst proceed no farther at that
time against him.

During his Banishment, he thought himself Neglected by his Patron Mien Here B.
And began to Blabb it out who it was that set him on to Swear against the
Burghers. Who hearing of it, found some means to bring him to Amsterdam. Where
they had him first Arrested for Debt (for they were afraid to venture too far,
knowing whom they had to deal with) and seeing none come to Relieve him,
concluded that the Drudgery of Swearing being over, his Patron had no farther
use for him, and therefore proceeded to bring him upon the Stage for this
Conspiracy against their Lives, and to Discover his Accomplices. Being, put to
the Torture he did Confess. Was Sentenced to the Pillory, and to the Rasp-house
(their Bridwell) for Six Years, where I suppose he now is to be found.

But there is one thing Extraordinary. The Confession of this Koin is kept up,
though it be the Custom there always to Publish the Confession of those who are
Sentenced, after being put to the Torture, for the Vindication of the
Government.

This (say the Jacobites) is like keeping the Trials of the forementioned
Friars. Graham and Thursby out of the Printed Account of the Sessions at
Old Bailey, Sept. 92.

In this Class of Sham-Plots and Impostures, they mind us to make a farther
Examination into the Business of Fuller, who Swore many Noble Lords and others
into a Plot; his Grace of Canterbury Sancraft the Chief. It is certain he has
been set up, and supported by some Body. They desire us to inquire, and we will
find that he had a Bill of 200 l. this Summer from Mien Here B. above
mentioned: And before that, he drew a Bill of 50 l. from Flanders, to the Great
Man at Lambeth, by the Name of his Uncle, who paid it. And said he would do
more than that for him, if he performed what he had Engaged to him.

It would be asked likewise how he came to be kept from his Trial all this
Summer, the H. of Commons last Winter having Voted him an Impostor, and desired
that the Attorney General might Prosecute him, and yet that was forgot, till
the Parliament was ready to to Meet this Winter.

And the first Day of his standing in the Pillory, according to Sentence, was
disappointed, the Pillory being set up, but no Fuller came, and it was taken
down again.

Which made so great an Outcry, and gave such Disgust, and Jealousy, as is not
cured by his being set afterward in the Pillory; for it showed how unwillingly
it was done, and merely to stop Peoples Mouths.

There is Greater Care taken (say the Jacobites) of his Colleague Young, who
Counterfeited Arch Bishop Sancroft's Hand and others, and see them to an
Association (he has the Honor to be set out by the Bishop of Rochester's Pen)
for Blackhead the Evidence against him, because of his Quality. (a Tailor) must
not be sent to Goal, but has been suffered to make his Escape from a Messenger
in the Savoy; Aaron Smith is a Greater Scandal than these, being Publicly
Owned, and Employed by the Government, as a Plot-journey-Man. His Life would
make a History. When many Lords and others were lately Committed contrary to
Law, without any Information upon Oath against them, The Matter was endeavored
to be folv'd up by Aaron Smith's making Oath, that he had informations against
them, which he did: But when it came to the Test, he could produce none; and so
they were forced to Discharge those they had Illegally Imprisoned: But Aaron
Smith not Punished for his Evident Perjury, and Conspiracy against the Lives of
so many Noble and Worthy Gentlemen. Sir, forgive my Repeating these Things from
the Mouths of the Jacobites, they must be told, to the end, that their Mouths
may be stopped, and we may all know (for no doubt you do) how to Answer them.

There are many other Passages of Different Natures, which give great Scandal
against the Government. The Princes Ann Flying from her Father did not more
Alarm the People of England (of some Deep, and they could not tell what
Design on Foot) than her Royal Highness present Quarrel with her Sister, and of
so long Continuance, does Amaze and Distract the Common People. They think all
is Wrong. There is something at the Bottom more than we know. Is it so, that
there is not one Wise Man among us to take away, or some way Compose so Fatal a
Breach, 'twixt those in Possession, and those in Expectance of the Crown? At
least, not to suffer it to Rise to such an Extravagant height, as to have their
Guards taken from their Royal Highnesses, and Public Affronts and Indignitys
put upon them in all Places, and that by Order from Her Majesty: One of these
came to my hands, and is here under Written. It was sent to Attend upon her
Highness to the Bath last Summer, and follows in these Words.

White Hall, August 30th. 1692.
THE Queen has been informed that your Self and Brethren have Attended the
Princess, with the same Respect and Ceremony as have been usually path to the
Royal Family; Perhaps you have not heard what Occasion her Majesty has had to
be Displeased with the Princess, and therefore I am Commanded to Acquaint you,
that you are not for the Future to Pay her Highness any such Respect or
Ceremony, without Leave from her Majesty; who does not doubt of Receiving from
you and your Brethren, this Public Mark of your Duty: I am

Your most Humble Servant, Nottingham.

To the Mayor of Bath.
Forbidding to pay such Respect to her Royal Highness, as is usually paid to
the Royal Family, looks like another P. of Wales Discovery (say the Jacobites)
as if People had leave given them to Doubt whether she were of the Royal
Family; or so near as is believed to the Crown: Why else (say they) should the
Respects which are usually paid to the Royal Family be Denied to her? And the
Secretary himself forgets her Style of Royal Highness, that every one may have
a Pluck at her: Plain Highness must serve her Turn, till she Learn better
Manners.

The Executioner gave K. Charles I. the Style of his Majesty, when we was going
to Cut off his Head.

Can the Queens Displeasure forfeit the Princess Title and Quality, which she
has by being K. James's Daughter? Or must she have the Style of Late, added to
her Royalty, like her Father?

And the Bishop of London (say the Jacobites) who Run away with the Princess in
his Jack-Boots, and Sword Drawn, to be the Man pitched upon, after her Late
Royal Highness Return to London from the Bath, to give Orders to Dr. Birch of
St. James's Church (in which Parish she had taken a House to Live in) not to
pay her any of the Respects usually paid to the Royal Family, such as sending
her the Text, to wait for her Coming, or make any Obeisance to her.

But no doubt it is all for the good of the Protestant Religion! And it is hard
(say the Rogues of Jacobites) if when these fall out, some Honest Men do not
come by their Rights!

Sir, it had been much to be Wished, for the Honor of the Government. That
this Civil War of the Royal Sisters had not been so Exposed.

And it had not been of less Importance, at least to her Majestys Rep. if the
Extraordinary Greatness and Intimacy she has of Late Contracted with the
Countess of D. had not been altogether so Notorious.

The Jacobites Laugh in their Sleeves, and make Observation, That our Godly
Queen, who for the sake of Religion, has Forsaken her Father; should at the
same time Caress the Great Instrument of his Sin, and his Shame.

Who, to Testify her Repentance, makes it her Common-Practice to Rail at K.
James. Condesending even to call him Names, and the Billings-Gate Rethorick:
And to disown all Obligations from him.

And for a Penance, she Submits to a Scandalous Office of an Informer, to
Betray his Secrets, and his Friends who Trusted her: And, because she does
every thing to the Utmost, she spares not to show her Wit at Invention, where
she wants Truth to fill up an Accusation.

For these Good Works, she is allowed now out of the Secret-Service-Money, Five
Hundred pounds a Week, Paid her by Hen. Guy, Secretary to the Treasury: And is
to have an Order for Ten or Twelve Thousand pounds Arrears of a Grant given her
from King James of Thirty Five Hundred pounds a Year, out of the Quit-Rents of
Ireland. Besides the Extraordinary Presents from B. in a Corner which no Body
must know.

For all which she is so Greatfully Good Natured, as to Bragg in her Cabals
how, Dexterously she can Manage this Government, that, as her Phrase is (and
that not over Privately) she can make what she Please pass upon them; and, as
an Instance, has Sold them a Treasurer, to Secure her own Payments, Sir E. S.
that Good Man! Who never was Unconstant to his Principle of Changing to the
Sunny side. This is not out of her Disaffection to the Government, But some,
you know, would rather loose their Friend than their Jest.

That Sund. should be a Pentioner of this Government, and so owned by King
William in the List of Pentioners, given into the Parliament, cannot be more
Explanatory of his Declaration (say the Jacobites) than Queen Marys choosing
Lady D. for her Confidant, is a Demonstration of the true Figure of her
Holiness.

But that Father Simon alias, Patrick, should be pitched upon for Confessor and
Guide of this Holy Confederacy, seems strangly Consequential to all the
Devotional Tracts Written in Covent Garden.

And; the Education of the Young Lady K. D. in the Protestant Religion, being
the pretense of this Kindness on the Sudden, that he should perform this Charge
so Carefully, that, besides the Example of her Mothers Virtue, she has the
Instruction of two other Penitents in the same Trade, Ladies of Skill, and
Famous through the Whole Town (that we need not Name them) who are both Roman
Catholics, and Daily Guests at the Countesses Table.

Not that her Ladyship retains the least Test of her former Conversation, but
only in Zeal, to make Converts of them too: For this is a Reforming Age! And
Generously like Lot, would rather Expose her own Daughter, to Learn all the
Vices of Sodom, than fail in her Hospitality to these two Angles, who are come
under her Roof.

But as the Bishop of L. (say the Jacobites) who thought he had Cemented the
two Sisters unalterably, by making them Quit their Father, to meet one another,
has yet lived to be made an Instrument in their Quarrel, the late Bishop of E.
may have the same luck, in good time, with the Third Sister, who is now put
into his Hands.

And the Jacobites desire us to consider, That this Child may come in her Turn
to the Crown. For she is only not next in Blood: And what Great Matter is
that, so it be kept in the Royal Family? The Succession goes on still, though she
should Usurp in her Sisters Life time. And if that should be for the Good of
Religion --

Therefore her Education ought to be a Parliamentary Concern, at least a
Christian, not to leave an Innocent Child, where she can see nothing but what
may Corrupt her.

And if there can be any Cause sufficient to Warrant undutifulness to a Parent,
this Lady has more to Plead, than either of her Sisters. For it must be
Confessed on all Hands, That her Mother is not the best Company for her in the
World: And it would be an Advantage to her, if she could forget that she had
such a Mother: And to the Government (especially to her Pious Majesty) that
such a Cabinet Councellor had not yet come within White Hall.

Sir, I could heap up Instances of this Nature upon you, of which the Jacobites
have Catalogues: Upon which singly, though the least stress is laid, yet by their
Number they acquire a Weight. And in drawing up the Forces of the Jacobites, we
must not only show you their Goliahs, such as De-Wit, Gler-Coe, Grandval, Koin,
etc. each of which single is an Army of Objections against us.

But I must likewise lead out the Setters and Small-Fry, Fuller, Young,
Blackhead, Aaron Smith, and Lady D. for these, though not so Glorious, are as
useful as the other. The Lion cannot hunt without his Jackall.

Sir, I would not have made this Muster, but to inflame your Zeal to Vindicate
the Government, and Reconcile the Jacobites, of which they give us good hopes,
if any tolerable Answer can be given to what is here Objected by them.

Wherein if you can be an Instrument, I suppose you will reckon it the most
Glorious Scene of your Life; and not be Displeased with your Humble Servant, by
offering these Objections of our Adversarys, to put it in your, Power, to
Oblige your Self and your Nation to so High a Degree, as to make them one with
us again.

And now, Sir, in the same Freedom that I have Dealt with you, let me Entreat
you, in your Management of all this, for the sake of these Dull Jacobites, that
you would Curb the excuberance of your Wit, it is but lost upon them; They are
a Plain Downright sort of People, and Love Plain Sense and Reason, they will
never be able to understand you Politics, when you resine them to that Degree
as you do? p. 12. where you prove that King James will have no Reguard to the
Non-Swearers, who lost their Preferments, rather than take an Oath of
Allegiance to King William, because of the Title which they think King James
has to their Allegiance: For say you, they did it not for hic (K. James's)
sake, but for another, and better Reason, for fear of being Damned.

Now the Jacobites think that no King can have a better hold of any Subjects
Loyalty, than of those who believe they will be Damned, if they be Disloyal.

And that (notwithstanding of all you say) every King would desire such
Subjects, and consequently would Encourage such more than any other Subjects.

They are likewise utterly incapable of ever coming up to what you Advance p.
13/14. That their very Boldness and Resolution in Opposing their present
Majestys, will be thought no Virtue fit to be Rewarded by a Prince, that is, by
King James.

Your Reasons are Subtle. The first is, That their Opposing their present
Majesty's, is upon a mere Paint of Law.

What if it were? Say the Jacobites, if that point of Law be Asserting K.
James's Right? Will he for that Reason think it no Virtue, nor fit to be
Rewarded? This passes a Jacobites understanding!

But Secondly, you know they pretend Conscience, and the Law of GOD, unless you
mean by a mere Point of Law, a Point of GOD's Law. And the very Page before (p.
12.) you confess that their Refusing the Oaths, and Loosing their Preferments
is for another, and a better Reason, for sear of being Damned.

And from thence you endeavor to prove that K. James owes them no thanks for
it, because it is not for his sake they do it, but their own, for fear of being
Damned.

Now the Jacobites will certainly say, that you prove your Assertion from quite
contrary Topics. One, that King James will not care for the Jacobites, because
they Act out of Conscience, only for fear of being Damned: The other, that K.
James will not care for them, because they do not Act out of Conscience, but
upon a mere Point of Law. This they call Fishing for Arguments; and he that
seeks will find.

They desire to know whether it be a Fault to be Loyal upon a Principle? So
that if we have any Reason for our Loyalty, we forfeit all pretense to Thanks
or Reward? if we be Loyal upon the point of Law. Then no Thanks to you says the
King (as you, say the Jacobites, would have him Speak) because you are Loyal,
upon a mere point of Law. If we be Loyal upon point of Conscience. Then, no
thanks to you again, for that is only for fear of being Damned.

Suppose then we be Loyal without any Reason in the World, but by mere Chance,
or a Fancy, that, say the Jacobites, they find to be the only Loyalty you think
Meritorious: Because, having no other Reason for it, it must be supposed to be
only out of Love to the Kings Person, for a Handsome Nose, a Sweet Breath,
Graceful Mien, Affable Temper, or what pleases your Fancy. But you must have a
Care that you have no Solid or Substantial Reason, such as the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, Liberty, Property, etc. For then, no thanks to you, it
is for them, and not the King you are Concerned. But most of all beware of
Pretending Conscience, For then it is only for fear of being Damned. A
Weathercock Loyalty (say the Jacobites) fits you best, it will Turn and Wind,
and not be troublesome at an Unseasonable Time, and therefore you think it
deserves most Thanks: But they think, not from the King.

The Jacobites say, this Argument of yours overturns all Duty, Humane and
Religious: And makes them wholly Inconsistent with any Gratitude or Reward,
from Men at least: So that if Children or Servants be Dutiful, if Wives be
Loyal, or Friends Just, here is no thanks, if they do it out of any Principle
of Conscience.

But you do not Trust to these Arguments, you have another. That these
Jacobites Boldness and Resolution in Opposing their present Majesty's -- will
be thought no Virtue by a Prince, who would make his Will Superior to all Laws.

That is, a Prince would not desire his Subjects to be Firm in their Loyalty to
him, for fear they might be Firm likewise in something else that might
Displease him.

This is too Superfine for these Jacobites, they Cry out, that it is the same
as if a General should not desire Stout Soldiers, least they should be as
Stout, if they should Turn against him: As if a Man should desire a Weak Horse
for his Journey, because if a Strong Horse should prove Subborn, he could
dispute it harder with me. Or if I should choose Knavish Servants, and Fickle,
whose Principle it were to Desert me, and take on with my Enemy, when ever they
were Displeased; for fear if they they should be Firm to me, they might be Firm
against me. All these, and Twenty other Instances of the like Nature are as
Feasible, say the Jacobites, as that a Prince (let him desire never so much to
be Absolute) should be displeased at the Firmness of his Subjects Fidelity, or
their having an Inflexible Conscience (as you Word it) as to their Loyalty.

The Jacobites profess, they can no more believe it, than that a Husband should
be Sorry his Wife were. True and Loving to him; least if she should happen to
Love another, she might be as True and Loving to him, because he found, it in
her Temper to be Firm and Constant in her Love.

These, Sir, are Flights of Jealousy in Prince or Husband, which lesser Wits
than yours have the Happiness not to know: And therefore desire you would not
throw away such Magnificient and Strong Sense upon them, for they shall never
be the better for it, they would not be Disturbed with it.

But yet they Confess, that you have found out Grounds for all this Jealousy,
which they should never have thought on; and they stand amazed at the acuteness
of your Wit, which could Search so Deep, as to find Reasons why Wives may Leave
their Husbands, and Subjects Abdicate their Prince at their Pleasure. And
nothing is so Surprising as these Reasons which you produce for this, viz.
Because a Wife may be Ravished, and forced from her Husband, therefore it is,
Lawful for her to yield to an Adulterer, Nay, to invite him to come, and Drive
away her Husband, to Intrigue with this Gallant underhand, Contrive and Assist
him to Frighten her Husband out of his House to save his Life, and then to make
a Present of it, together with her self, to her Deliverer. And then it is
Justly and Legally their own, for, What made him Run away and leave his House?
And his Wife holds still. Faithful to her Matrimonial Vow; she only Change; the
Object, she is for Matrimony still: And therefore, by her Vow to her First
Husband, she is Bound to the Second. She only Transferrs her Allegiance: And
therefore it is the same Allegiance still.

All this the Jacobites think is the Consequence of Comparing this Revolution,
with the Conquest of the French King in Flanders, etc. (p. 7.) Because they are
Ravished, and Forced from their Natural King, therefore you would Insinuate
that your Case is the same, who Invited over a Foraign Prince, Intrigu'd with
him under hand, did Assist him to Frighten away our Natural and Lawful King, to
Save his Life, and then made a Present of his Crown, together with your Selves,
to your New Deliverer, from the Slavery of an Old Husband: And all his
Possessions are now Justly your own, for, What made him Run away and Leave his
Kingdom? We are still Faithful to our Oath of Allegiance; we only Change the
Object; we are for Monarchy still; and therefore by our Oath of Allegiance to
K. James, we are Bound to K. William (which is a Topic taken up in Soloman and
Abiathar, and several of our late Pamphlets) for, say they, we only Transferr
our Allegiance, and therefore it is the same Allegiance still, etc.

And the Jacobites desire you to remember, that Marriage is a Mutual Contract;
and there is a Due Benevolence and Duty on both sides, which if either Party
(the Husband as well as the Wife) shall Neglect, or be Guilty of Male
Administration, why should he not be Deposed, Propter Inuti^ Imperium, and
Good-Womam have the leave to choose another Husband? And yet our severe Law
will not allow it.

If you say there are Divorces in Marriage; and why not in Government?

They will answer, That for the Case of Adultery only, Divorce is Allowed in
Scripture, and Consequently in our Law. But that neither Scripture nor our Law,
Allows of any Case, wherein it shall be Lawful for Subjects to take Arms
against their King, but on the Contrary, Declares it to be unlawful upon any
Pretense whatsoever.

And they make use of this as a strong Argument against us. For (say they) The
Law of God and of the Land, would have made Exceptions in the one, as well as
in the other, if they had thought it Reasonable. And therefore that we must not
make Exceptions against the Laws, both of God and Man.

But to come close to the Matter without Smiles or Innuendo's. They Desire your
Answer, whether if Dixmuyde and Furnes had Invited the French to come thither,
and had Betrayed these Towns into their Hands, whether this could, in Justice
and Good Conscience, have excused their Transferring their Allegiance, and
Swearing Oaths to the French King?

If you do not speak plainly to this, they say, you do not come up to the Case
in hand.

Unless you will say (as some of late have done) that the P. of Orange has
Conquered England, as much as the French King has Dixmuyde, etc.

And that though he does not at present set up the Title of Conquest (for what
Cause he thinks fit) yet that he has it in's Sleeve, and may justly set it up
when he Pleases, For which Gilbert's Pastoral, and several other Licensed
Pamphlets, have already made way. And then we all hold our Lives, Estates, and
Liberty, only at his Good Pleasure.

I cannot Imagine why the Parliament does not take Notice of these sort of
Pretenders to Politics, who would make them all absolute Slaves, under the
Arbitrary and Despotick Power of a Conqueror!

You say in the same place (p. 7.) That the Principle of Rights of Hereditary
Kings to their Crowns, being Sacred and Inviolable is Dangerous to the
Unfortunate, because it lays a Necessity upon the Conqueror, to take away his
Life (if he can) as well as his Throne, since he cannot lose his Throne,
without losing of his Life.

This (say the Jacobites) is the very Reason which Frightened K. James away, for
he Observed in his Father's Words, that there are but few Steps 'twixt a
Prince's Prison and this Grave. And though some Kings have been suffered to Live
some time in Prison, as Edward the Second, and Richard the Second, etc. Yet it
still ended in their Murder. Therefore K. James the Second had no mind to stay
any longer in Prison, least he might have made another of the Number.

But it often falls out, that the Murder of one, will not Secure the Usurpers
Title: And therefore Richard the Third Murdered all he could get, who stood
'twixt him and the Crown; as did Athaliah, O. P. etc. And there are many
Examples of the like in History: And these Jacobites do think, that this
Consideration should rather Operate against such Bloody Attempts (which cannot
stop in one or two single Murders, but Run often to the Destruction of whole
Families, and even Nations) rather than against the Right of Succession, in
Hereditary Princes: The Preservation of which would have stopped these Oceans of
Blood, which have Drowned many Great and Wealthy Nations, for their Violating
of this Sacred and Inviolable Right.

But you say, Sir (p. 8.) That if this be so, Princes have no Remedy against
the Injury of Neighbor Princes -- for it is only the fear of Conquest, and
losing their Crowns, that can keep Princes in Awe, and bring them to Just and
Equal Terms.

This the Jacobites say, is too great a Reflection upon Kings, as if there were
never a Just King in the World: And your putting it in these General Terms,
without an Exception, they say, Discovers you to be no Friend to Monarchy.

But even as to the Argument. Have Princes no Remedy against the Injury of
their Neighbor Princes, but taking their Crowns from them? Does every Injury
deserve so great a Reparation? When a King Grants Letters of Mart, is not that
some Remedy, short of Dethroning his Neighbor Prince who has Injured him? If I
owe you a Penny, it is Just to take a Thousand Pounds for it?

It will be Convenient, Sir, to Explain this a little further.

Page. 9. You show the Necessity of Swearing to a Conqueror, because the whole
Nation cannot Run away.

Answer. If the whole Nation were against him, there would be no need of this
Question in our Case: And for particular Persons, you know the Cavaliers
Refused to Swear to Oliver, or the Rump. And yet, tho Persecuted, they were not
Destroyed.

No Conqueror will think it his Interest to Imbroyl his new Acquisition, by
falling upon a Great part of the People, to Drive them to Arms: And if the
Dissenters be but a small part of the People, than your Objection Ceases; it is
not the Case of a Whole Nation, nor the Major Part.

The Jacobites do likewise Quarrel much at your Argument, p. 14. That K. James
would use the Non-swearers ill, because the French King used the Hugonots ill.

They say, there is no Consequence. They say, there is a vast Difference 'twixt
K. James's Character, and that which goes with some Men of the French King: The
one a Mild and Merciful Man in his own Nature, the other as some would make you
believe, of a more Fierce and Cruel Temper.

But that which is a Greater Security, is the Disproportion of the Hugonots of
France, to the Protestants of England.

The Protestants are Two Hundred to One Papist in England: The Hugonots are not
(as some Compute) One to a Hundred Papists in France.

Now, though there might be Reasons for Destroying, or Banishing Two Men for the
Safety or Peace of Two Hundred, yet (say the Jacobites) the Argument will not
hold to Destroy Two Hundred for the sake of Two.

But lastly, they say, The Difference is Great, 'twixt the Non-Swearers of
England, and the Hugonots of France, as to the Principles of Loyalty.

For though the Hugonots stuck to this K. Lewis, against the Prince of Conde. Yet
this was no Religious Quarrel. Both these Princes were Roman Catholics: And so
they had not the Bias of Religion on either side.

But it cannot be denied that they have often Rebelled, and made many Dangerous
Commotions in France of Old.

And we know it was said (how true I cannot tell) that the French King had
Discovered Plots and Combinations amongst them, even in Favor of the P. of O.
so long a go, which was the Reason of that Persecution, for which he is so much
Blamed.

Whether there be any Truth in this or not, yet it is rendered the less
Improbable; because of our mighty Braggs, that the Hugonots, and Hugonot
Converts are in League with us, have Invited us over, and are ready to Join us,
upon our Descent, for whom we carry Arms, and Depend upon them to Rise with
us, and Declare for King William, as soon as he is Able to Protect them.

The Answer to Great Britains Just Complaint acknowledges Frankly, p. 47. in
these Words. The French King knows, that if he be Invaded by a Protestant
Prince, these Men will Endanger him by a Revolt.

How far this will Justify the French King, in desiring to be Rid of these Men,
we need not Dispute. But I could wish that you had not Mentioned that Matter at
this time. For there is none but must see, that their Case is toto Colo,
different from that of our Non-Swearers, who suffer Expressly for a Principle
of Loyalty: And they for the Contrary.

Your 15th. Page, moves the Jacobites Spleen very much. You are there Bemoaning
your self, What would become of the Church of England if K. James should
Return? By which (say they) you only mean your selves, the Swearing-Clergy.
Now, they say, that you cannot be Ignorant, that the Non-Swearers do think
themselves the True Church of England, and the others, though more Numerous, to
be the Deserters.

O but say you, in the Name of the Swearing-Clergy, they would, it may be, Hang
us in that Day, and possibly Exchange Smithfield for Tyburn.

This the Jacobites say, is only a twinge of an akeing Conscience. And they
wish much rather, that you should live to Repent, like Peter, who Denied his
Master, out of Fear.

But that Grace was not given to Judas, who Betrayed Him out of Covetousness:
And he was Delivered over to the most Terrible Executioner, the Shame and
Confusion of his own Guilt.

But why do they fear the Cruelty of the Non-Swearers? They are Generally Mild,
and show Signs of Good Nature enough. They who are so much for
Passive-Obedience, and practice it, are thereby in a Good Preparation of mind,
toward Christian Humility, Resignation of themselves to God, Forgiveness, and
even Loving of their Enemies: And till they do something Contrary to this, they
think we ought, in Charity, to put the best Construction upon their Actions.

But you Discover what it is which Frightens the Swearing-Clergy; and makes
them so Apprehensive of Revenge from the Non-Swearers. And that is, the hard
Words they Receive from some of them. They call us no better (say you, p. 15.)
than Heretics, and Schismatics, and Perjured Apostates.

Alas! Did they do it! It Is a very hard Case! But (say the Non-Swearers) What
would you have us Call you? Either, You or We are Schimaticks, and Apostates
from the Doctrine of Christ, as formerly Professed in the Church of England.
And would you have us to take the Blame off You, to lay it upon our Selves? And
if we believe you to be Perjured, and would Reprove you for it, in the
Christian Method, What shall we call Perjury, but Perjury? If you will tell us
a more Gentile Word, you shall be Gratified with it.

But you say in the same Page, They (the Non-Swearing Clergy) seem to Comfort
themselves under their present Sufferings, more with the sweet hopes of
Revenge, than any great expectations of future Rewards.

This is not (say the Jacobites) so very Charitable a Censure in the Swearers.
By this you free them from Convetousness, and making Interest the Guide of
their Conscience; only you think they cannot want a little Sweet Revenge:
Because their Provocations have been Great; and you would think it very
Pallatable if their Case were yours.

But, say the Jacobites, if they be afraid of an after Reckning, they should be
have with greater Moderation now: And not Hunt us with Messengers and
Proclamations, if we Print a Word in our own Vindication, at the same time,
that they are Provoking us to tell our Scruples openly, and that they will
Answer fairly, and take no Advantage.

Among other Examples of Cruelty in this Sort, they Instance in the Case of a
Young Lad of 12 Years of Age, Thom. Ross, his Mother a Widow, and Lives upon
Charity. This Orphan was found with a Paper in Defense of Passive Obedience; it
was Doctor Tillotson's Letter to Lord Ruffel, and the Trimming Court Divine:
And because he would not tell, or may be could not, where he had them, he was,
without any Trial at Law, or Jury charged with him, first set in the Pillory,
and then Fined a Hundred Mark; which his Mother not being able to Pay, he has
Lain now Two Years in Nemgate, and is there still, and no Applications have
Prevailed, though his Poor Mother offered Part of the Fine, that is, all she had
in the World for his Release. Excessive Fines was once a Complaint.

Of which the Jacobites show another Instance in the Case of Mr. George Sheals
a Clergyman, who will not Swear, but Read the Liturgy of the Church of England
in his own House, and did not Deny some Devour People who sometimes came
thither, the benefit of Joining in the Common Prayers of the Church. For which
Fault alone, he was Fined a Hundred Marks, which being much above his present
Ability (for he is Deprived, and has nothing where-withal to Subsist a Wife and
Parcel of Young Children) he Lay Three Months in Newgate for his Fine. Add to
this the Imprisonment of Archdeacon Fitz Gerrald, Mr. Collier, and Mr. Newton,
Three Non-Swearing Clergymen, this last Summer, without having any thing to
lay to their Charge. And Dr. Bryand Sent to the Gate House for Reading the
Common Prayers, The several Lords and Gentlemen Committed without any
Information upon Oath, contrary to Law, has been brought before the Parliament.
Many more Instances the Jacobites offer to give of the like Usage from us; and
they desire a List of all whom we have Pardoned since the Revolution, who have
come under the Lash of the Law, to teach them by our Mercy, to return our
Kindness.

They likewise mind us, That the Refusal of the Oaths was not at first thought
so Heinous a Matter, but that the Parliament Allowed Twelve of the Clergy who
should Resuse it, the Third of their Bishop-ricks or Livings, during Life; and
it was left to K. William's Clemency, to Name which Twelve of the Deprived
Bishops or Clergy he Pleased.

But he was Pleased with none of them: And their Successors (whom the Jacobites
call Intruders) follow, say they, the Example of his Charity, and keep all they
can get to themselves.

They (the No-Swearers) hope to Live (say you ibid.) to see the Swearing
Bishops and Priests, the Contempt of Princes and People.

This does not show, say the Jacobites, that they are Greedy of Life. For they
may see that every Day they go into the Streets. The Turn of the Clergy this
Revolution, has made them in a Literal Sense, the Byword of the People.

O but their great Grief is, That if we had a Jacobite Parliament, they would
make no Scruple to Declare the Legitimacy of the Prince of Wales p. 18.

That need not, say the Jacobites, for he is Legitimate, by all the Laws in the
World, without their Declaration, unless you think that Three or Four Foolish
Ballads, and Drunken Songs, Laughed at now by those who made them (for they have
served the Turn for which they were intended) can Disinherit a Prince or any
other Man of his Birthright: For there is no other Evidence against the P. of
Wales, no one Information of any Person whatsoever, no Sentence of any Court,
nor has even the present Parliament said one Word against his Legitimacy.

There is a Terrible Discovery in the Words following, viz. They would take
care for new Jacobite Tests, to Renounce and Abhor all the several Hypotheses
and Principles of Government, which have been Urged to Justify our Submission
and Allegiance to their present Majesty's.

These Jacobites are a Cruel sort of People! It is Ten to One, but they might
do all this. And then we must be saying and un-saying all over again. But they
who have done it twice or thrice, will find it easier and easier; they will
never want Distinctions. And Shame is over --

But besides the Jacobites say it is impossible for them to Reproach you, more
than you do one another. Even the chief Top-Men of your Party. For Example.
When K. James lost the Boyn, then Dr. Sherlock thought it would never be Day.
He Immediately cried up. Success as Divine Right. And upon that Point he Staked
down his Soul to all Eternity, and all theirs who would be persuaded by him
Vide Dedication to his Book of Judgment, and of Death. 'Twixt these two, he
only found Conversion.

But since that the Whore Success has been Courting that Handsome Portly French
King, Waited upon him at Mons, Namure, Steenkirk, the Rhine, Savoy, Dixmuyd and
Furnes, and we know not where it will End.

Therefore it is good to look about, and Damn that Doctrine of Success in time,
before it be made use of against us.

For this Great Work Tillotson is set up, to pull down what Sherlock had so
Artificially built.

And he does it Effectually (but not with so great Respect to his old Friend)
in his Thanks giving Sermon before quoted. p. 30. where he tells us; that The
Cause must be first Manifetly Jast, before Success can be made an Argument of
GOD's Favor to it, and Approbation of it -- Mere Success is certainly one of
the worst Arguments in the World of a Good Cause, and the most Improper to
Satisfy Conscience -- And yet does in a very Odd, but Effectual way, satisfy
the Consciences of a Great many Men, by sh^wing them their Interest. And p. 17.
Knowledge and Skill to Devise Mischief, and Power to Effect it, are the true
Nature and Character of the Devil and his Angels. What Jacobite could have
Damned the Doctrine of Events more Effectually!

And when they see such Great Doctors fall out among themselves, in the Method
of Satisfying their Consciences, as to this Revolution, it is a mighty Scandal
to them, and a Tentation to think, that having forsaken their old Foundation,
they are yet to seek where to settle upon true or certain Principles.

Mere Success, says Sherlock, is Divine, says Tillotson, it is the Devil and
his Angels. And each Ventures his Soul upon the Truth of his Hypothesis,
because an Error in this Involves them in Rebellion, which both of them do
Confess to be a Damnable Sin.

But as to this Principle of Doctor Tillotson's, I must tell you, that the
Jacobites are very well pleased with it, viz. That the cause must be first
Manifestly Just, before Success can be made an Argument of GOD's Favor to it,
or Approbation of it.

And they hope now to come soon to a Good Conclusion, the Case being thus
Stated upon its True Bottom; Therefore we must suppose that it was Manifestly
Just, to Plot against K. James, while he was upon the Throne, and to assist the
P. of Orange against him, otherwise the Success of this Revolution can be made
no Argument of GOD's Favor to it, or Approbation of it.

The Great Terror before us was Popery, and the most popular pretense for what
we have done, was Securing the Protestant Religion.

And whether Religion be a Manifestly Just Cause for taking Arms against our
Natural Prince, the Jacobites say is as Manifestly Decided, as any principle of
the Church of England, or any Act of Parliament in our Statute Book.

They say moreover, that this same Dr. Tillotson her gone a length in this,
beyond whatever the Church of England owned in her highest Altitude of
Passive-Obedience: Which is, to make it Unlawful, even to Preach the Gospel,
without leave of the Civil-Magistrate, unless we can prove our Mission by
Miracles, as the Apostles did. This you will find in his Sermon upon Josh.
24.15.. 2. p. 11. Preached before K. Charles II. at White-Hull 2. April, 1680.

And that this Doctrine might be thoroughly Instilled and Propagated, he
Instructed the House of Commons in a Strain even beyond this, in his Sermon,
Preached before them, 5. Nov. 1678. upon Luke 9.55,56. where he Inferrs that
Religion is good for nothing but Temporal Respects, and that chiefly to prevent
Rebellion: And that Rebellion is worse than Atheism or Infidelity. For, let any
Man ( says he, p. 20.) say worse of Atheism and Infidelity if he can. And for
God's Sake, What is Religion Good for, but to Reform the Manners and
Dispositions of Men, to Restrain Humane Nature from Violence and Cruelty, from
Falsehood and Treachery, from Sedition and Rebellion? Better it were, there
were no Revealed Religion -- than to be Acted by a Religion that -- is
continually Supplanting Government -- Teaching the Lawfulness of Deposing Kings
-- Such a Religion as this, is as bad, or worse than Infidelity and no
Religion, p. 21. and a Great deal more to the same purpose, which makes it more
Eligible to Renounce Christ, and all Revealed Religion, than to allow of the
Lawfulness of taking Arms against our King, upon the Account of Religion.

I hope he will think it worth his while to Explain these Matters for the sake
of others, as well as the Jacobites, for in Truth, Sir, they carry a very
strange Aspect, and Stumble very Well-Meaning Men. Together with his Letter to
Lord Russel, and Prayer on the Scaffold with his Lordship. which are so
Notorious, I need not Repeat them. As likewise these Passages in Doctor
Sherlock's Sermon, upon the Discovery of the Phanatick and Republican Plot at
Rye-House. Printed Anno. 1683.

Where, after Disproving the pretense of Rebelling for Liberty and Property, he
proceeds to the Grand pretense of Religion.

The Libertyes and Propertys of the Subject (says he p. 2.) is an Admirable
Pretense to Deprive the Prince of his Libertys and Propertyes; and those who
have any Liberty or Property to loose, seldom gain any thing by this: For when
you have secured their Liberties and Properties against their Prince, it is a
much harder Task, to secure themselves from their Fellow Subjects. But let us
hear him as to Religion.

Page 2. It is a dangerous way for Men to Rebel, to save their Souls; when God
has threatened Damnation against those who Rebel; But this is as Vain a Pretense
as Liberty and Property; for no Men Fight for Religion, who have any.

Religion is a Quiet, Peaceable, Governable thing; it Teaches Men to Suffer
patiently, but not to Rebel.

Page 6. How do Men Abhor a Religion which is Nourished with Blood!

Page 7. It was sufficient to prove any man a Papist, who durst own it possible
for such Good-Men to Rebel, or Plot against the King and Government?

We had been more secure from the Popish Plot, than, for ought I know, we may
be yet, had not these Men abused Peoples Fears, and Dangers of Popery, to the
Disturbance of the Government, and to the carrying on their Antimonarchical and
Fanatic Designs.

And thus the poor Church of England, which has escaped the Rage and Fury of
Rome, had like to have been Sacrificed to a True Protestant Zeal -- How things
proceeded after this, to the Disturbance of the public Peace, and the
Interruption of the Ordinary Courts of Justice, you all know as well as I; and
Wise Men quickly Saw, and Honest Men could not forbear Warning the People,
whither those things Tended: And they met with a good Reward for it; they were
all Papists in Masquerade, and especially, the Loyal Clergy were Loaded with
all the Contempt and Ignominy, which an Enraged and Envenomed Zeal, and some
Witless Scriblers could cast on them. Whole Vollies of Phamplets flew about, to
poison the people, with Lewd and Seditious principles: But to Talk, or Write,
or Preach about Obedience to Government, or patient Suffering for a Good Cause,
was to Betray the Protestant Interest, and to Invite a Popish Successor to Cut
our Throats: And what all this ends in, thanks be to God, we now see, and I
hope, time enough to prevent it.

Page 11. There is nothing more expressly contrary to the Revealed Will of God,
than Treasonable Plots and Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes: And tho God
does many times Permit those things to be done, which He has forbid to be done,
or else no Man could ever be Guilty of any Sin; yet his forbidding of it is a
plain Argument that he does not Approve it, that He will not Countenance it,
nay that he will not Permit it, but where He sees Great and Wise Reasons to do
so.

[The Doctor has Recanted this, in this Case of Allegiance, and taken away the
Distinction 'twixt Gods Permission, and his Ordering of Evil, it would not
serve this Turn: Therefore he says now, that God not only Permits, but is the
Author of all the Good or Evil which Happens, either to Private Persons, or
Public Societies, etc. Case of Allegiance. p. 12.]

But let us go on with his Sermon.

Page 13. Christian Religion -- requires us to Obey our Superiors in all
Lawful things; and Quietly to Submit and Suffer, when we cannot Obey. He (the
Blessed JESUS) Lived in Obedience to the Civil Powers; and though the Jewish
Nation, which was a Free People, the Lot and Inheritance of God Himself, were
then in Subjection to the Romans, yet he would not give them the least
Encouragement to shake off the Yoke, but Commands them to give unto Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's.

Page 14. Christianity Defended it self, only by a Resolute and Patient
Suffering, for the Name of Christ. This is the true Temper and Spirit of
Christianity. Under the most Barbarous and Persecuting Emperors, no Christian
ever Suffered as a Rebel.

Papists Plot and Conspire the Death of a Protestant Prince, to bring in
Popery: And professed Protestants, it seems, do the same thing to keep out
Popery.

Page 15. If the Consciences of Subjects will serve them to Rebel for Religion,
it seems a very hard Case, if the Conscience of the Prince, must not allow him
to Hang 'em for their Rebellion --

The Truth of this is Readily owned, when it is applied to the Papists.

Page 18/19. The Church of England her self, has been a Martyr for Loyalty.

Page 19. the life of our King (King Charles II.) and the Ruin of his
Government, was laid in a mighty Zeal against Popery, and for the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion.

Page 20. Though few Men dare own it, yet the Actions of too many Sufficiently
Proclaim, that they think they may Strain a point, and Dispense with Strict
Duty, when it is to serve a Good Cause, when the Honor of God, and the
Interest of Religion is Concerned -- Thus it is too often seen, that Men who
begin with a Zeal for Religion, slip Insensibly into State-Factions, and are
Engaged Vastly beyond what they first Designed, and Engaged so far, that they
cannot Retreat with Safety or Honor, but must either Conquer, or be Conquered.

Page 21. I doubt not but many Men have Died Rebels, and Suffered as Traitors,
who, at first, did as much Abhor the thoughts of Treason and Rebellion, as any
of us can. Thus I doubt not, but it was in our Late Troubles, and thus I
believe it is at this Day.

Page 23. We saw all the Zeal, and all the Intrigues of Forty, and Forty One
return again, and yet it was an Unpardonable Crime for any one to say so, or
for any Man to look as if be thought so.

Page 26. Let us Bless God, and let us Honor our King, and Receive him with
Joy and Thanksgiving, as a New Gift and Present from the Hands of God.

Page 2^. A true Christian Zeal will not Suffer us to Transgress the strict
Bonds of our Duty to God, or of our Duty to Men, especially to Kings and
Princes, whatever Flattering prospect of Advantage it may have. To Lie, to
For-swear our Selves -- To Reproach and Libel Governors, in Church or State,
to Stir up, or Countenance with the least thought, any Plots, Seditions, or
Rebellions against the King, is not a Zeal for GOD, nor for Religion.

Thus Dr. Sherlock, Excellently!

Now then to come to our Application. All this must be false, if it was Lawful
to Plot against K. James, and Join with the P. of Orange, for the Preservation
of our Religion, Liberty, Property, or whatever other Pretense.

Secondly (say the Jacobites) if it was unlawful to Plot against K. James while
he was upon the Throne, then the present Revolution, notwithstanding it is
Success, must still Remain Wicked, because, as Dr. Tillotson has said, The
Cause must be Manifestly just, before Success -- etc.

And thus he proves it to be in the present Case, in the Words immediately
following, viz. If the Cause of True Religion, and the necessary Defense of it
(against a False and Idolatrous Worship) be a Good Cause, Ours is so: If the
Vindication of the Common Liberties of Mankind, against Tyranny and Oppression,
be a Good Cause, than Ours is so: And this needs not be proved, it is so
Glaringly Evident to all the World. Thus the Dr.

And it is every Word of the Proof he brings in all that Sermon, and is
Answered in what goes before: The ^ame Hand, and say nothing -- This (say the
Jacobites) is the Ultimate Resolve of the Letter to a Friend, which is our
present Subject, and is taken Notice of before, viz. That he will Dispute with
none who do not feel the Force of his Argument at the first Hearing -- that
they are Stupid Senseless Slaves, etc. Letter p. 26.

And now the proof is. That it is Glaringly Evident to all the World. This (say
the Jacobites) the Dr. meant for a Joque, for he) knows all the World is not of
his Mind. And a Glaring Light is the falsest Light can be, it Strikes one
Blind. But they tell him of a Glaring Comet hangs over these Nations, which he
Mistakes for the Sun, and because it Lighted him over to Lambeth, he is
resolved to see by no other Luminary, least it should show him the way back
again.

It was this (say the Jacobites) Glared in his Eyes, that he could not see,
what the Poorest Dablers in Divinity have at their Fingers ends, and it is one
of the first Principles Taught among the Casuists, viz. That not only the Cause
must be Good, but the Means. That a Good Cause will not Justify Wicked Means.
That we must not Lie for GOD, that their Damnation is Just, who do Evil, that
Good may come of it. Therefore, there was something more to be said, besides
the Cause being True Religion, which is all the Doctor Urges.

We know that all Pretenses are Good: For if a thing were not Good, it could
not be a Pretense. No Man Pretends to do Wickedly. And the better the thing is,
it makes the better Pretense; therefore, Religion is the General Pretense for
Rebellion. But, as before is said, Religion must not be served by Means, which
that Religion does forbid; that would be to Destroy Religion, to please GOD by
breaking. His Commandments; to take Service with the Beelzehub, for the Cause
of CHRIST.

We have no Dispute with the Protestant Jacobites, but concerning the Means of
Preserving our Religion: They say, the Means we take are not Justifyable: And
for you; Sir, to say nothing at all to this, but that it is Glaring! The
Jacobites think, was because your Understanding was Dazzled; and they take it as
a Yielding of the Cause.

But besides they say, that by this, you (...) Absolutely Declared, that
Protestant Religion you now Profess to be worse than Infidelity and no
Religion. And that without Debating particulars, or, at the first Hearing, as
you now would have it. And that all this follows unavoidably from your own
Words in the 'bove quoted Sermon, upon the 5. Nov. p. 21. where only putting in
your now Doctrine of Resistance, instead of the Word (...) (which the Jacobites
think but two Names for the same thing) then these are your own Words. viz. We
will at present admit Resistance to be the True Religion, and their Doctrine of
the Lawfulness of Deposing Kings -- as in Truth it is, the Doctrine of this
Religion: In this Case, I would not trouble my self to Debate Particulars; but
if in the Gross, and upon the whole Matter it be Evident, that such a Religion
as this is as bad or worse than Infidelity, and no Religion; this is Con^tion
enough to a Wise Man, and as Good as a Demonstration, that this is not the True
Religion, and that it cannot be from GOD. These are the Doctors Words. And he
says all this of Popery, only upon the Account of its containing the Doctrine
of Resistance. But he makes a Notable Discovery, p. 24. Where he tells us. That
many have all along held and believed these Doctrines of Deposing Kings, and of
Absolving their Subjects from Obedience to them, and have frequently put them
in Execution, though they have not thought it so Convenient at all Turns, to
make Profession of it. It is a certain sort of Engine (says he) which is to be
Scru'd up, or let down, as occasion serves; and is commonly kept like Goliah's
Sword in the Sanctuary, but yet so that the High Priest can Lend it out upon an
Extraordinary Occasion. These are the Doctor's own Words. And the Jacobites
leave the Application to himself: And hope they need not fear now that he has
got the keeping of our Goliah's Sword. Let him take care to whom he Lends it.
All the Dissenters (but those of the Church of England) are Sueing for it. The
Socinians want not hopes that it will come to their Turn at last.

But if another Turn come first, then, says your Letter to a Friend, p. 19.
Those who in the Late Reign were the Great Advocates of the Protestant Cause,
will be Disgraced at Court, Threatened into silence, their Authority Weakened,
and their Persons Reproac'd, both by Papists and Jacobites.

The Jacobites Guess who are Meant by this; and say, that those who were
Advocates for the Protestant Cause in the Late Reign, and Preached down the
Deposing Doctrine, as a Mark of the Beast, and shall come about in this Reign,
and own Publicly that they were Mistaken, and both Preach and Practice now
Barefaced, that same Popery they Damned before, deserve not the Name of
Protestants, but Apostates.

But on the Contrary, those who adhere constantly to their Principles, which
they professed before this Turn do preserve their Authority and Respect, in the
midst of the Reproaches of those who are Grieved, that they Live to be a
Reproach to them. And, if they should not find Suitable Rewards for their
Constancy in this World, it is laid up for them in Heaven.

The Jacobites give us Instances, where the Deprived do Force Witness and
Attestation, even from their Deprivers, who sometimes forget themselves, to
Comdemn what themselves have done. Which brought an Old Sier, as the Jacobites
do certainly Assure us; to beg My Lord of Canterbury's Blessing, and therein
his Pardon, the Third Day after he had laid his Hands upon the Intruder into
his Throne. But the Archbishop stopped his Lord-ship, as he was Kneeling, and
asked him, if he had forgot what he had been doing on Sunday?

In the following Pages 20. 21. you show the Miseries of a Civil-War, which you
say must follow, if the Jacobites should Assist K. James; for that K. William
will not Desert nor Abdicate: And you are resolved to Assist him against K.
James.

The Jacobites Laugh at this Argument. It is like the Old Saying. The second
Blow makes the Quarrel. I Turn you out of your House, and desire you to make no
Disturbance about it, because I am Resolved not to part with it.

The Jacobites say, That if we will not Assist K. William, but let K. James
Deal with him and his Foreign Troops, we shall have very little Civil-War.

Now which of us is in the Right or the Wrong, must depend upon the Justice of
the Cause. And that is the Issue to which the Jacobites always Press to bring
us.

But Indeed, Sir, you have given a very unlucky Instance, p. 20. where
Aggravating the Miseries of a Civil-War, you bid us look into Ireland, and see
to what a Heap of Rubbish a Flourishing and Fruitful Country is Reduced, by
being the Scene of a three Years War.

Here the Jacobites desire us to take a Specimen of the Advantage of a
Civil-War and Rebellion, to Defend our Rights, etc. when that Country could not
have Suffered so much in the Reign of Twenty Tyrants, as by that Short
Civil-War of Three Years. They desire us then to think of the Consequences of
Entailing many Years Civil-War (for ought we know) upon these Nations: York and
Lancaster lasted a Hundred Years, and this War (in all probability) will not
cease while K. James or the P. of Wales, or any of their Issue stand nearer to
the Crown, than the present Possessors: Which may be till England be Reduced to
a Heap of Rubbish like Ireland. Therefore they desire and request, that we
would Consider in time, for the Preservation of England, and the Peace of our
Selves, and our Posteritys, before it be too late. And not to Flatter our
Selves; into our own Ruin, by the Notion of our Draining France, in the
Lengthing out of this War, for we have tried Three Campaigns, and find it is
not to be done suddenly, by Force, unless Lewis would lend us some of his
Generals; It being said Publicly in the House of Commons, that England had not
a Man fit to make a General of Horse: I think we must have a little of his Money
too for he is not half Drained so Low as we are; nor has this War made him such
Miserable Subjects, no not in Dauphiny, so Poor, so Harrass'd, so Ruined as
they are in Ireland, almost (says Lord Sidney in his Speech to the Parliament
there, 5. October. 92.) to an utter Desolation of the Country. And yet he tells
them, That the Necessity of his Masters Affairs, Compels him to Ask a Supply
from them, at a time, when the Kingdom is in so Low a Condition, and has
Suffered so much in the War. On the other Hand Grand-Lewis, has (as the very
Dutch News tells us) not only freed Dauphiny from all sort of Taxes for Ten
Years to come; but sent them Great Quantities of Corn, and other Supplys, that
his Subjects may not feel the War, which he has carried on to this Day, without
Imposing one Tax upon his People: For he has sound a way to make War at his
Enemies Cost, and cause them to bear his Expense, at least, so much of it, as to
make the Rest very easy at Home.

He lets us Fortify Towns, and then takes them from us without Trouble, with
all our Magazines, Stores, etc. He Trades with our Ships, which our Merchants
send abroad, and is at no more Charge than to Conduct them into his Ports.
There is hardly a Post but brings us News of the Increase of this Branch of his
Revenue, which by their own Losses, the Mer^hants have Computed to several
Millions Sterling. in Cargo, besides the Loss of above Two Thousand of their
Ships, some of Great Force, carrying some Forty, sone Fifty Guns, little
Inferior to Men of War. Nor have our Men of War escaped much better. Last 13.
Nov. 91. There came a List into Parliament of more than Thirty Men of War,
taken by the French, and otherwise Lost by several Accidents, and Eight
Disabl'd since the Year 88. and the List is well Increased since that time. To
Balance all this, the French had one unlucky Accident at Sea last May, 92.
Whereby they lost the Hulks of Sixteen Ships, the Guns and Rigging Saved, but
not one Sunk or Taken in Fight, though we were twice their Number: And I must
tell you, that the Jacobites think us Horrible Ridiculous, even to Madness, and
that it must appear so to all Mankind, to see us so Transported with this, as
to Equal it to the Miraculous Deliverance of Israel, and Overthrow of Pharaoh,
etc. in the Red Sea, as you have heard from Dr. Sherlock: But that his
Predecessor in Paul's, has learnt to Cant as far beyond him, as he has got in
Dignity before him. In his Thanks-giving-Sermon, 27. October. 92. p. 25. He says
it was The Greatest and Cheapest (Sea Victory) that ever the Sun saw, from his
first Setting out to Run his Course.

This, the Jacobites say, they can Forgive in him for several Reasons: And
because he makes an Humble Apology for it in the same Sermon, p. 8. in these
Words, viz. The Excess of Knowledge and Wisdom -- if attended with Pride -- is
very Dangerous, and does many times Border upon Distraction, and Run into
Madness. For Example. p. 33. He Flatters K. William to his Face, even to
Blasphemy, giving as High a Character of him, as could be said of CHRIST
Himself, with Relation to His Humane Nature, viz. That he does Imitute the
Divine Perfections, as far as the Imperfection of Humanel Nature, in this
Morral State, will Admit. And yet in the same Breath, p. 34. (he says) It is
Beneath an Honest and a Generous Mind to Flatter, p. 31. He Rejoices mightily
at a New Discovery he has made, That the Weeping and Wailing, Rev. 18.17. was
Meant of the French this Sea Fight, and, says he, did little Imagine this
Thirty Years ago. But the Lamentations Mentioned in that Text, are plainly of
the Merchants, for their Great Losses at Sea, and Decay of Trade: And where
that will Light. I believe he did as little Imagine.

All this the Jacobites can easily pass by, as some of the Bold Strokes, which
this Doctor thinks his particular Talent.

But they are Amazed to see this Spirit of Infatuation, Possess the Body of our
Representatives in Parliament, in the Address of the House of Commons to their
Queen, 10. Nov. 92. Where they call this such a Glorious and Complete Victory,
as is not to be Equaled in any former Age, and can never be forgotten by
Posterity.

The Jacobites think these Gentlemen deserve an Answer; supposing they ought to
know more than other men; for if there is no more in it, than what is visible
to the World; The Jacobites say, That this is the most surprising and
unaccountable Madness, ever seized the Brains of Mankind, or (to follow the
Cant) that Ever the Sun saw, from his first setting out to run his Course.

Therefore, in Pity to the Weakness of these Blind Jacobites, I beseech you,
Sir, to Explain a little, wherein the Miracle of this Victory does Consist.

Was it so Great a Miracle, for a Hundred. Sail of English and Dutch, to Worst
Forty French?

Had it not been a Greater Miracle, if they had not Beaten the French with such
odds? Was it not a Miracle they had not a Greater Victory over them? That they
could neither Burn, Sink, nor Take one of their Ships in Three Days Fight?

That the French were able to Maintain so unequal a Combat, with so much
Advantage, that if they had had any Ports, or but an Hours more Tide, they had
left us with the Greatest Share of the Loss? Why was Sir John Ashby, and other
of our Admirals, questioned in Parliament, for the ill Conduct of this Fight?
Would you have had more than the Greatest and Cheapest Victory ever the Sun saw?

Was it not a much greater Victory, when the French Beat the English and Dutch
Fleets, with Equal Number, in the Year 90. And Possessed our Shore Triumphant,
a whole Month together?

Had we been able to have forced our way into St. Malo's, as the Dutch did into
Chattam! Could we have brought off but one of their Ships, for Memory of our
Victory, though we had turned it, after, into a Place of Entertainment (like the
Folly upon the Thames) as the Dutch have done with our Royal-Charles, taken
from Chattam! Had we met the French with Equal Number; had we blown their
Admiral into the Air, as the Duke of York did O^dham, and Taken, Sunk, and
Burned Eighteon of their Men of War, in a Fair Fight!

Had we let the French feel our Courage at such a Rate as this, neither Sun or
Moon had ever seen the Like! Unless you think it a Greater Miracle, that the
English should Beat the Dutch at Sea even Hand, than that both English and
Dutch should cause Less than half their Number of French to Retire, though
without a Ship Lost or Taken in Fight!

Was not the Destruction of the Spanish Armado, Anno. 1588. as Cheap a Victory
as this? For there we Lost no Men, nor had any Ships Disabl'd; And the Naval
Power of Spain, then so Formidable, was so Shattered and Broke to Pieces, that
they have never made any Figure upon the Sea since.

Whereas France, will, this next Summer, show us the same Ships, that is, with
the same Names, and Equipage of every sort, exceeding those Lost in May last,
great part of them being already Launched: He Heals this wound so quickly, that
the Annals shall not find the Name of a Ship wanting, that was upon the Sea
last Year; So that Posterity may come to doubt, whether this Boasted Victory
was not ^ Winters Dream, since no Loss or Difference, but for the Better, is
found 'twixt this, and the last Summers Fleet of France.

And the Jacobites desire J. Cant. to Consider, whether this be not that
Wonder, which the Sun never saw before. That such a Fleet, of Great Men of War,
should be Built, and Equipped in one Years time, where they must send for most
of their Materials into other Countries; and those who could Furnish-them best,
are in Actual War with them?

And add to this, That all this is done without any Tax upon the Subject; which
makes good what the Doctor, in his 'foresaid Sermon, informs us of the French
King, viz. That he has An almost Inexhaustible Treasure and Revenue.

An Instance of which is given in our London Gazzet, from 1. December. to 5.
December. 92. which tells us, That he has already in Bank for 93. and is now
Forming a Fund for the Year 94.

I told you this before; but that was only what I heard from the Jacobites last
Summer, when I Wrote this, but the Delays of the Press has given me more
Informations. For it seemed hard then to believe; but now our Gazzet makes it
good: And if what the Jacobites say, be true, as it has hitherto proved, he
has, before this time, his Bank completed for 94. and is beginning for 95.
which perhaps our Gazzer may own next Session of Parliament.

On the other hand, the Jacobites Object, to as, That the P. of O. has been an
Insupportable Charge, as well to his own, Country as to ours; that he was ever
a Burden, and Exhausted the Wealth of those, over whom he had Power: Of which
^lland was very sensible, before they parted with him.

In the bove quoted Narrative, Wrote at Amsterdam, Anno 76. it is said in these
plain Terms, viz. That the P. of Orange is the common Spoiler and Troubler of
Church and State -- That there has been more Blood and Treasure spent in the
Five Years Service of this Prince, than in Twenty of his Ancestors: So that we
see he is given to these Provinces for a Sore Scourge, to be Chastised by him:
The Battle by St. Nuef, the Siege of Mastricht, of Woerden, Oudenard, and of
Charleroy, which were all so scandalously broke up, and (...); what Blood have
they last? And that through his Simplicity, and little Conduct occasioned. These
are the words of that Narrative.

And the Jacobites say, That his Conduct was as little commended at Steinkirk,
at Mons, or Namur.

But much better, they say, at Tergoes, where, since he could not beat the
French, he would do some Feats, and Advance his Authority at Home.

The Story they tell thus.

That he not only Refused to Confirm the Magistrates at Torgoes, according, as
they say, to the Custom, as being Stadt-Holder: But he would have the Election
wholly to himself: And accordingly he Rejected the Magistrates Chosen by the
City, and Appointed others in their Places. That the City Refused to
acknowledge his Magistrates, but adhered to their own. That he sent Dragoons
and others, of Greater Number than usual, to Quarter upon them, and Reduee them
to Obedience, that they shut their Gates, and Refused to Receive such a Number
of Soldiers. Whereupon more were sent, and something framed like a Siege. That
the Town was at length forced to Submit. That the President Burgo-Master was
Sentenced to be Beheaded; but it was Changed into Banishment, and the
Magistrates were sont Prisoners to the Citydal of Boldack. Thus Tergoes was
Reduced, and, as a Letter I Saw from Holland, of the 3. October. 92. Says, it was
the only Conquest he had made that Campaign.

And another of the 31. Ditto. says, that the ^rbitrary Change of the
Magistrates at Tergoes, and Ro^dam, has extremely Incensed the People of all
Ranks, in these Two Provinces. The Mobb Ebbs and Flows like the Sea. Their
Kindness is Unconstant. They Advanced the P. of Orange, with Violence and Fury,
as above told, and now begin to Transferr their Affections toward those whom
they think Persecuted by him. But this Matter went Farther than the Mobb.

The whole Province of Zealand was Miarm'd at the Sentence against the
President Burgo-Master of Tergoes and his Brethron, and the Inhabitants of the
City came Weeping about him, as if they were going to lose their Father, and
the only Defender of their Liberties and Privileges. After Sentence Pronounced
against him, he very Boldly told his Judges as he stood at the Bar, that,
themselves were sensible of the Injustice of his Seatence, and that they durst
not Execute it, That he knew they would be Suing out for a Pardon for him,
thereby to Disgusse their Arbitrariness: But for his Part, he would have none
-- that he desired no other Favor than to Dye a Martyr for the Laws and
Privileges of his City. The Stadt-Holder having Notice, from several Parts, of
the Great Discontents in Zealand, occasioned by the foresaid Sentence, and
being Apprehensive of the Mischiefs which might Ensue, should it be Executed,
sent him his Pardon, to prevent an Insurrection, which in Great Probability,
would have been occasioned thereby. You will say, that it is much, in this Age,
to find a Man of this Vigor, and that Durst thus Stickle for the Support of the
Privileges of his Country.

The Jacobites desire us to take Notice of the Part the Glergy Acted in this
Affair, because of the Likeness it bears to our Case in England. A Letter from
Leyden. Dated 13. Janua. 92. Gives an Account of it, in these following Words.

The Business of Tergoes is not yet ended, there are but four Ministers which
belong to that Town, and they all refuse to Pray for the Now Magistrates, but
in General Terms, Prayed for all Lawful Authority, for which they were severely
Reprimanded, but still continued to do the same; and in the close of their
Prayer, constantly Remembered the Old Magistrates, Praying GOD would Comfort
them in their Afflictions, and give them Courage to Support it. They thought
that was not enough, they Joined in a Letter to the King as Stadt-Holder, that
he would Extend his Clemency -- toward them, but he extremely Affronted at
their Procedure, sent immediately to the States of the Province of Zealand, to
have them Suspended; Which the States Refused, Urging there was no Law for it.
He then sent to endeavor to make them Retract what they had Writ, which one of
them was persuaded to, but the Rest Persisted, though threatened, to be Banished
as movers of Sedition, and have Writ circularly to the chief of the Clergy of
Vtreck^, Leyden, etc. to know whether, in Conscience they could, or ought, to
Pray for the New Magistrates; and if not, that they should then Join with them,
in Interceding for the Old Burgo-Masters, with the Stads-Holder, showing, at
the same time, that when the Liberty and Privileges of the Civil-Magistrate
were Invaded, the Church must needs suffer, and must afterward be subject, to
such an Arbitrary Dependence, as was directly contrary, to the freedom of the
Gospel; it is not easy to conceive, how this has Affected the Soberest Men,
even in the Provinces most Zealous for the Stadt-Holder.

There is another Occurrence, which they tell of the Geneva Clergy, that is
very like our Present Debate here, concerning the Validity of a
Lay-Deprivation, of the Spiritual Power.

The Story is this, as I saw it from a very Good Hand in Geneva.

About the latter end of Septem. last, there was a Solemn Fast kept at Geneva.
They met at Church at Four in the Morning, and continued till Five in the
Afternoon: And all this time was Spent in Singing Psalms, Preaching, and
Praying. One of the Ministers Reflected very sharply upon some Porsons in
Office, yet without Naming any one, for their Pride and Insolence, in
Challenging and Taking the Precedence before the Ministers, in Receiving the
Sacrament, contrary to the Constant Custom of that Church, where the Ministers
always Communicate after the Council of State, who are there, the
Representatives of the Sovereignty. The Officers Complained to the Council,
who, Summon the Minister, he Appears, Declines their Authority as Incompotent,
and Persists in it. Upon which, the Council Pronounce Suspension against him,
During Pleasure. And the Minister still Persists in Denying their Authority.
And thus the Matter stood, when the Letter was Wrote. He tells likewise, that
he once heard Passive Obedience Asserted in their Pulpits, as the Peculiar
Character of the Protestant Religion, but that, in other things, the Spirit of
Calvin still prevails: That they all Condemn the Sectarys of England, and not
one of them thinks the Communion of the Church of England Unlawful, he says, he
has heard them commend our Common Prayer: And one of them Discoursing to him of
the Revolution in England, said, he knew not how to Approve or Justify it; and
that there was more of the Cavalier, than of the Christian in it.

Here I had ended, having tired my self, and I Am afraid you too; But a Pamphlet
coming into my Hands, called an Answer to Great Britains Just Complaint, which
is Wrote, Sir, in Vindication of this Letter of yours, from the Objections
which are against it in Great Britains Complaint, I thought it would be very
proper to let you know, what the Jacobites say against that Answer, that you
may have the whole Cause before you, and by one Effectual Reply, may silence
them for ever.

I do not pretend to Examine all that Answer to Britains Complaint, I leave it
to the Author to Defend himself, but I will only tell you some Cursory
Observations I have heard from the Jacobites, upon a slight View En Passant, to
Entertain you, till the Fuller Answer (which I hear is a Preparing) shall
Appear.

In the First Place, I must tell you, that these Jacobites are no ways
Discouraged, but show themselves mightily Pleased with the Performance of the
Answerer to Great Britains Complaint, who Vindicates K. William, they say, at
such a Rate, as Exposes him more than the Book he pretends to Answer. They say,
he brings in (by way of Apology) the severest Objections which K. William's
Greatest Enemies could Suggest; and then says nothing in the World to Clear them.

That, it is known to every Englishman in England, that K. William had no
Battle in England. Therefore that it is most Ridiculous in this Author, p. 65.
to Bragg of King William's Victories in England, and to Advance his Prowess for
this, above that of the French K. whom he calls a Coward. Was this in his Zeal,
to make England a Conquest? Which is the Notion of late much Advanced.

That it would appear full as Comical to the French, to Boast of K. William's
Victorys in Flanders. (as this Author does in the same Place) Would they not
desire you to Name them? Or to remember what the Dutch Narrative above-quoted
Names, viz. The Battle of St. Nuef, the Siege of Mastricht, of Woerden,
Oudenard, and of Charleroy: And once at Mons, they say, he Attempted to Steal a
Victory with the Articles of Peace in his Pocket.

They Ridicule him, and say, that none but the Irish have been Civil to him.
For none else will be Beaten by him, and not that, but when he is much Superior
in Number, as he was at the Boyn, which was the first time, the French say,
that ever he saw himself a Victor, and is like to be the last, For the Irish
themselves Baffled him afterward at Limerick, and Forced him to Turn his Back.

But this Author says ibid. That K. William Dared the French Army, and makes
his Great Prowess consist in that. Whereas this is the very Jest which the
French put upon him, viz. That he Stood at the Head of a Hundred Thousand Men,
to see the French King in Person, take Namur (amat Victoria Testes!) without
Daring to Strike a Stroke in its Defense, though he came thither on purpose for
its Rescue. And his Daring to see the English Butchered at Stein-Kirk before
his Face, without Daring to come in to their Relief, though he had drawn them
into that Snare by his Conduct.

And the Inference this Author Draws from K. William's thus Daring the French,
is in the next Words, viz. That if the French have the Advantage, yet K.
William has Entirely the Honor of the Campaign. Which is as severe a Satyr,
as any of K. William's Enemies could have made upon him, to set up a Hero for
his Non-Resistance Valor in War!

Doubtless the Honor is as Great,
In being Beaten, as to Beat!
Pamphlet. p. 64. It is observed that K. James never Won a Battle in his Life.

Jacobite. He has certainly Mistaken an J. for a W. There can be no Excuse for
his Malice, unless he Plead such a Gross Ignorance, as never to have heard,
that K. James, when D. of York, did on the 3. of June, 1665. in fair and open
Fight with the Dutch, Blow up their Admiral Opdham, and, as it was Expressed in
the Lord Chancellor's Speech to the Parliament, 10. Octo. 65. In that Great
Action Sunk, Burned, and took Eighteen Good Ships of War, whereof half were the
Best they had, with the loss of one Single Small Ship of Ours -- The Actions,
and the Blessing of that Day -- ( that Glorious Third of June!) has been
Celebrated in all the Churches in England, and in the Hearty Devotions of all
True Englishmen, etc.

And the Commons of England, to Express their Great Sense of the Valor and
Magnanimity of his Royal Highness, did, upon this Occasion, Grant to his
Majesty, one Months Assessment, amounting to 120902. 15. 8. as a Present to be
Given to his Royal Highness.

The Act begins thus. We your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the
Commons Assembled in Parliament, taking Notice of that Heroic Courage, with
which your Majesty's Royal Brother Expo'd his own Person, for the Defense of
your Majesty and your People, against the Dutch Fleet, and of the Glorious
Victory, through the Blessing of Almighty GOD, by him Obtained, are Humble
Suitors unto your Majesty, That we may have leave, to make some Expressions of
our Humble Thanks to his Royal Highness for the same, and that for this end
your Majesty would Graciously Please to Accept from us your Loyal Subjects, the
Sum of Money herein after Mentioned, and to Bestow the same upon your Majesty's
Royal Brother. Now what a Witless and Malicious Scribler must this be Reputed,
who dare outface the Sun, and what is so Publicly known, and upon Record in
England?

Nor was his Royal Highness more Celebrated at Home, than he was Glorious
abroad. During his Brother's, and his own Exile, he was General for France and
Spain Alternativly, where he Signalized himself to that Degree, that the Famous
Mareshal Turenne, who Instructed his Royal Highness in the Rudiments of War,
used to boast of him, that he had Bred up one, who did Exceed himself in the
Military Capacity.

And his Fame was Trumpeted no where Louder than in England, for about Twenty
Years together, till the Foundations laid for the Bill of Exclusion, made it
Necessary to have another Character Raised of him.

Pamphlet. P. 65. Says of a certain Monsieur (but Names no Body) that he never
got one Inch of Ground, nor a Single Town by True Valor, and Bravery.

Jacobite. This is True of some Body, but not of the French Monsieur. Witness,
in the last Campaign, Namur, Steinkirk, Dixmuyd, Furnes, etc. But if you will
say, all this was by Treachery, on the Confederates side, it will follow, That
they know not among them all, a Man they can trust: A good Presage of a further
Victory! But why then was the Valor, and Fidelity of the Governor of Namur,
so much commended? You Contradict your selves on all hands. In whom lay the
Treachery at Steinkirk, at Dixmuyd, and Furnes? Why are not those Traitors
called to an Account? The French King Fights when he pleases, and Conquers when
he Fights, and Those whom be Beats, call him a COWARD, to make Themselves more
Ridiculous and Contemptible.

Pamphlet, p. 62. As for those who declare they ought to Fight against this
Government, so soon as an Enemy appears; I hope the Government will withdraw
its Protection from them, and pair their Nails in time.

Jacobite. This spoils all the mighty Braggs, which this Pamphlet has, p. 54.
of Dr. King's Book, concernign the Affairs of Ireland, which he there calls a
Convincing Tract, and that every Page of it is a Demonstration.

For the Protestants then there, do now declare, That it was their Principle to
Fight against that Government, so soon as an Enemy appeared, and did
accordingly. And K. James was told of it, and was Morally assured they would do
so. And therefore, by this Rule, he could not have been blamed, if he had pared
the Protestants Nails there much closer than even as Dr. King does Represent it.

Pamphlat. p. 59. He foothes the Roman Catholic Princes of the Confederacy,
not to fear any Harm to their Religion, from the Protestant Confederates; for
(says he) The Protestants never did Combine to Exterminate Popery in General.

Jacobite. What does he mean by in General? Are we not to be against All the
Errors of Rome? or only for some part of the Truth? or are we to Compound and
Abate of it, in Favor of the Confederates? And Swear to Re-Establish the
Pope's Supremacy in France, in Order to Secure the Protestant Religion in
England?

The First Article of the Resolution of the Princes, Allies, and Confederates,
which was taken in the Assembly at the Hague, Feb. 91. as it was done out of
the French, and Printed here, was, That they Solemnly Protest before GOD, that
they will never Break off their Union, nor make any Peace with Lewis XIV. Till
he has made Reparation to the Holy See, for whatsoever he has Acted against it;
and till he Annull and make Void all those Infamous Proceedings against the
Holy Father, Innocent, XI.

This was but in Parsuance of what was before Concerted in the Particular
League with Spain, and the Emperor, 31. December: 1690. as it is in the Abstracts
of the Foraign Leagues, given into the Parliament this Session.

There, Article Fourth, It is agreed, that no Peace be begun, before -- all
things in the Ecclesiastics -- be Restored as in their Former State.

Pamphlet. Page. 52. He says, the French King Dragoon'd the Hugonets, against
his Interest, purely out of Vain Glory.

Jacobite. So easily is it, for Malice to betray our Reason, and Expose us to
Forget and Contradict your Selves!

It was but in p. 47. that he gave a Substantial Reason, why it was the French
King's Interest to be Rid of these Men, The French King knows (says he) that if
he be Invaded by a Protestant Prince, these Men will Endanger him by a Revolt.

Pamphlet. Page. 37. He commend; the Great Clemency of K. William's Order,
against the Lord of Glen-Coe, and says, a Milder Order was never given. And
that he has Expressed a High Displeasure at it, viz. The Massacre of Glen-Coe.

Jacobite. He was too soon Weary of this Subject. For he should have told, what
was the High Displeasure was Expressed against these Mutherers of Glen-Coe,
particularly, against those Bloody Brutes in Commission, who sent Orders under
their Hands (two whereof are Inserted No. 19. Appendix, of the Answer to Dr.
King's Book) and said it was by the Kings Express Command, to put all to the
Sword under 70. Yet these Infernal Furys are continued still in their
Respective Posts, and no Mark of Displeasure is to be seen upon them.

In the next Place, K. William's most Mild Order, should have been Inserted,
otherwise, it will not be Believed, that any Officers durst have Vouched his
Express Command, for an Action of this Nature, and not have Forfeited their
Necks, at least their Commissions, if they had not a Sufficient Warrant, under
his Hand to Produce. And it is to be Explained, how Glen-Coe and his Men could
be in Arms, and in open Rebellion, as the Pamphlet Foolishly Alleges, at the
same time, that Glen-Lyon and his Soldiers were Quartered in their Houses.
This Pamphlet confesses the Matter of Fact, but Disproves no one Particular of
it.

Pamphlet. Page. 30. He undertakes to Free K. William, from the Objection of
Imprisoning many Lords, and others, contrary to Law. Which he does, by
Confessing the whole Charge against him, and then giving an Excuse for it. viz.
That the Safety of the Nation Absolutely Requires it, when Invasion is Threatened.

Jacobite. But, yet when this Method would have Absolutely Defeated the Present
Revolution, and K. James was Minded of it, and Advised to Secure but a small
Number of those who Betrayed him, and were then in the Conspiracy against him,
and he was Morally assured of it; he would not do it, because (not having
Informations upon Oath against them) it was Contrary to Law, as a Noble Earl
did very well Remark, in the House of Peers, this Session of Parliament.

And the Ministers concerned in our Modern Imprisonments, had an Act of
Indemnity, to Secure them last Year for this, and are Endeavoring another now.
The House of Lords, having this Session Declared such Commitments to be
Illegal: Upon which the Prisoners so Committed, were Discharged; and not from
K. William's innate Clemency, which forbade the Prosecution, as this Pamphlet
would have us believe; for such Endeavors were used to continue them in
Custody, that Aaron Smith (the Plot Journey-Man) was forced to make Affidavit,
that he had Informations upon Oath against them, though when it came to the
Issue, there was no such thing. And the Prosecution of this Perjury, was all
which the Innate Clemency did forbid. [Thus, Sir, say the Jacobites.]

Pamphlet. Page. 31. Accuses K. James for Prosecuting Lord Macklesfield,
Brandon Gerard, and Lord Delamare, upon Monmouth's Rebellion.

Jacobite. Lord Delamare himself, cannot but own that he had a Fair Trial, and
K. James, who was Present, showed a Particular Satisfaction in his being Acquit.

Will this Author say, that there was not Information upon Oath against him?
Lord Macklesfield Fled, his Case is Sufficiently known. Lord Brandon Convict
and Pardoned by K. James, and Professed Great Loyalty, and Gratitude.

If such Informations could have been had against those Committed in this
Reign, the Lords had not Voted their Commitments Illegal.

But this Pamphleteer avers, that the Government could not want Informations
against them. Though it is Evident to all in Westminster Hall, that they did want
Informations upon Oath against them, and that this was the only Cause of their
Acquittal.

But he had some Reason to think, that the Government could not want
Informations against whom they Pleased to Accuse, considering the Fund of
Evidence was Provided, and their Qualifications. Fuller, Young, Blackhead, and
Holland, are Notoriously known, besides these, there are the -- standing
Evidence at every Sessions, Capel (a Broken Shoemaker of Windsor) Low (a Fiddler
in Field-Lane) Mrs. Scot (a Common Prostitute) and others of the like
Characters, who (except the Fiddler, that keeps an Alehouse among the Butchers)
have no Habitation, but are Absolute Beggars, Supported by Aaron Smith.

But the Wit of such Cattle, is not always so ready as their Knavery, which is
the Reason they have done no more Mischief, though they have done all they could.

Pamphlet. Of many Hundreds Guilty of Treason, Two only have Suffered for it,
During this Reign.

Jacobite. The Author by this, would make you believe that he was very Exact in
the Account. But we can Name Three off Hand.

In all whose Trials, Law and Honor were as much Strained, as ever was known
in England: The Hardness of Mr. Ashton's Case has been more than once taken
Notice of, in both Houses of Parliament. The Second -- a Poor Chairman was
Hanged for Attempting to Raise an Army, and Inlisting Soldiers to Restore K.
James.

The Third. Cross an Innkeeper, for his Curiosity in going a Board one of the
French Ships, when they lay so long upon our Shore, after Beating home our
Fleet in the Year 90. of which he thought the less harm, because Sir William
Jennings, and other English Gentlemen and Protestants, then Aboard the French
Fleet, came on shore with the French, who Treated the Country with all
Imaginable Civility and Kindness; and invited any to come on Board them, and
they should be Civily Entertained, for they professed, that their Master had no
Enmity against England, but rather Kindness, to End their Divisions, and stop
the Exhausting of their Money, and Restoring their Rightful KING, and the Laws
to their Ancient Channel. Upon which, this Innkeeper ventured, and found them
as good as their word, and brought Letters from Sir William Jenning's, and
other English Gentlemen, on Board, having that occasion, to some of their
Friends: Of which this Fellow was yet so Cautious, that he brought them open,
and delivered them to the next Justice of Peace. But he had told, that the
French were a Civil sort of People, and not such Bugg-Bears as some Represent
them. And was Hanged without Mercy.

That more Instances of this Nature are not to be Produced, is, because more
(however Guilty) have not been Convist, which was not for want of Good Will.
[Thus say the Jacobites.]

Pamphlet. He comes now to the Rarity, as the Jacobites call it, to Instance a
Pardon, Granted by K. William: Yea, one of them (says he) upon whom Actual
Treason -- was proved, has been Pardoned after Conviction and Condemnation.

Jacobite. This is the Case of my Lord Preston: Which is all over so
Extraordinary, that Execution had been a Milder Treatment than that he met with.

He was Taken upon Thursday, Janu. 1. 90/91. Tried and Found Guilty the
Saturday Fortnight after. The Thursday before, his Father-in-Law was Employed
to Drink upon him, most part of the Day, and at Ten a Clock at Night, he was
Hurried away, being in Great Disorder, to Kensinton, where another Treat was
Provided, and then he was brought before K. William, where he Spoke, not with
that Caution, as Reasonably may be supposed, he would have had at another time.
On Friday K. William went for Flanders. Next Day Lord Preston was brought to
his Trial, where he was Confronted with the Lord President, and Lord Sidney,
who had been both Present at his Intercourse with K. William, which Lord
Preston Declared was a Great Awe upon him, and Interruption to the Defense he
had to make for himself, not Remembering, what he had said in that Disorder he
was in at Kinsinton.

That he was not Released till about the end of May following. All which time,
he was Delivered over to Satan, to be Buffeted, under the Conduct of his
Renegado Reis-Efendi, the most Dexterous of that Sultan's Executioners. It
would make another Part of the Turkish Spy, to tell all the Arts, and little
Contrivances, of this Bloody Officer to Wheedle, to Frighten, to Circumvent
this Condemned Lord. The Sheriff being one Day sent to give him Notice of his
Execution, such an Hour; another Day Visited kindly by his Lordships Self, and
Lord Deu. at other times, by other Emissaries, with New Threats, and Promises
of Rewards, and Preferments if he would Comply; telling him that others had
Discovered against him, even those whom he endeavored to Serve, suffering none
to come near him, to Undeceive him in any Point.

In short, having tried all ways, they Resolved to make him an Evidence: In
order to which it was Necessary to Qualify him, by Cranting him a Pardon. But
his Estate being Intayl'd, was the Greatest Security he had for his Life; which
if they took, they would lose the Benefit of Seizing his Estate: Therefore,
they chose to keep that as an Awe over him, to Force him to be an Evidence: And
accordingly, having passed his Pardon, about the end of May, and his Lordship
gone immediately Home to live Privately, he was straight sent for again in
June, and told that he must be an Evidence. Which his Lordship positively
Refused.

That Lord President bid him Remember, that though his Life was Pardoned, he had
an Estate to lose. And told him, that the Parliament might Undo what the King
had Done, and Revoke even the Pardon which the King had Granted. Lord Preston
said, he was Surprised to hear that Doctrine from his Lordship. K. Charles II.
having hazarded a Breach with his Parliament, to Support the Pardon his Majesty
had Granted to his Lordship upon which Lord N. interposed, Solving it as well
as he could, and then Ordered the King's Council, who attended, to let my Lord
Preston know, what was yet in the Power of the Government, to Inflict upon his
Lordship, in Case of his Refusal to be an Evidence. The Council Learned in the
Law, then Declared, That they could Imprison him, During Life, and Fine him
more than he was Worth. His Lordship Answered, that he thought Magna Charta,
and the Laws of England, had Limited Fines, to be Salvo Contemento: And
likewise laid down Methods for the Liberty of the Subject. However, That
neither Life nor Estate should prevail upon him, to bring Innocent Blood upon
his own Head.

His Lordship was thereupon sent Twice to Newgate, whence he Delivered himself
both times by Habeas Corpus. And his whole Estate was Seized, and is still, to
force him to Hang his own Brother, and others whom they do not like. And he now
Suffers under their Clemency and Good Nature.

But how came it, that this Author did Name but One of the Pardons, Granted by
K. William. For there were Two in his Reign. The other was Granted to Crone.
And the Price he was to Pay for it, was to be an Evidence. But he was with
Great Difficulty and Management brought to it, by the Industry of the foresaid
Reis-Efendi: When he made the ^east Hesitation, he was Ordered to Prepare for
the Gallows. He had Twenty Five Reprives: And Three times was brought to the
Sledge, with the Rope about his Neck. At last his Fears prevailed: He said to
some of his Friends, that he was too Young to Dye, considering his Life had not
been Strickt: And they took his Informations upon Oath, after his Condemnation,
and before his Pardon, while he was a Dead Man in Law: But to Qualify him to be
an Evidence, they Granted him a Pardon: But least he might Start back, the
Pardon was given into a Third Hand, Sir John Holt, who was to be his Judge, can
tell where it was Lodged. Upon this, he had his Liberty. And the very Day,
before he was to have been Produced, as an Evidence against the Lives of Honest
Men, he, Struck with the Terror of so Great a Wickedness, made shift to get out
of the Reach of his Tormentors, and still continues so. All this, Sir, the
Wicked Jacobites do say, I Repeat their Words. And they are positive in the
Truth of it all, and Provoke us to bring them to the Test. They say, that we
our selves know all this to be True.

Pamphlet. Page. 29. He (K. James) Granted Dispensations Contrary to Law, and
Despised a Parliaments Confirmation.

Jacobite. The Contrary of which, is so much True, that the Great Objection
against him, was, his Endeavoring to get the Parliaments Confirmation, viz. To
have the Penal Laws and Tests taken away by Parliament. Yet in all that time,
there was no need found for the Self Denying-Ordinance, no Guilt Confessed in
Rejecting it; nor Scandal in having it overthrown by the Votes, and open
Solicitation of Foraigner, and Soventeen Court Bishops, after it had passed the
Commons, who were most Concerned in it.

Pamphlet. Page. 26. As to the Conventions Gift, they and K. William believe,
after the Throne was Vacant, that they ought to have Declared his Wifes
Hereditary Right.

Jacobite. Yet it is certain they never did Declare it. How will this Author
Vindicate them in this?

Pamphlet. Page 20. The Convention did Examine it (the Birth of the P. of
Wales) as far as was Necessary to their own Satisfaction, and after all,
Declared the Princess (...) Orange to be the Right Heir.

Jacobite. This is News indeed! It is an Impudence that Points out the Author.
For none other, sure, Durst have so positively averred, what the whole Nation
knows to be as False as Hell. For neither Parliament nor Convention, ever once
Touched in the least Tittle upon the P. of Wales, nor could be Provoked to it,
as is sufficiently known. Nor did they ever Declare the Princess of Orange to
be the Right Heir. We desire the Votes of the House may be Produced, or some
Sufficient Voucher: Who could Imagine that any Man of Common Reputation, would
tell in Print, a Lie of such a Nature, that every Body must know to be so, who
have the least Conversation in Affairs, or have Read but the Votes, or a New;
Letter?

Pamphlet. Page. ^0. Where there is no doubt concerning the next Heir, upon
Cession or Death, there the Right Heir Succeeds Immediately: But while the next
Heir is Ambiguous in an Hereditary Monarchy, till the Title he Examined,
Cleared, and Declared, none of the Pretenders can Assume the Royal Pignity.

Jacobite. I need not Apply this.

Pamphlet. Page. 21. Why should the Convention do his (K. James's) Business for
him, and Neglect the Nations Sufety? (i. e.) in Examining into the Birth of the
Prince of Wales.

Jacobite. That is, if they had Examined into it, they must have found the
Truth of the Birth of the P. of Wales from the Queen; and that would have done
K. James his Business for him.

But K. James his Business did not wholly depend upon the P. of Wales; for
whoever was his Heir, did not hurt his Title.

In the next Place, it was not altogether K. James's Business: For did it not
Highly Concern the Nations Safety, to Examine and Clear who was next Heir, till
that was done, (by your Rule here set down) neither the Princess of Orange, nor
her Husband could Assume the Royal Dignity, without plainly changing our
Hereditary Monarchy, into an Elective One.

Pamphlet. p. 20. The Convention Judged ( viz. of the P. of Wales's Birth) and
Unanimously Declared for the Princesses Right, and in this, sufficiently
showed, they did not intend to make this Monarchy Elective, in that they
Declared the True Heir -- to be Queen.

Jacobite. As if setting up the next Heir, during the Life of the True Owner,
were not an Election? Or setting up any other but the next Heir?

Secondly, She ought, by this Rule, to be Queen in her own Right, and he but a
Matrimonial King: Whereas she is Absolutely Divested of all Manner of Power,
and the whole Execution put in him; insomuch, that she cannot Act, in his
Absence, but by Virtue of a Particular Act of Parliament, made for that
purpose, which might Enable any one else as well to Act what she does. And yet
this Author says, p. 27. That the P. of Orange did Accept the Crown in his Dear
Consorts Right, which, as it is Generally told, he Rejected with Disdain, and
said, he did not come over to be her Gentleman-usher.

Pamphlet. p. 24. Perhaps he might have Seized the Crown by his Power.

Jacobite. This is the Title of Conquest, from which that Party cannot Refrain.
Dr. Burnet began it, but stands Ominously Corrected by the Hand of the Hangman.

Pamphlet. p. 26. K. James chose to Fly, rather than to Treat.

Jacobite. First, the P. of Orange never offered a Treaty.

Secondly, When the King offered it, and sent the Lords Hallifax, Nottingham,
and Godolphin, to Treat with the Prince; and offered all Desired in the
Prince's Declaration; viz. Leaving all to a Free Parliament. His Highness
Returned such an Answer, as made it Visible to all the World, he came not to
Treat. It is inserted. p. 93. of the History of the Deser. wherein he Demands,
that the King shall immediately give up the Tower of London, Tilbury Fort, and
Portsmouth. That all Papists, and others not Qualified by Law, who adhered to
the King, should be Disarmed, Disbanded, etc. while he himself had more Foraign
Papists in his Army, than the King had of His own Subjects, in His: And as if
the Law Countenanced his Invasion, and the Subjects Rising in Arms with him
against the King, more than the King's Employing all the Hands he could get
upon such an Apparent Necessity. Nay, more, they would not Submit to ask Pardon
from the King for their Treason and Rebellion, but they must not have so much
as an Ill Word, nor have it said that they had done Amiss; and therefore it was
Demanded in the Second Article, that all Proclamations which did but Reflect
upon the Prince, or those who Declared for him, should be Recalled. [By what
Name would they have had the King call their Rising against him!]

But farther yet, they were not only not to be in any manner Reproached for
what they had done, but to be Rewarded, and Encouraged to Persist; it was
Demanded ( Art. 6.) that the King should Pay them, and Assign a Sufficient Part
of the Public Revenue, for the Support and Maintenance of the Prince's
Troops. Such Demands made to a Crowned Head, in his own Kingdom! By a Son and a
Nephew, by a Subject Prince, and Servant to a Commonwealth! And by a Company
of his own Rebel Subjects, whose Advice, and Concurrance is Mentioned in the
said Demands!

This Answer was given upon Sunday (9th. December. 88.) his Highness's Lucky Day
for Business.

But let us go on a little, and you shall see how Inclinable the Prince was to
a Treaty.

After the King was Taken, and Barbarously Treated at Feversham, when (as the
History of the Descr. tells. p. 102/103.) The Body of the Peers of England,
had, according to their Duty, sent the Lords Feversham, Atlesbury, Yarmouth,
and Middelton, most Humbly to Entreat his Majesty to Return to White Hall. The
P. of Orange in Opposition to them, sent Mounsieur Zulestein, with a most
Insolent Command to the King, to Continue at Rochester; for he would have no
Treating with him. And the next Day ( viz. 16. Dec. 88.) when the King sent the
Earl of Eeversham, with a Letter to the Prince, Inviting him to a Personal
Treaty, his Highness, contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, and of Nations,
not only Refused to Return any Answer, but made the Earl a Prisoner, which was
a Treatment no one King would give to another, though they were at open Wars; But
the Privilege of an Ambassador from a King, within his own Kingdom, could not
Secure that Messenger who brought any Offers of a Treaty. And to prevent the
like for the Puture; the very next Day, ( viz. 17. December. 88.) his Highness
Supriz'd the King (his Father) in his Bed, after Eleven at Night, and having
Ordered Count Solmes to Dispossess the King's Guards of their Posts at
White Hall, and place his Dutch Guards in their Room, he sent Three English
Lords, with an Order Signed under his own Hand, to Remove their King from
White Hall, (because his Highness was to be there) and peremptorily to Limit
his Majesty to the Place whither he was to go; nor had the King Liberty to
Choose any other Place, without Leave first Asked, and Obtained from his
Highness; but still under his Dutch Guards. And his Majesty was positively
Required to be gone by such an Hour, least he should Meet the Prince so much as
upon the Road.

This was a hopeful way of Treating! And so Modestly Managed, that all the
World stands Amazed, at him who never said or did an Insolent thing.

For which Virtue alone (for no other is to be Found, or Named in the Famous
Thanksgiving Sermon above quoted) his Character is Advanced above that of the
Great French Monarch, being Introduced, in the Comparison, with A Greater than
he is here. Fulsom Cant, and Profane!

But how could it be expected that he came to Treat? Who, in a Hostile Manner,
Entered the King's own Palace and Castle of Windsor, and, as a Conqueror,
Erected his Standard upon that Noble Castle, 14. December. 88. as the History of
the Deser. Braggs. p. 103. Thus much the Jacobites Answer to your Objection of
K. James's not Accepting of a Treaty.

Pamphlet. p. 9. He (the Author of Britains Complaint) Accuses the Prince for
sending him ( K. James) by Water, at an Unseasonable Time, thereby Indangering
his Health, forgetting that K. James went in the Night by Water, the very Week
before, of choice, when he crossed the River, in order to his first Attempt to
get into France, and this, without any Damage to his Health [How does this
Author know that?] So that he used himself as Ill as the Prince used him.

Jacobite. Surely, this is the Smartest Defense that ever was made, and shows
the Prince's Great Concern for K. James's Health. What? To Use him no Worse
than he would Use himself. Because a Man that Flys for his Life, would Leap
over a Precipice, therefore, without any Unkindness, you may Throw him over,
for you Use him no Worse than he would Use himself.

But yet it was a great deal Worse, that the P. of Orange Used the King, than
he Used himself: For, as this Author tells it, he only Crossed the River; but the
Prince sent him to Graves-End by Water, and that against Wind and Tide, and as
Britains Complaint says, p. 10. The King was Refused his own Coach to Carry him
by Land, though he Declared that he could not Travel by Water in so Cold a
Season, and so Great a way, without Manifestly endangering his Health. Which
the Answerer does not Deny.

Pamphlet. As to his (King James's) Writing to the Bishops, his Speaking to the
Bishop of Winchester, or to Sir R. Clayton, or to other Citizens; all this is
an impudent Fiction: The Bishop of Winchester protests that no such Proposition
was ever made to him, the same is Avorred by Sir R. Clayton.

Jacobite. And hoth their Credits are come to be alike; but there are others of
better Reputation who do own it, and will make Oath, that Sir Sim. Lewis did
confess it. And the Persons who brought the Messages from the King, both to the
City, and Bishop of Winchester, will Depose it, and Prove it by undeniable
Vouchers: And had the Courage to go to the Bishop of Winchester, upon Monday
Morning, the 9th. of last Janua. 92/93. accompanied with a present sitting Lord
of Parliament, and a Knight of great Honor, and Taxed the Bishop with his
having received such a Message from the King, which his Lordship Denied, at
first, with an Oath: But the Person binding him with Tokens, as that his
Lordship kissed the King's Seal, which that person brought as a Credential from
the King, and naming another Person of Note, who was present at the delivery of
the Message, that his Lordship Replied, he could not give his Answer till next
day, that then he told that Person, he had wrote to the King; and that the
Bishops were not able to Protect his Majesty, and therefore durst not undertake
so Great a Trust, as the Security of his Majesty's Person, and several other
Circumstances: Upon which the Bishop said, That it was possible his Memory
might fail him; and that though it were so, what needed all this stir about it
now; and that he perceived they had a mind to Expose him; and for that Reason
(as those present, and we may reasonably suppose) he still continued to Deny
the Matter, but so faintly, and with such confusion, as made it Evident to
those Noble Persons present, that he had Received such a Message, but was not
willing expressly to own it, after having Forsworn it, Though he Confessed all
the Particulars, as that Person coming to him, etc.

And from the same Infirmity of his Memory, if you please, you may imagine it
proceeded, that he did not Communicate this Message of his Majesty's, to the
rest of his Brethren, the Bishops, but Returned the bovesaid Answer in their
Names, of which their Lordships do justly Complain.

Pamphlet. p. 26. Nor has he (K. W.) refused any Acts of this kind, ( viz.
Redressing of Grievances) which the Parliament has offered him.

Jacobite. This, instead of a Vindication, is a manifest exposing of K. W.
being such an Evident Protestatio contra Factum; for it is publicly known,
that last Winters Session he Rejected the Judges Bill, which Passed both the
Houses; and which therefore to be sure they thought necessary for the Good of
the Nation, and conducive to make the Judges Bold and Honest in their Station.

Pamphlet. p. 9. The Convention Refused to Receive or Read the Letter, which
King James wrote to them from St. Germains (which continued his CLAIM,
according to Mr. Sam. Johnson, p. 16. of his Address to the Commons of England
in Parliament Assembled, and confuted the Desertion) because they were told,
that HE wrote in the Style of a King.

Jacobite. That was smart! He should have Subscribed, Your Honors most Humble,
and most obliged Servant, as i^ Duty bound, James Stuart. His FATHER'S
Executioner gave Him the Title of Majesty upon the Scaffold.

Sir, I had here taken Leave again, But the Delay of the Press has lengthned
your Trouble and mine, and Obliged me to Offer to your Consideration, the
Advantage the Jacobites have taken, as to the Story told before of Grandval,
from a Pamphlet lately come out, Called, Reflections upon the Late HORRID
CONSPIRACY, Contrived by some of the French Court, to Murder his Majesty in
Flanders, and for which, Grandval, one of the Assassinates was Executed.
Printed for RICHARD BALDWIN. 1692.

The Design of this Piece, is to Lay the whole Odium upon King James, and the
French King, making Them the Contrivers and Managers of this Conspiracy.

To which the Jacobites say, That it was done so Foolishly, and in such Faint
Harangue, as Confutes it self, and makes it impossible for any Man of Sense to
believe, not only, that either of these Kings or their Council, But that
Du-Mont himself, who is said to be the Assassinat, would, or did Engage in such
a Ridiculous Contrivance. For, p. 23. telling of the French Court's Management
with Regard to Du-Mont, viz. Their Fine Project, of Rescuing Du-Mont, with
Fifteen Hundred, or Three Thousand Horse, he adds, as if he were playing Booty,
these Words, viz. This is all Stuff, and in the Opinion of every body, that
Understands any thing of War, was next to an Impossibility. And he Confesses in
the next Line, that Du-Mont could not see throw this, which he Acknowledges was
very strange, because (says he) the Evenues of his Soul were all Intoxicated,
and Shut up, with the Impression of Twenty Thousand Livers. This is Stuff
indeed! And this is the Defense of the Grandvallian Plot! Which I should
believe some Malicious Jacobite had Wrote, to Expose us still more, But that I
find two Remarkable Passages, of the L. B. of S. which I suppose he would not
Discover to any of them. The First is p. 19. where he tells of a Proposition
made to K. William, by the Means of the B. of S. to Kill the French King. But
that he, the said Bishop, Started up Immediately, and said, be thought the King
was too well known, for any to Dare to come with such a Proposition; he hoped,
he himself had been also so well known, that none should have made it by him,
he was Sorry a Promise was given of Safety; but he bid the Rogue be gone
immediately: And that K. William Ordered the Bishop, to be sure, to Seize upon
him, that had made the Proposal, if ever he could set Eye on him again.

The Jacobites wonder, if K. William, or the Bishop, had so Great a Mind to
find out this Man, how it came to be kept a Secret all this time: That the
Bishop, sure, must know something of the Man, and some Marks of him, with whom
he had had such Familiar Conversation. And never to make an Enquiry after him!
Though the Bishop tells that K. William was so Earnest in it, and looked on
Propositions of this kind, with so much Horror, that he thought, that which on
all other Occasions was the most Sacred with him, I mean, his Word, did not
bind him in this. And though he had given Promise of Safety to that Man, yet he
would even break his Word, the Most Sacred thing to him in the World, to have
him Taken. This is, say the Jacobites, to make us believe, that no Man could
make such a Proposition to K. William, and hope to Live, though it were against
the French King himself.

And yet, p. 2^. He tells of some that, when he (the P. of Orange) came First
into England, Proposed to him, Proceeding against K. James's Person. And how he
Rejected the Advices given him at Windsor, when he had K. James in his Hands,
but that he said, whatever he might do in the way of War, he could not bring
himself to do any thing Personally against him. Yet we heard of no Body
Punished for such Proposals.

In the same p. 20/21. We have another Proposition made to K. William in
Ireland, and sent by the B. of S. which was, to send a Ship to Dublin, and
Declare for K. James, and then K. James himself, was to come on Board, and so
they were to Run away with him, to Spain or Italy. When K. William heard all
this, (says the Author) he said it looked Plausible, and he verily believed it
would take.

I bessech you, Sir, let some more Care be taken, of those who are Employed to
Write in Defense of the Government, that they do not Expose our King at this
Ridiculous Rate. Nay more, to Load him so Odiously as this Author does, p. 22.
with the Suspicion of having Ordered the Marquess de Louvois, the Great
Minister of France, and Father of the Marquess Barbesieux, to be Poisoned.
Which this Author there says, the Marquess of Barbesieux gave, as a Reason to
Grandval, for his Engaging into that Plot of Assassinating K. William. It Is
True, this Author says, it was but a Suspicion. But that leaves it still a
Suspicion. And is no small Reflection upon K. William; as likewise, o have
heard so many Proposals for Assassinating his Father, and the French King,
without any Punishment Inflicted upon any of the Ruffians.

The Jacobites will make use of these Innuendoes, much to his Disadvantage. Nor
will the Bishop of S. his Flagrant Harangues Satisfy, without better
Vindication, as to Matter of Fact.

But as to his Lordships Great Tenderness, and Starting at the Proposal of
Killing the French King (for which you have his own Word) the Jacobites know a
Passage nearer Home, which is better Vouched, and, they say, does set the
Meekness of that Prelate in a Clearer Light, and that is: When K. James was
Seized at Feversham, by the Mobb, Mr. Napleton, (who had been very Active in
this Revolution, and was one of those, who, under K. James's Window at
Feversham, Read the P. of Orange's Declaration, and is one of the Excepted
Persons in K. James's Declaration) came up to London, to give an Account to the
P. of Orange, of what they had Acted and Done at Feversham. And at the Prince's
Court, Meeting Dr. B -- t, who seemed very Inquisitive to be Informed what had
Passed, and amongst other things; Mr. Napleton telling him, that the Mobb were
so Barbarously Rude to his Majesty in the House, to which the King was First
brought, that his Majesty Resolved to go to some other House in Town, where he
hoped he might be better Secured, from the Barbarity of the Mobb, and called
upon Sir Edward Hales to come along with him, and Declared that he would not go
without him; and that, as the King was going to the Door of the Room, the Mobb
very Outragiously lifted up their Clubbs, Staves, and what Weapons they had;
and Mr. Napleton told the Doctor, that he verily believed, had not he Stopped the
King from going, they would certainly have Knocked out his Majesty's Brains. To
whom the Doctor Replied, Why did you Stop him? He Repeating the same Reason,
the Doctor several times Reiterated. Why did you Stop him? And that with an
Emphasis, and a Brow, which fully Satisfied the Gentleman of the Doctor's Good
Intentions toward his Majesty. And that he himself was like to have but Cold
thanks, as it Proved, notwithstanding of all he had Acted so Vigourously
against K. James, for not knowing to Improve such an opportunity to the Utmost.

He was not so well Read, as the Dr. in that Maxim, which this Author charges
upon the Court-Divines of France, p. 29. viz. That an Action in it self Morally
Ill, becomes Good, if the Intention be to serve the King, or Extirpate Heresy.

It is strange indeed, Sir, that this past the Imprimatur without some farther
Explanation: Because it Opens the Crying Objection, which the Jacobites have
against Us, even in their own Words, viz. That we Dispense with the Fifth
Command (which none Deny to be Moral) to serve K. William, and Extirpate what
we call Heresy. For all People upon the Earth, do, even from the Light of
Nature, think it an Immoral and most Wicked thing for Children to Rise against
their Parents. And have we any other Excuse for it (say the Jacobites) except
to Support K. William, and what we call The Protestant Religion? And does not
this make That Action, which is in its Self Morally Ill, become Good? They Ask
us whether Disobedience to Parents, Abstracted from such Circumstances as the
Present Case, be not in it Self Morally Ill? And whether the Present
Circumstances do not make it become Good? And then, whether this be not, in
Terms, that Wicked Casuistical Doctrine, Charged upon the Franch Court Divines,
to Patronize the very Worsh of Actions, as this Author Speaks, ibid. Page. 29.

The Jacobites think it is not more Observable, which is Related of K. Charles
I's taking Notice of the Properness of the 27. Matt. the Lesson for the 30.
Jan. to his then Circumstances, Than that the 13. Mark. which Foretells
Childrens Rising up against their Parents, should be the Lesson for the 13.
Feb. on which Day K. James's Children took Possession of his Crown. In that
Year (1688.) it proved to be Ash Wednesday, when the Curses were Read against
Disobedient Children, against him that Smites his Neighbor Secretly, that
Removes his Neighbors Landmark, that Misleadeth Foolish People with Fair
Pretenses, and makes the Blind to go out of his Way, against all that are
Slanderers, and Unmerciful. Upon the same Day ( viz. 13. Feb. 91/92) Glen-Coe,
and his Clan were Massacred. This was Observed before: But as to the Present
Argument, the Jacobites make this Use of it, as an Objection against us, that
if all these Immoras Actions, which are Cursed from the Mouth of God, can be so
Sanctified by their being intended for the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion, as that our English Court Divines should usher K. W. and Q. M.
without any stop or stay, directly from the Banqueting House, (after taking
Possession of their Fathers Crown, Removing Landmarks, Slandering, Smiting
Secretly, etc.) to the Chapper at White Hall, and there Read over before them,
all these Actions they had done, without thinking that any of the Curses
belonged to them, or to themselves for so Officiating, and Concurring therein:
If this Change of Evil to Good, can be wrought (say the Jacobites) by the
Intention of English Course Divines; What Grounds have they to Quarrel with the
French Court, or Court of Rome Divines, with those of Mahomet, or the
Inquisition, of Corban, or the Covenant?

Among all whom, the Jacobites say, that Lord Shaftsbury, and the Re-publican
Cabal, could not find a Casuist so well fitted as the 'foresaid Dr. B -- t,
whom they chose to State the Case to K. Charles II. for Divorcing his Queen
Katherine, in order to Defeat the Succession of the D. of York, which the
Doctor did Learnedly State, and Resolve in the Affirmative, for the good of the
Protestant Religion, which Case the Jacobites say, they have, and perhaps, in
the Dr's own Hand, to produce upon Occasion. But though this Resolution,
otherwise Vn-natural, and Extirpate Heresy; yet, by the Intention to serve the
King, and Exeirpate Heresy; yet, that King had too much Honor to be thus
Served, and Rejected the Proposal with Disdain, and such Thanks as the Doctor
Deserved, for setting his Hand to so Honorable and Religious a Project.

Now, after all this, to Cry out upon K. J. for acting so Unnatural a part, as
this Author words it, p. 25. That is, (say the Jacobites) to seek to Dispossess
his own Daughter, and her Husband, his Nephew; to have no more Compassion for
his own Flesh and Blood --

Sir, You see how we Expose our selves, by the Indiscretion of our Advocates:
and these Reflections on Grandval have led us farther into the Briars.

The only Salvo I can find for Us, is in p. 18. Where it is said. That, in the
printed Account, there are many things relating to this Conspiracy (of
Grandval) omitted, which his Majesty, for some Reasons of State, or perhaps out
of a Principle of Inimitable Generosity, has thought fit not to make Public.

Sir, these are the Things we want, and the Jacobites desire; And I beseech you
do not spare them, for you see they do not spare us. Tell out the whole Truth,
conceal Nothing, out of Modesty, that may Convince, or else Confound them; for
they are Confident, That all this is mere Vapor and Brag; and that we have no
more to say against them, than we have said already, and which they have
Confuted, every word of it, as they pretend.

Our Chief Dependence is now upon your Pen: Therefore your SILENCE will CONFIRM
these Jacobites, and make them Insult; will Stagger many, who are Well-inclin'd
toward Us, and give up our Cause for this Generation, and perhaps, for Ever.
So, expecting your Answer,

I Kiss your Hands.
Advertisement.
PAGE 68. the last Paragr. it is said by the Jacobite [ I cannot Imagine why
the Parliament does not take Notice] viz. of Gilbert's Pastoral, and other
Pamphlets, setting up the Title of Conquest.

This is therefore, to let the Reader know, that that part of this Discourse
was Printed last Summer. But the strange Difficultys of the Press have Delayed
it so long, that some things grow Stale, and there is Opportunity to add some
Later Occurrances, which, if all had been done together, might have been
Disposed to better Advantage. But Excuses signify nothing. You must take them
now as they are.

And the Jacobites say, since they have Guessed so Right, as to the Fate of
that Pastoral, Wrote by the Bitterest Enemy to K. James, on purpose to
Overthrow his Title, and Dis-inherrit his Son: This looks, say they, like the
Prognostication of Zeresh, and the Wise Friends of Haman ( Esther. 6.13.) that
if K. James, and the P. of Wales, are of the Seed of the Stuarts, who ought to
Inherit the Crown, before whom thou have begun to Fall, thou shall not Prevail
against them, but shall surely Fall before them.

You have Fallen more Fatally (say the Jacobites) by the Vindication of your
self, which you have Published since the Burning of your Pamphlet, than by what
you have Suffered in Effigy in Pallace-Yard. For that you have, out of your
own Mouth, given your self the Lie, and Overthrown all the Foundations which
your self had set up, to support this Change of Government, and Justify the
Part you have Acted in it.

The Defense you have made, is by Re-printing your Measures of Submission to
the Supreme Authority, with a Preface, wherein you Accusc the House of Commons,
for Judging you Unjustly, viz. without Reading or Considering that Book which
they Condemned to be Burned, or the Principles Contained in it. In which you
are so positive as to aver in these Words, viz. I do not think it possible for
any, who will give themselves the Trouble to Read them, to Retain any bad
Impressions, etc.

Upon this Head, Good Doctor, the Jacobites do mind you, that in this very
Tract you have (upon this Occasion) Reprinted, (your Measures of Obedience)
you set up the People as the Original of Government, and Consequently their
Representatives, as the Competent Judges of the Maladministration of their
King, with Authority to Depose him, etc. And yet you Accuse them of Injustice,
in your particular, and appeal from their Sentence; which you think sufficient
to Fore-Fault the King, and Absolve your Oaths of Allegience, etc.

Psalms. 9.15,16. The Ungodly is Trapped in the Work of his own Hands: In the
same Net which they hid privily, is their own Foot taken.

Psalms. 59.12. For the Sin of their Mouth, and for the Words of their Lips,
they shall be taken in their Pride; and why? Their Preaching is of Cursing and
Lies.

Psalms. 64.8.9. Yea, their own Tongues shall make them Fall; insomuch that
whosoever sees them, shall Laugh them to Scorn.

And all Men that see it, shall say, this has GOD done; for they shall
perceive that it is His Work.

All this, Doctor, they Apply to you, likewise, as to the Birth of the P. of
Wales, which, at the Close of your Measures of Obedience, you call a Base
Imposture; and yet they all know, that you your self often Prayed Publicly for
the P. of Wales, by Name, in the Chapel of her Royal Highness at the Hague,
after all the Reports which you, and others spread abroad of that Imposture.

And since you could thus Banter God Almighty to His Face, they think it not
strange, that you should Revile what your self now acknowledge to be the
Original of Government, and only Foundation of the Present Establishment. Being
Beaten by Jack Catch from your Title of Conquest.

Though the Jacobites did neither Need, nor Desire his Help, to Overthrow your
pretty Distinction of Conquering the King, but not the Kingdom, which you
Repeat, and Insist upon in your Vindicatory Preface: And would Persuade all
your Clergy and their Flocks, to Pawn their Souls upon it, by taking the Oaths
upon that Foundation: Which is the Theme in your Pastoral Letter. And to which
the Jacobites Reply briefly thus.

That if Conquering a King, gives the Conqueror a Right to that Authority which
the King had, then, by Conquering the King, he Gains a Right to be King of the
Conquered Kings's Kingdom. And it has been thus understood in all Historys, and
Conquests that we Read of.

And this is Really a Conquering of the Kingdom, by Conquering of the King, who
is the Head, and therefore Implys the Conquest of the Body.

But, on the other Hand, if the Conquest of a King, gives the Conqueror no
Right to Succeed in his Authority: Then, no Argument can be Drawn from the
Conquest of a King, for Transferring our Allegiance to the Conqueror. Which is
the only Use the Doctor intends by this Distinction in his Pastoral Letter, for
the Cenquest of the King, Cannot otherwise be any Reason, for taking an Oath of
Allegiance to the Conqueror.

But I will not Detain you any longer, with the Jacobites Argument upon this
Point, they have Vindicated it in Print, to which you may have Recourse.

Have Patience with me, only to tell one Circumstance, which I forgot, of what
the Jacobites Urge, in the Case of my Lord Preston, set down, p. 101, 102. And
that is, That when his Lordship Refused to be an Evidence, to save his Estate,
the 'bovesaid Reis-Efendi, insulting over him, in Discourse with a Noble
Person, who well Remembers it, said, we will see how finely my Lord Preston can
Starve!

Which Sweet and Christian Temper, the Jacobites say, he Learned, at least
Improved, under the Pastoral Care of the Religious Mufti, who had so well
Instructed Vnthinking Napleton, but met Here with an Apter and more Discerning
Scholar: Who, like himself, though not so Early, Renounced the Doctrine of the
Cross, for the sake of that Religion, which is Propagated by the Sword. And, as
True Renegades, show Zeal, for Joy of their Conversion.

These (the Jacobites say) are Prodegies, and Portend Ruin and Revolution, like
Earthquakes.

Concerning which, I beg leave to add a Word to what I have said before, upon
Occasion of a Fresh Lamentable Instance; which is, that Astonishing
Earthquake, which happned the 11th. JANUARY 92/93. in Malta, and in Sicily, in
the last of which, as our Gazzet tells us, about 150000. Souls Perished, and 37
Cities and Towns Destroyed, some of them to that Degree, as not to have a House
left standing, as in Catanea, the seat of the University, in which alone near
20000 Persons Perished; and the Famous City of Syracuse, greatly Renowned in
Ancient History, has subsisted above Two Thousand Years, to Perish in this
Earthquake; and the Hideous Bellowings of Mount Aetna, which, our last News
said, did then continue, Terrified those who are left Alive, to that Degree, as
to Force them to Quit their Houses, and Fly from a new Eruption. This was
Terrible!

But the strange Giddiness which, as I told, Accompanied our Earthquake in
England, has something in it, though not so Visibly Dreadful, yet, perhaps more
Extraordinary and Remarkable than that in Sicily; which the Jacob. think does
point to the present Epidemical Disease of England: They have a Proverb in
Italy, viz. He that Cheats me Once, it is his Fault; But if he Cheat me Twice,
it is my Fault. Was it ever heard (say the Jacobites) that a Nation should be
Twice Cheated, in the same Age, and mostly by the same Persons, and upon the
same Pretenses, to Rise up against their King, and Cut one another Throats;
and after being Penitent, and keeping an Aniversary Humiliation for the Murder
of the Father, and Damning all those Rebellious Principles, and Specious
Pretenses, for taking Arms against their King; That they should again take up
the same Pretenses, against the Son, Depose him, and Murder one another
afresh, as if they had never Bled before, for Pursuing the same Wicked
Principles! And that they cannot, or will not, yet see this; but Perstst in it
Obstinatly, and Desperately against a Power, which they Confess too Strong for
them, which is growing Stronger, and they Weaker every Campaign, and which
Courts them to Peace, upon Just and Honorable Terms, is such an Infatuation
(say the Jacobites) as we were very properly minded of, by the Turn of our
Brain, in the Late Earthquake.

I will not Enter upon the Dispute of Natural Causes: There are such for Wars,
for Pestilence, for Inundations: Some Assign them for the Deluge, and the Final
Judgment by Fire; But yet this hinders them not to be Judgments, nor us to take
Notice of them as such; and therefore I hope it will not be thought
Superstition to Pray, that if GOD be Visiting the Islands, Great Britain, and
Ireland, may not follow the Fate of Jamaica, Malta, and Sicily: But that, by
our timely Repentance, we may Avert the Just Judgments of GOD, which seem Ready
at the Door, and of which we have had such Premonitions, as will Render us
Inexcusable, if we take not Warning, but Persist still in our Wickedness. Which
GOD, of His Mercy, forbid, And Grant us Peace, with Truth, for CHRIST JESUS
Sake. Amen.

The Principal ERRATA.
PAGE. 3. Line. 15. For is, Read are. p. 33. l. 18. r. should not. p. 34. l.
32. r. But woe to. p. 41. l. 30. r. a short turn. p. 46. l. 31. r. Retort. p.
47. l. 8. r. Ferine. p. 62. l. 5. f. into. r. in to. l. 22. f. Test. r. Taste.
l. 27. f. Angles. r. Angels. p. 67. last line. r. the Good Woman have leave. p.
82. l. 23. dele the. p. 94. l. 13, r. Seer. p. 87. l. 8. r. and says, he did.
p. 90. f. lost. r. Cost. p. 104. l. 4. r. Foraigners. p. 109. l. 14. r.
Avenues. p. 110. antepenult. r. to have.

I should have put among the Erratas, some few Repctitions I found upon Reading
this over, at its Finishing, which were Occasioned by the long Delay of this;
and adding some later Occurrances as they happened, which were Occasionally
sent to the Press, without Reading or Remembering what was Wrote before.


