DARY'S Miscellanies Examined; And some of his Fundamental Errors DETECTED.

BY Authority of Ancient and Modern MATHEMATICIANS.

The Ancient: Euclid, Diophantus, Apollonius and Archimedes.

The Modern: Xylander, Bachetus, Stevin, Albert Girard, Torricellius and
Regeomontanus.

To which is added, A Task for Mr. Dary of his own setting.

By Robert Anderson.

London, Printed for Philip Brooksby, next to the Golden Ball, near the
Hospital gate, in West-Smithfield. 1670.

DARY'S Miscellanies EXAMINED. And some of his Fundamental Errors DETECTED.
WHilst those miscellanies were printing, I met with two of Master Darys
friends together, at their office in Holborn and they related to me that Master
Dary had a Book in the press, in the Preface whereof he had a quarrel with me,
and that he was resolved to vex me; my answer was, that if he gave me bad
language I would lay it under my feet; but if he gave bad mathematics I would
return it to him again; therefore, all those calumnies, that bad and scurrilous
language, (for such are their only demonstrations) either by him or by any of
his crew in that preface given, or may be hereafter given in any of their
writings, I shall take no further notice of, but shall ever lay them as dirt
under foot; but I shall prosecute a close conviction of their erroneous
principles in Geometry. That preface those authors divides into two parts, the
first against Stereometrical Propositions, the second in defense of the ART of
practical gaging; and as they have little to say against the first, they have
as little to say in defense of the latter, but in both I shall easily subvert
their crippled arguments. To the first,

In the first page of the preface, Master Dary has it thus; in the tail of
which Book there is a whole broad side. Here he is outrageous because he was so
perfectly confuted in the tail of the guide to the young gager: truly, as it
was the confutation of the ART of practical gaging; it deserved no better
preferment, than to be put in the tail of the young gagers guide: however, if I
find Master Dary's understanding improved by my instructions there given, in
these his Miscellanies; I shall to encourage him, commend him in the tail of
this.

In the second page of the Preface, he has these words, the word frustum
pyramide I cannot understand, But if he had said frustum of a pyramid, etc.
this complaint may consist of three parts, first, frustum pyramide; second, I
cannot understand; third, frustum of a pyramide; if we compare the first with
the last, we shall find them both of one signification, for frustum signifies a
broken piece, therefore it is as well sense to say a broken pyramid, as to say
a piece of a pyramid; one familiar example for many, a broken knife, as to say
a piece of a knife. Such expressions are brief and well understood, both
signifying the same thing, and he himself using the same expressions in the 31
and 32. 89 page, of the Art of practical gaging: thus, is the content of the
frustum pyramid, and in 29 page of that Book of Art, you have it thus, Master
Michael Dary, an ingenious Artist and practiced gager: when it is the frustum
of a Cylindriod: here we find him a giving himself a good character; and then
telling us of a frustum of a Cylindriod, and in page 32 of that Book of Art,
thus, to cut this Cylindriod, here we may observe this ingenious artist, how in
one page he calls it a frustum of a Cylindriod, and immediately he calls the
same solid a Cylindriod, so he makes no difference betwixt the part and the
whole. Further, as for those mighty words of art, to wit, Cylindroid, prismoid
and peripetasma; I shall say only this, Often have I known some men of no great
parts,
Stuff up their mouths with mighty words of arts.
For his 2. complaint, that is, I cannot understand; it troubles me to hear it,
yet I see his understanding mend a little, as we shall observe hereafter. In
the same page, he is angry because that irregular frustum is cut into so many
parts, if that do not please his worship he may take one of the other ways
which cuts that solid into fewer parts; for there are four ways every one less
work than other. But the gunner and his crew must be a shooting though but with
pot-guns.

In the third page, our gunner gives the seventh prop. of the 5 of Diophantus a
Broadside; thus, the stress of his argument is weak and infirm. Though we
should grant Z equal to, it is yet to demonstrate that Z is 3 and A 5. A by
supposition was an unit, then reduce them to one denomination, and that
denomination being rejected, Z will be equal to 3, and A equal to 5* this he
looks upon as an hard demonstration, which I am not bound to tell him how to
do, says he. Further, he dwindles to his Reader, hoping for glory and would
know, Whether this proposition has any relation at all to gaging. I answer
yes, and argue thus, numbers have relation to gaging, this Proposition is of
Numbers; therefore this Proposition has relation to Gaging. Again, triangles
have relation to gaging, this proposition is of triangles; therefore, this
proposition has relation to gaging. This prop. which he quarrels with, is the
7. of 5. of Diophantus, as is cited in the 106 page of Stereo. Prop. and seeing
he has so much immodesty as to say his arguments are weak and infirm, I shall
set down the text as Bachetus has it. Esto primus 1 N. secundus unitatum
quotlibet, puta 1. and est productus eorum multiplicatione 1 N. summa vero
quadratorum est 1 Q + 1. add 1 N. fit 1 Q + 1 N + 1 aequalis quadrato. Esto
latus ejus 1 N - 2. fit quadratus 1 Q + 4 - 4 N. aequalis 1 Q + 1 N + 1. and
fit 1 N. ad positiones, Erit primus, secundus 5/5: and abjecto denominatore,
erit primus 3. secundus 5. and postulatis respondent. So then I have these
witnesses on my side, 1. Diophantus the author of the proposition, 2. Xylander.
3. Bachetus. 4. Stevin. 5. Albert Girard. Those four commentators upon
Diophantus every one of them setting it as above. 6. Truth it self, and it will
prevail. So then, if Mr. Dary cannot bring better authority then these on his
side for the stress of his argument; I shall conclude, that pride and ignorance
is baffled; and where he says I fling dirt in the face of Van Schooten, I may
very well say he flingeth dirt in the face of these 5 authors, yea and in the
face of truth it self. Further, had this 7. and 8. prop. of the 5 of Diop been
observed by the proposer and resolver of that question, it is very likely it
would not have been proposed by the one, nor resolved by the other; however,
what I said concerning Van-Schooten and des Carts is true and just, therefore
no dirt. In the fourth page, our gunner has more fireworks, to wit, his note
for progressions is invalid and of no force. For says he, there is no need of
unity for the first term of this progression. My answer is, that note for
progression is of force and truth, and unity of use; thus, the question it self
requires whole numbers; the seventh of the fifth of Dioph. finds whole numbers;
therefore greathan an unit; therefore well limited.

The second part, in defense of the Art of Practical gaging, and it begins in
the fifth page, and there he tells his Reader how he has been commended by
diverse artists in this City. Here he appeals to men as ignorant, as himself is
vain glorious. In the 6 page he flingeth dirt in the face of the printer, thus,
in which I see there are many press-faults; that is false, they are the segment
makers faults, for the segments are the complement of one to the other to
100000 etc. therefore no printers faults. In the sixth and seventh pages, he
shows how to calculate a table of segments, and here his understanding mends
a little, for he works pretty well since the last time I taught him; so then,
as one mends in his Rules, so I hope the other will mend in his calculation,
(with that instruction I formerly gave him) so we may expect a better table of
segments some time or other. In the 8. page he again dwindles and would fain
insinuate into the affection of his Reader; and make him believe that I did not
know that there was a third etc. differences in the table of segments, to speak
the truth, that table of segments was calculated so falsely that the first
differences did manifestly show it; further, If Mr. Dary had known that way, or
any other way better to examine Tables by, before he published those segments;
more shame to him to publish such false tables, without examination. In the 9
and 10. pa. the Gunner has fire and gunpowder, viz. know ye not that the Table
for wine, ale and beer, are capable but only of the first and second
differences. If so, more shame to the Calculator that they have more diff. and
they so much confusedly put. As for that Book entitled A guide to the young
gager, I knew not the man nor heard of the Book until a great part of it was
printed, neither did I see one line of that part of it, till it was publicly
exposed to sale. Thus have I passed through this fiery conflict, and have not
heard the bounce of one gun, nor received any harm, which makes me conclude
our gunner and his crew are as bad marks men, as they are segment makers, for
he promi^ed at the beginning of his preface to charge his guns and pepper me.
Thus have I considered him as a Gunner with his Crew; now will I consider him
as a Geometer, with his famous Companions.

These famous men, whose true descent does run
From aged Neptune, and the glorious Sun.
AN EXAMINATION OF Dary's Miscellanies.
IN the first page of the Preface, he says, Most whereof have lain by me many
years: If so, I hope very true.

1 In the second page of the Preface, says he, For although the sides thereof
be continued, they would never be included or terminated in one point, as the
Pyramide is; that is, the sides of a Pyramide are included in one point, which
I deny, thus; a point has no part, by 1 def. 1 Euclid. A Superfices (for such
are the sides of a Pyramide) have length and breadth 5 def. 1 Euclid. That
which has no part, to include that which has length and breadth, is absurd;
that is a lumping point for an able Anylist.

2 In the fourteenth page, says he, The 3 Angles of any Spherical Triangle
being given, there are likewise three sides of another Spherical Triangle
given, whose Angles are equal to the sides of the former Triangle. Here the
Gentlemen forgot to complement, and I presume in the next they will forget all
good manners. Further, the sum of the sides of any spherical triangle, are less
then two semi-circles, Reg. 39* of 3. The sum of the three angles of any
spherical triangle, are greater then two right angles, but less then six, Reg.
49 of 3. therefore the Rule is false, except the sum of the three sides be
greater then two right angles; but the Rule is set down general, therefore a
general error.

3 In page 21. we have it thus; If a sphere be by a plain touched, and the eye
be placed at the center of the sphere, then a right line infinitely extended
from the eye to any assigned point in the spherical surface, shall project the
assigned point upon the plain. Here the Radius of the Sphere is taken to be
infinite, for, says he, then a right line infinitely extended from the eye to
any assigned point in the spherical surface; but the plain is without the
sphere, therefore beyond infiniteness it self, which is absurd: however this
proves them to be infinite Projectors.

4 In page 29. at the 18th it is thus; If a sphere be enclosed in a cylinder,
and that cylinder be cut with plains parallel to its base, then the intercepted
rings of the cylinder are equal to the intercepted surfaces of the respective
segments of the sphere; that is false: For* Hemisphaerii superficies aequalis
est superficiei curvae cylindri eadem ipsi basim, and eadem altitudinem
habentis, says Torricellius at the 18. Prop. de sphaera, and solidis
sphaeralibus lib. prim. and as the whole, so the parts, by the 19. Prop. of the
same. Here we have a combat betwixt Torricellius and our Geometers: First, they
say the intercepted rings of the cylinder are equal to the intercepted surfaces
of the respective segments of the sphere. Torricellius proves, that the
intercepted superfices of the cylinder, are equal to the intercepted superfices
of the respective segments of the sphere. 2. These Geometers say, if a sphere
be enclosed in a cylinder, here we may make the Diameters of the base of the
cylinder of any magnitude, greater then the diameter of the sphere, and yet the
sphere be enclosed* Torricellius proves, that the cylinder and hemisphere must
have the same base. 3. These Geometers regard it not, whether the sphere and
cylinder are upright or inclining. Torricellius by construction makes them
upright. Thus do these Geometers make solid superfices, for a ring is solid.

5 In page 33. they set down a rule for the sphere, and conclude it will hold
in the spheroid; this rule will also hold if it were the Frustum of a Spheroid,
putting d^d equal to the fact of the right angled conjugates in the base. That
is false, by 21 of 1 of Apollonius, and 31 and 33 of Archimedes of conoid and
spheroid; for the diameter of the base one way, or the right angled conjugates
of the base the other, with the height of either, will not limit a spheroid, as
the diameter of the base and the height does a sphere. This very rule Crowns
all their endeavors; for before they had made a point bigger then any
superfice, a line longer then infiniteness, a solid superfice, but now they are
come to an unlimited solid.

6 In page 39. they write thus; But if such a solid have not its Zons made by
circles or ellipses, but by four flat sides at right angles to the foresaid
conjugates, then it is a prismoid; nevertheless, the rules before prescribed,
hold to all intents and purposes: that is false to all intents and purposes at
the first appearance; for if two right lines be at right angles, and they be at
right angles with four plains, those plains will be the 4 sides of a
Parallelepipedon, by the 2, 3, and 30 def. of 11 Euclid. a Parallelepipedon
being calculated gradually, can have but a first difference, and not a second
and third: But this is like the rest of these Famous Geometers works. Our
Master Geometer tells his Reader thus, Most whereof have lain by me many
years. And in the Title Page he says, they are brief Collections from diverse
Authors: If so, why so many Fundamental Errors? Further, seeing M. Dary, and
his Companions will assert any thing, and demonstrate nothing, except they are
required in print; therefore I desire them to demonstrate these six following
assertions of their own, and and shall call it

A Task for Mr. Dary of his own setting.
To wit:

1 The sides of a Pyramide being 32000. I desire Mr. Dary to give one point to
include that superfice, as he asserts in page 2.

2 The three sides of a Spherical Triangle, being 6, 8, and 10 degrees, their
sum 24 degrees, I desire Mr. Dary to give a Spherical Triangle, whose sum of
the three angles are 24 degrees, as he asserts in page 14.

3 In the Gnomonick Projection, the Radius of the Sphere being infinite, and
the arch from the touch point to the assigned point be 30 degrees, I desire Mr.
Dary to extend a line from the center of that sphere, by the assigned point, to
the touching plain, that is further then infiniteness, as he asserts in page 21.

4 If a Cylinder and Hemisphere be of one height, but the diameter of the base
of the Cylinder be greater then, or equal to the diameter of that Sphere, and
they concentrick, this Hemisphere is enclosed in that Cylinder; let that
Hemisphere and Cylinder be cut with Plains parallel to their bases I desire Mr.
Dary to prove, that those intercepted rings of the Cylinder (that is solid
rings) are equal to the intercepted surfaces of the respective segments of the
Sphere, as he asserts in page 29

5 In a Spheroid, let 6 be the perpendicular height of the Frustum, 8 the
diameter of the base, when cut by a Plain at right angles with the Axis; let 10
and 12 be the right angled conjugates in the base (as he calls them) when the
cutting Plain is parallel to the axis, the altitude of the Frustum 4. I desire
Mr. Dary to give one example in each, if but one; if more then one, to give
them all; that is, to prove it a limited Proposition, as he asserts in page 33.

6 If two right lines, to wit, one 6, the other 8, be at right angles, and
these two lines be at right angles with four Plains, the height of these plains
may be 12. those will be the limits of a solid, which Euclid names a
Parallelepipedon, at the 30 def. of 11. I desire Mr. Dary to prove such a solid
to be a Prismoid, and to have second and third differences, as he asserts in
page 39.

Now to commend him.
THose six Assertions of Mr. Dary's, may well be termed A Task for him for six
days; which Assertions being performed according to the Rules of Geometry, I
shall ever conclude Mr. Dary to be great, yea greater; nay the greatest
Geometer of all mortal men.

But if Mr. Dary, with the help of his Companions, cannot or will not fairly
demonstrate these their Assertions, but still cavil and quarrel it out. I may
well conclude, his or their Geometry is not, nor will not be worth taking
notice of for the future; for that Micellanea Riff-raff having lain by him many
years; and we may be sure, often thumb'd over with much care and prudence, like
an ingenious Artist, and a practiced Gager; being his whole stock of
Mathematical knowledge, is now made public, to prove himself what he is, to
wit, a Geometer full of errors, and a Mathematician altogether without
demonstration; therefore I shall employ my idle time better then in confuting
such unwise ridiculous Assertions; for this we may be sure of* that whatever
Mr. Dary writes, will be full of Fundamental Errors.

Although I am well assured, that whatever Mr. Dary writes will be so full of
Fundamental Errors, that it will not be worth taking notice of: yet seeing one
deeply swears by his Maker he would have us never agree, because it will be
good sport for them; and another of Mr. Dary's friends is desirous to see Paper
Battles, therefore I shall the rather desist: However, if I take pen in hand
again, I shall be as ready to bring them into the Lift, by examining their
works, as they are desirous that we should make them sport. Further, Mr. Dary
has related to several of my acquaintance, that those his Miscellanies were
published as a snare for me; and one of his Crew has told me to my face, that
he could be revenged on me, and never appear in it himself: I asked him how; He
answered, he could hires a stab to be given for a very small matter: My answer
to these two, and the rest of them is, I value the snares of one, the stab of
the other, and the envy of the rest, no more then the dirt of my shoes; my
seconds shall be Euclid, Diophantus, Apollonius and Archimedes, and my Weapons
Truth and Demonstration.

FINIS.

