Imprimatur,

Ab. Campion, Rmo Dno Arch. Car. a Sacris Domest.

Feb. 12' 167^ Ex AEdib. Lamb.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE Divine Dreams MENTIONED IN SCRIPTURE, TOGETHER With
the Marks and Characters by which they might be distinguished from vain
Delusions. In a Letter to Monsieur Gaches, by Moses Amyraldus.

Translated out of French, by Ia. Loud, Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-head in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1676.

TO THE Right HONORABLE JOHN, Earl of Bridgewater, Viscount Brackley, Baron of
Elsemere, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Bucks, and one of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD, THE first Fruits, by the Law of Moses, were due to God, yet is it no
violation now of the Laws of heaven, in some proportion, to show our just
esteem of those who are so much like it here on earth: Hence it is that I
presume to Dedicate these my first endeavors of this kind to Your Lordships
Patronage and Protection; and I could wish that the first productions of Art
and Study were like those of Nature, that is, the best and most perfect in
their kind, that so the Present might more resemble it is Patron.

I do not present this to Your Honor, as if you stood in need of Translations,
for in this respect You perhaps are the most improper Person in the Kingdom to
make such Dedications to, being Your self so Great a Master, not only of the
French, but also of the more Ancient and Learned Languages. But I look upon my
self under some obligation of justice, to return that to Your acceptance, which
was the result of some few hours, which I should have counted stolen from Your
Lordships Service, but that such is your Candor and benign Temper, such Your
great love and affection to all commendable Studies, that You and they seem to
have the same Ends, and the same Interests; thus what ever time is employed in
them, You are pleased to look upon it as spent in Your own Service.

But this is not all the right You may justly challenge to this Translation,
Your Title to it seems yet more particular; wherein such was your Favor and
Condescension, that, as it would be Ingratitude to conceal, so would it be
almost Arrogance to acknowledge them; wherein (pardon the pride of the
expression) I had the Honor to be instructed by Your Lordship in the French
Tongue; You being pleased, not only to peruse, but in many places to Correct
it, so that I cannot now so properly challenge any thing therein my own, as the
Imperfections.

And now I hope you will pardon this my innocent Ambition, if I desire to
publish my Gratitude, and that sense of my Obligations, which is too big to be
confined in a private breast.

How acceptable this Treatise may be to the World, I know not, yet this I know,
that I should have sufficiently obliged the Age, if in the Dedication I had
given it Your Lordship's just Character; this being the most probable way to
provoke men to the love and imitation of Virtue, not to represent it in Idea
and Speculation only, but as it appears both more amiable in it self and more
prevalent on others, when thus incorporated in the lives and practices of Noble
Persons: But this though a true and just Relation, would be as uneasy for You
to hear, as it would be difficult, yea above the power of my Pen to perform:
Thus among other things, Your own Temper concurs in this, to make You
Heroically Virtuous, that is, a follower of Virtue merely for Virtues sake,
since Your modesty will not endure the common and cheap Reward of a due Praise
and just Commendation.

But yet I could wish that I had not so much to plead for the seasonableness of
the Discourse, in an Age where Infidelity on the one hand, and Fanatical
Enthusiasm on the other, seem to divide the greater part of the World; where
some men look upon all Divine Revelations to be mere Dreams, others mistake
their mere Dreams for Divine Revelations: Now what more proper and seasonable
in these circumstances, then that which is the design of this Discourse, that
is, to evidence the Grounds and Reasons why we receive those that are truly
Divine, and reject the vain pretenses of others?

And to whom could the Dedication be more suitable then to one whose Principles
and Practices at once confirm and adorn the Religion you profess; whose
well-settled judgment, and understanding of Your Religion in general, and Your
great affection to the Church of England in particular, render You equally
distant from the Superstition of the Romanists, and the Novelties of later
Enthusiasts?

My Lord, I shall not any further by a tedious address misemploy those precious
minutes, which are usually spent either in Your serious and private Studies, or
in more public Employments: I shall only beg, that God would long continue You
amongst us, and bless Your endeavors in settling and securing the Kingdom by
Your Counsel, and supporting the Church by Your constant Affection; which is
the hearty Prayer of

Your Humbly Devoted Servant Ja. Loud.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Shall not go about to make any tedious Apologies for the publication of this
Treatise, being conscious to my self of the innocence of my intentions, that,
however I may be mistaken in my apprehensions, or have failed in my design, yet
I did intend herein, not to offend, but to serve thee; for I am not of the
temper of those, who would rather commit a deliberate crime, then want an
occasion of Apologizing: the reasons then inducing me hereunto were principally
these two: 1. Because those who have not stock enough of their own to trade
withal, are not altogether unserviceable to the Commonwealth, by becoming
Carriers and conveyers of other men's goods; and Translations, I conceive bear
some resemblance hereunto, and if it be for the benefit, and advantage of a
Kingdom, to bring in the Riches of Foreign Countries, then certainly can it
not be disserviceable to the Commonwealth of Learning to make the works of
other Nations intelligible to our own, and whatever Law there may be in
particular against other things of the French Nation, yet there is none against
the Importation of their Learning. 2. This Treatise, if we consider the whole
Series and Method of it is mannagement, seems a sufficient vindication of the
sober use of Reason in matters of Religion; if we reflect upon those natural
and necessary deductions which the Learned Author makes from certain and
undoubted Principles, and those other rational motives of credibility, which he
makes use of, to prove those dreams he there treats of, to be truly Divine.


Yet not so as to exclude that secret sense and inward consciousness, which was
the immediate result of the Divine Impression made upon their minds by the
Spirit of God, especially in those dreams and visions, where particular and
personal commands were conveyed to any of his Servants, as to Joseph to convey
our Savior into Egypt.

But here I am very sensible that this reason of its publication, viz. the
asserting the use of Reason in matters of Religion, will by some be thought
rather fit to have prevailed with me to have let it laid still buried in its
Native French, lest by this means the contagion should still further prevail in
the English Nation.

How far an extravagant opinion of the power and extent of Reason may have
possessed some, I know not, yet this is certain, that we must not therefore
wholly reject it, because others have overvalued it, or by some other ways
abused it; we must not forbid our selves the use of fire and water, because
some have employed both to their own ruin: For by this way of arguing, we must
bid Adieu not only to Reason, but Scripture too, which has been abused, not
only by great pretenders to Reason, but by ignorant and unstable men, to their
own destruction.

But then if we would either prevent the rise, or stop the growth of any such
opinions amongst us, the way to do it, I conceive, is not to suspect our
friends, (such who are not only free from error herein, but also very able and
willing too, to defend the true Ancient Catholic Faith in this particular)
not, I say, to suspect our friends, but so to treat our open and professed
enemies, the Socinians, in such a sound way and Method of proceeding as may be
the most effectual to convince them, or however to secure our selves; that is,
First, with strength of Reason; Secondly, with Candor and Ingenuity of Temper.

1. With strength of Reason, thus to baffle them at that weapon, which they
pretend to be so much their own, though in deed and truth, they cannot lay such
a just claim and undoubted title to it, for in many things they perhaps are the
weakest arguers of any sort of men whatever; yet seeing they are such
pretenders to it, we must deal with them accordingly, by the strictest and
severest methods of reasoning: for a good cause cannot suffer more, then either
by too violent an urging of weak arguments, or an unskilful managing of good
ones; and a weak defense, like a cold petition, is its own answer, and a kind
of giving up the cause we pretend to plead for, besides it brings a
disreputation to truth to see its Patrons and Defenders worsted.

In order therefore to our more successful proceeding herein, in all Personal
disputes with these Adversaries, they ought not to demand, nor should we grant
them any other part, then that of an Opponent, and the reason is, because ours
is the Ancient Truth, which has been in the possession of the Church long
before their opinion was ever thought of, and therefore we must be supposed in
rightful possession of it, till the contrary be proved: which they will be
never able to do, seeing their great Art and Policy consists rather in evading
the force of our arguments, then in trusting to any of their own.

I speak not this, as if our Christian Religion, was not as well able to
confute its adversaries, as to defend it self, provided only that they would
but acknowledge so much reason and ingenuity, as not to look upon frivolous
evasions for solid answers, which if they do, they then seem to labor of a
certain weakness of mind, something like that of Skepticism, only the Scepticks
they deny or doubt of every thing, these by the like unreasonable principles,
do or may assert any thing, and thus in stead of being what they so much
pretend to be, such Masters of Reason, they hereby destroy the very foundations
of all rational discourse.

2. We should treat them with all Candor and Ingenuity of Behavior, for our
Reasons and Arguments will be then the more likely to convince their
understandings, if withal we endeavor to oblige their affections, however not
provoke their passions. Thus it is verily thought, that Arrius had never raised
those tempestuous storms which we read he did, If Alexander, the first that
opposed the Arrian Heresy, had carried himself with more moderation, and been
less eager in so good a cause.

And having gone thus far in answer to the objection, give me leave to enquire
a little further into the merit of the cause; what there is in Reason so
destructive of Religion, that the very name of the one should seem heretical in
the other; what is it wherein Reason has so highly offended, that it should be
excluded the Temple, and from having any thing to do in matters of Religion.
Does that Religion, which once commanded us to give a reason of the hope that
is in us, does it require nothing now, but blind obedience? Was Reason
required, as it were in the very infancy and first ages of the Church, and is
it now become useless, nay dangerous in its riper years? Is that which is the
imperfection of old age, viz. the weakness of our intellectuals, is it now
become the perfection of our faith? The Heathens indeed, they looked upon a
Prophetic fury and alienation of mind to be either a necessary concomitant or
a certain effect of their inspiration. The Turks they look upon mad men and
fools as the only Prophets and men inspired, and we know what Church it is that
asserts ignorance to be the Mother of Devotion: But we have not thus learned
Christ; for our Religion does not go about to build the Christian upon the
ruins of the Man, nor do we then cease to be Rational when we become
Religious, Religion being founded, and as it were grafted upon the stock of
Reason. Thus the Moral Law is either the same with, or founded in the Light and
Law of Nature; and the Christian Law, though it be above them both, yet is it
not contrary to either.

Thus Reason and Religion do friendlily agree, and mutually conspire to support
each other; for Religion improves Reason, and Reason thus improved and
enlightened, defends Religion; and as on the one hand the mysterys of our Faith
are so far from being any real ground of an objection against it, that indeed
they render it more Divine and Venerable; for we might perhaps justly question
the Divinity of that Religion, wherein we see nothing above the power of a
finite understanding, either at first to find out or afterward to comprehend;
so on the other hand the sutableness thereof to our rational faculties in other
things, is no less a commendation and confirmation of it: for to say that God
should institute an unreasonable Religion, is such a foolish assertion as needs
no confutation; for certainly God would either have given us a Religion suitable
to our Faculties, or Faculties suitable to our Religion.

If it be here objected that God and Scripture condemns Reason, and that it
does not become us to dispute against the express Commands of God; To this I
answer, that Scripture does no where condemn that Reason which I here plead
for; but all those places which they urge against it, may and must be
interpreted either concerning the Traditions of the Jews, or the doubtful and
disputatious Philosophy of the Gentiles, either of the Science falsely so
called, which the Gnostics so boasted of, or of mere Natural Reason, as such,
destitute of Divine Revelation; Or, lastly of the carnal Appetites of
Christians, of the (...), that Law of the members warring against the Law of
the mind. Secondly by Reason we know the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and
by Reason we come to the true meaning and sense of them, and by Reason we know
the obligation that lies upon us therefrom, and without this it is not easy to
conceive a way how God could either have conveyed the knowledge of his Will to
us, or of our Duty to him; and it is not probable that Scripture should condemn
that, without which all its own commands would signify very little or nothing.

I shall here therefore briefly enquire into the nature of Reason, both as it
was in innocence before the Fall, and as it is now in this state of
depravation; for the want of a right distinguishing herein has been the cause
of many errors and mistakes about the power and properties of it; however it is
that which must needs cause a great deal of obscurity in what is said
concerning it, in this complex'd and undistinguished capacity.

And this is that which seems the (...), the first fundamental error in Mr.
Hobs his Politics, that he does not sufficiently distinguish betwixt pure and
corrupted Nature; so that there must needs be a great deal of falsehood in some
things and confusion in others, when he ascribes that to Nature in general,
which does not belong to it but in such a particular respect and private
consideration.

Reason in innocence was that inward Principle, that Divine Light set up in the
soul of man, which bore an equal respect to truth and goodness, by which we
were both instructed in our duty and enabled to perform it; it was part of that
Divine Image, wherein Man was created, and that which directed both the
speculative and practical dictates of the understanding to their respective
ends; viz. to the acknowledgment of the Divine Wisdom in matters of
speculation, and yielding obedience to his will in matters of practice.

Now did right Reason enjoy an universal, and undisturbed Empire, now was there
not that contrariety in the faculties of the soul, but what was Knowledge in
the understanding immediately became Obedience in the will and affections; now
was Reason and Righteousness, as it were the very complexion of the man; nor
was there any further need of Supernatural Grace to be super added to him,
besides what was naturally contained in these Essential Principles of his
constitution, which made him such as God designed him, viz. a Man in Innocence.

This was the state of Reason before the Fall and it yet remains the same in
substance, though not in the same degree of purity and perfection, as before;
it is the relics of the Divine Image, yet remaining in us, by which we are
still enabled in some measure to understand truth and practice our duty; it is
that power or faculty of the soul, or the soul it self, as it contains in it
the principles and foundations of ratiocination, and a power and ability of
drawing right consequences therefrom, but yet so obscured and weakened, that
there is now need of Divine Illumination and assistance for the performing of
that which before we were able of our selves to do: But then though God did
thus punish man by taking away part of that strength which he had so
misemploy'd; which was the effect of his justice, yet did not his goodness
suffer him to sink below himself, though he became weak and guilty, yet he
remained a man; his faculties, though depraved, yet were they not annihilated,
and as the Principle is not wholly taken away, so neither are the Acts and
Exercises thereof necessarily false; so that we are not abandoned to an eternal
Skepticism, but we have still sufficient grounds of truth and certainty within
our selves, for we had better have no such faculties as pretend to Reason, then
such as should always deceive us even in things that we clearly and distinctly
perceive. And here may be as strong arguments drawn from the goodness of God,
that the punishment of the first sin did not extend to an absolute
falsification or total corruption of our faculties, as there may be from his
veracity, that he gave us true ones at first; for indeed to assert Reason thus
wholly corrupted, would be to introduce such a confusion and disorder into the
nature of things as is inconsistent with the notion of a Providence, such an
one, as we should think that God would rather have annihilated the whole race
of mankind, then ever have suffered it in the world.

And this is the true State of Reason in it self before the Fall, and as it is
in us now since, only here we must further know that this natural Faculty of
Reason in Christians is further enlightened and enabled by the Divine Revelation
of his Will, and by the assistances and influences of his holy Spirit.

I could wish therefore that those men would speak more intelligibly, who go
about to give such particular and distinct differences betwixt the Spiritual
and mere Rational Man, as they call him, in their Actions relating to Religion,
as if there was any Character either more certain in it self, or more
warrantable to us, to judge of the Spirit of God in a man by, then by it is
producing the effects of Righteousness in him; That the Principles of Natural
Reason and Grace are two distinct things, flowing from different Fountains, is
certainly true; but then why we should oppose these two, especially in a
Christian State, where God is never wanting by his grace to assist the humble
and sincere exercises of Men's Reasons, where the more truly Rational any Men
are, the more Spiritual they are, and the more Spiritual the more truly
Rational; here actually to distinguish betwixt the Spiritual and mere Rational
Man, when the same effects of real Righteousness equally appear in both, this
is arrogantly to take upon himself that which is only proper to God, to be a
searcher of hearts.

As for that place of 1 Cor. 2. 14. upon the misunderstanding whereof they seem
principally to found this their opinion, but the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned; here by the Natural Man is
not meant the Christian Rational Man, but a man endowed only with the
Principles of Natural Reason, void of Evangelical Grace and Divine Revelation;
now this cannot be applied to a Christian who enjoys both in their respective
degrees: so that the true meaning of that place is briefly this, That the
matters revealed in the Gospel and Preached by the Apostles were such, as the
Learned Philosophers of the Heathens and others, who were only led by Humane
Reason, did absolutely despise as seeming foolishness unto them, nor could they
by any Study of their own come to the knowledge of them, for they were only to
be had by understanding the prophesies of Scripture, and other such means as
depend upon Divine Revelation: so that the Christian does receive and believe
the Gospel and the things therein contained, by arguments drawn from the
Scriptures themselves, by prophesies and miracles and other evidences of Divine
Revelation afforded therein, and by the assistances of the Spirit of God
derived therefrom, but then this does not exclude but include Reason, for grace
is not a super addition of a new faculty, but a new power and principle to the
old.

Now I see no reason, why those who are Baptized into the same Faith, and live
in the same Christian Communion, and give all due obedience to the Laws of God
and Man, according to their power, why any such should be supposed to act from
a Principle of mere Natural Reason, and not also from that of a truly Divine,
and in its own nature, Saving Grace, and that for no other Reason, but only
because some few men, who are highly conceited of themselves, and censorious of
others, who pretend to a monopoly of the Spirit, and as it were to a Commission
from Heaven to pass sentence on all who differ from them, only because these
men are pleased to vote whomsoever they will, Formal, Moral and mere Rational
Men.

But indeed those who are thus particular in describing how far a mere Rational
Man may go in matters of Religion, what sins he may avoid and what duties he
may perform, and yet have nothing of the true Spirit of God and Saving Grace;
these men, however they may pretend and perhaps really are great enemies to
Pelagianism, yet they seem herein to be too great exalters of the power of
Nature, and in all probability too uncharitable censurers of Divine Grace,
whilst they attribute all the good works performed by those mere Rational Men
either to the Power of Nature, or to Common Grace, as they call it, which,
according to their interpretation and explication of it, is little better,
seeing it is neither in it is own nature sufficient nor by Gods appointment
intended to bring any one to Salvation; that distinction therefore betwixt
Common and Saving Grace, as Grace, does signify those inward motions of the
Divine Spirit, by which we are enabled to believe and practice aright,
according to this acceptance, it has no foundation in Scripture; for all such
Grace is in its own nature sufficient, and by Gods appointment designed to
bring Salvation, if we by our own fault do not hinder the event; though it be
granted, that this also may differ in degrees. Among other grounds and reasons
of this their mistake, this seems not the least, that they entertain too mean
apprehensions of that Covenant which God has made with Christians and their
Children, and also of the Sacrament of Baptism, by which they are admitted
members of Christ's Church: Yet notwithstanding both these, they look upon a man
before a certain critical moment of conversion, as they suppose it, little
better then an heathen, and that all the good works that they have or can
perform before it, stand them in little or no stead, in order to their
Conversion, and that after this, all the wickedness that they do or can commit,
shall do them no prejudice in reference to their Salvation, which opinion is of
very bad consequence to the concernments of a Christian Life.

But here we must also know, that there is need of a continued course of
Sanctification throughout our whole lives, both to complete and perfect that
holiness first begun in us, and also by reason of those many sins and
infirmities, which we are all subject to, which are to be turned from by
repentance and reformation.

And as this opposition betwixt the Spiritual and mere Rational Man, is without
any warrant from Scripture, so is it very difficult, if at all possible, to
assign the exact limits betwixt Grace and Reason in our selves, and then much
more in others.

1. In our selves, it is very hard to say that this was an Action of our Reason
only, that an Act of the more immediate assistance of the Divine Spirit, Joh.
3.8. the wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, and whether it goes, so is every one that is
born of the Spirit, thus he that is born anew, is discernably another kind of
man then he was before, thus his new birth is seen by the fruits, though the
beginnings, and the modes of procedure, and the means of conveying this to him
be undiscernable, Mark 4. 26. 27. so is the kingdom of God, that is, the
kingdom of Grace; as if a man should cast feed into the ground, and should
sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should spring and grow up, he
knows not how. These are the more ordinary methods of the Divine Spirit, but
then when God calls out some particular persons on some great and eminent
employments, either to do or suffer in his service, he frequently confers more
sensible influences of his Grace and Spirit on such; Neither is this spoken in
the least to oppose the joys and consolations of the Holy Ghost, nor the sober
and well-grounded experiences of Pious Men.

And as we cannot distinguish betwixt these in our selves, much less can we do
it in others, for if a man be outwardly pious, and give no just occasion of
suspecting his real honesty and sincerity, whether such an one be
notwithstanding an hypocrite, this is best known to God and his own conscience;
yet we by the Laws of Charity are to judge the best, but if such an one under
all this, be an hypocrite, this is that which a man may also be under the
highest pretenses to the Spirit; so that it is only the event, that must
determine the truth and sincerity of men's professions.

The sum of what I here intend, is this, that, provided we become new men, if
we cease to sin and learn to do well, if we turn from wickedness and perform
real and sincere obedience to the Laws of God, as the Divine Spirit indeed is,
so must it be acknowledged to be the principal cause of this change in us, yet
we need not here trouble our selves too nicely to determine the exact limits,
how far our Reason, as a less principal cause either might, or might not be
instrumental herein.

But the proper use and just extent of Reason will further appear by
considering it is object, which is the knowledge of God and the Divine Will, the
knowledge of our selves and the nature of things, so far as these or any of
these come under humane cognizance, so far as they are either our perfection to
know, or our duty to practice; so that nothing but either the impossibility or
the unlawfulness of the enquiry must limit the exercise of our Reasons, thus
must we not indulge either an extravagant curiosity on the one hand, nor an
idle supine negligence on the other, for it would argue presumption in us to
pry into those hidden things which God has reserved to himself, as it would
sloth and ingratitude, not make use of our faculties for those purposes, that
God designed them for.

And there have not been wanting those who have erred in both extremes, first
the Pelagians and Socinians, who make Reason the great rule of faith and
manners, who scarce acknowledge any other authority, or ground of their belief,
or higher principle of action: others there have been who too much undervalue
it, and ascribe not only too little to it, but look upon it as a dangerous and
pernicious thing, as if it was the Devils instrument to undermine the
foundations of Faith and all true Religion; some indeed have set it in the
throne and then fallen down in adoration to it, others on the contrary have
unjustly vilify'd that which is indeed a ray of Divinity, and I know not
whether have been more to blame, or done more disservice to Religion, those who
have adored it as a God, or those who have rejected it as a Devil.

I shall therefore briefly show the power of Reason in some things and its
weakness and inability in others, and give some particular instances of both.

1. Reason is a guide to a man in the choice of his Religion in general, that
is, supposing an Heathen in doubt of his own and desirous to fix upon the true
Religion; here rightly to determine his choice, he has no other way but to
bring the several pretenders to the test of Reason, and examine them by those
Rules, that Reason dictates to be the Characters of truth and certainty, that
is, by the agreeableness and correspondence they bear to the notions of God and
the nature of things, to those inward impressions they have of virtue and
goodness imprinted upon their minds, and according as they come confirmed with
the outward attestation of true and unfeigned miracles: and here authority, as
such, ought not to be urged, nor can it be of any force in this consideration,
though it must be also granted, that the concurrent testimony of different
parties is very considerable herein, as when the matters of fact relating to
our Savior and his Religion are not only granted, but attested by all parties,
not only friends but enemies, when both the Jews and Heathens do grant his
miracles; whereas those that other Religions pretend unto, being both in their
own nature, more slight and frivolous, more fantastic and a^ry, then solid
and substantial, and really serviceable to the glory of God and the good of
men, in this respect they are less worthy of God and less agreeable to the
nature of miracles, and also wanting the universality of attestation, they are
more liable to cheat and imposture. And here the certain evidence of humane
testimony is of more force to convince a man, then the pretense of Divine
Authority; I say, then the pretense, for in many it is only so, and that which
is real is to him no more, for as yet be does not believe any of them to be
Divine, but from the strength of their respective Reasons and Arguments must
conclude them so.

And here the use of Reason will be more particularly necessary to distinguish
betwixt true and false miracles, now a miracle being something above the power
of natural causes to perform, it will be very difficult rightly to assign the
just limits of the power of nature, to be able to say thus far can it extend,
and no further; and that which still augments the difficulty, is, rightly to
know how far the Devils power may extend in things of this nature, whether
first he can by his own native power work miracles; which seems not so
reasonable to believe he can, for then mankind would almost have laid under a
fatal necessity of being imposed upon by his power and malice, Miracles being
as it were the Great Seal of Heaven, which God makes use of to confirm the
truth of Doctrines.

But then nothing hinders, but that the Devil may by his knowledge of Nature
either so fitly apply natural agents to the producing of such effects, as may
require a good degree of Reason and Philosophy to distinguish them from Real
Miracles, or may by God, for Reasons best known to himself, be permitted
sometimes to work true ones.

Yet not so, but that upon a strict and due consideration of the circumstances
of the Action, or the end and design of the thing, there will something appear
whereby to distinguish such a miracle from those which are the more genuine and
immediate results of the Divine Power. To this we may further add, that the
Divine Providence is particularly concerned, where there seems as it were a
competition betwixt the power of God and the power of the Devil (as in the case
of Moses, and the Magicians of Egypt, and in others proportionably) there some
ways to appear in confirmation and approbation of the one, and in discovering
either the absolute cheats and impostures, or the comparative weakness and
imperfection of the other.

The sum of what I here intend is this, that by using our Reason, and the Rules
thereby afforded us, we may distinguish betwixt the delusions of Satan, and
Divine miracles, but without this it will be impossible to do it.

2. We should continue Christians upon the same Grounds and Reasons that others
first became such, that is, upon a due considering and understanding of our
Religion, so that we may both be the more confirmed in the belief of it our
selves, and may be the better enabled to give an account of it to others; thus
should we be Christians upon choice and consideration, and not only because it
is the Religion of our Country. It is not sufficient for us merely to be
baptized into the Christian Faith, but we must our selves understand and
undertake what the happiness of our Birth and Education first Entitled us to.

Yet this is not so to be understood as if Christians were Sceptically to doubt
of their Religion, or so far to indulge the extravagancy of their enquiries, as
for the present to suspend the belief of their own, and to be in an equal
indifferency to all Religions; yet may they piously enquire into the Grounds
and Reasons of their Faith, being warranted herein both from Precept and
Example in Scripture.

And as in the other particular; Reason was necessary to distinguish betwixt
true and false Miracles, so is it here to judge of Doctrines; that so we may
preserve that Faith once delivered to the Saints free from error or corruption
either in Principles or Practices: and indeed when once we bid adieu to Reason,
we then open a gate to all those errors and fanaticisms, which either the
malice of the Devil, or the impostures of men, or our own corrupt natures may
suggest, we deprive our selves of that which God designed for our defense, and
expose our selves naked to the power and malice of our enemies.

3. Reason is necessary to determine the lawfulness of some actions and the
expediency of others; for it was impossible for Scripture to descend to all the
particulars of humane life, much less to all the circumstances of them it was
sufficient for it to have laid down some General Principles, it being now the
Office of Reason to apply particular instances to these General Rules; and that
which renders Reason here further necessary, is, because that virtue for the
most part consisting in the middle betwixt two opposite vices there is need of
a careful and steady attention, lest while we endeavor to avoid the one
extreme, we unwarily run into the other: and here Reason will in many cases be
very useful to us rightly to determine the just limits of our duty, only we
must not make this bad use hereof, always to go to the utmost extent of what is
lawful, we must not live always upon the very confines betwixt vice and virtue;
for this would be to choose to walk upon the very brink of a precipice, where
perhaps we may be safe, but the action would never be counted prudent. This
would be only to make use of Reason to teach us how little we might be
virtuous, and how far unwise. And this possibly may be one Reason why many
times it is so hard to assign the precise boundaries betwixt vice and virtue,
exactly to determine where the one ends and the other begins; because God never
designed us to make use of that speculation, but to keep our selves within the
measures of prudence and safety.

2. I shall show the weakness and imperfections of Reason, and what those
things are wherein it is deficient.

1. It is not in the Power of Reason to have found out the mysteries of our
Religion, nor the methods of Salvation, for these do either depend upon the
Essential Nature of God, or the free determination of his will: both which are
unsearchable by humane Reason.

Whether therefore the Platonic Triad, or the threefold principle mentioned by
Plato and his followers, be the same with or may upon just grounds be applied
to the Christian Trinity, may be justly questioned; for it must be a very
favorable interpretation that infers an Unity in the Trinity, and Trinity in
Unity from Plato's Principle: yet whatever knowledge he might have of a
Trinity, this was neither born with him, nor was it the result of his natural
reasoning, but it came to him by tradition either from the Jews, or from those
who had it thence; as the greatest asserters of the Platonic Trinity do
acknowledge.

Whether Orpheus, Trismegist or Plato had indeed any true knowledge or distinct
notions of a Trinity, I shall not here undertake to determine, seeing that
after the great pains and Study that some men have bestowed herein, such is the
obscurity of those Authors expressions, such the doubtful and various
interpretations put upon them by men of different opinions, such the doubted
truth and credit of some of those writings, such the loose conjectures rather
then necessary consequences made from the whole, that the result of all seems
only this, that possibly it may be thus, and possibly it may be otherwise.

So that I am apt to believe that men do not entertain this or that opinion for
the necessary cogency of the Arguments on either side, but according to the
agreeableness, that this or that opinion may have to the tenor of their former
Studies, and to the Authors they have been most conversant in, or bear the
greatest affection for, or for some other collateral inclinations, rather then
Reasons of Belief.

I shall therefore on this occasion with all indifferency propose these few
considerations, which thou may receive or reject, as thou see convenient.

1. The notion of the Trinity, as relating to the Christian mystery, is much
more obscurely expressed in Plato himself, then we find it now since in his
followers, I mean those of the Platonic School, who lived after the coming of
our Savior.

For the Trinity, such an one as the Christians assert, could never in all
probability have been gathered from what is there said of it, nor could it
probably have been concluded to have been Plato's meaning, if the appearance of
the Christian Doctrine, had not given occasion and opportunity to his followers
to apply his notion of it to the Christian mystery.

2. At or upon the appearance of our Saviors Doctrine in the world, there were
two sorts of men, whose interest it might then be, though for different
Reasons, to assert and promote the notion of the Platonic Trinity: First, the
Platonists of the Age, who might think it tended much to the honor of their
Master and his Philosophy to find in it those mysteries which the Christians
looked upon as the peculiar Characters of their Religion: thus did they vie
Platonism with Christianity, equalling it in all things, relating either to
Speculation or Practice with the Christian Doctrine; thus did the appearance of
the Gospel in the world rectify the Philosophy of the Gentiles in some things,
and made them ambitious to conform their notions to the Christian Religion, as
far as they thought convenient, in others.

Another sort of men who might promote the belief of the Platonic Trinity were
professed Christians, yet such as had no mind to believe any thing of this
Christian Mystery; and these men boldly asserted that the Trinity was only a
Pagan notion brought out of Plato's School into the Christian Doctrine: Thus
did they endeavor to disparage what they had no mind to believe, but yet
withal supposed that it was in Plato, thinking it a sufficient Argument, either
of it is falseness or unfitness to be made part of the Christian belief, because
the notion (say they) was taken from a Pagan Philosopher.

3. Whether might not the Providence of God be some ways concerned herein,
either by occasioning or permitting such expressions in Plato, as might
afterward be made use of, though not for the proving of the Trinity, yet for
the facilitating the reception and belief of it among the Gentiles.

I shall not here Dogmatically assert any thing, nor shall I oppose the opinion
of the Traditionists; yet I think we need not too operously contend for it nor
lay more stress and weight upon that Argument, then the evidence thereof will
bear, because the Christian Trinity does neither depend upon, nor stand in need
of it: As for the inability of Reason to find out those methods of Salvation
now revealed in the Gospel, I shall have occasion to mention it hereafter.


2. The mysteries of our Religion, as they could not be at first found out, so
neither can they be now fully comprehended by Natural Reason, and this is that
which Reason it self acknowledges, that it is not in the power of a finite
capacity fully to comprehend the mysteries of an infinite Being; yet are these
very mysteries so far as necessary to be believed in order to Salvation,
sufficiently intelligible, being so far clearly laid down in Scripture. But
then we must not place our own private fancies or the doubtful and controverted
opinions of particular men in the number and rank of Divine mysteries, thus
coining more out of our own brains, then God and Scripture ever made. Thus a
late Author has ranked Reprobation and absolute Decrees, in an equal order
with the Trinity and Incarnation: but if all the unintelligble opinions, which
have been broached of late years, must be received as Divine Mysteries, what a
monstrous thing would Religion by this means soon appear?

Nor does the belief of this particular hinder us from making the mysteries of
our Religion as reasonable and as intelligible as we can, provided only, that
we do not make Reason the Rule and Condition of our believing them; we must not
reject what we cannot fully understand, this is both the fault and folly of the
Socinians, for herein they show themselves neither sound Divines nor good
Philosophers; for it is probable that if they had been more conversant in
Philosophy, they would not have so erred in Divinity; if they had a little
tamed and corrected the extravagancy of their own conceited abilities with the
difficulties of Philosophy, and a little more used their understanding to the
obedience of nature, they then would not perhaps have thought it such an
unreasonable thing to submit to that of Faith, for what an affront is it both
to Reason and Religion to be so credulous as to believe things altogether
unintelligible in Philosophy, and yet be such Virtuosi in Religion, as to
believe nothing but what is capable of demonstration, or within the compass of
our faculties to comprehend.

Here we may further defend the mysteries of our Religion, not only from the
Authority of the Speaker, in as much as it is very reasonable to believe, what
the God of truth reveals, but also by such subsequent illustrations as may at
least facilitate our apprehensions of the thing; and this is that which
Athanasius his Creed makes use of, as the reasonable soul and body are one man,
so God and man are one Christ; here we may also make use of those Arguments
which are called argumenta ad hominem, that is, we may consider whether those
respective persons, we then deal withal do not believe some things altogether
as unaccountable as those things they charge upon us. Thus the heathens have no
Reason to object against us the credulity of believing upon bare Authority,
seeing the Pythagoreans in particular did look upon Pythagoras his (...) almost
of as great Authority, as the Christians do their sic dicit Dominus, and
generally all Sects of Philosophers did jurare in verba Magistri, did yield
great honor and obedience to their respective Founders, nor have they any
Reason to object the unconceiveableness of the Trinity and Incarnation, seeing
they believe things concerning their gods altogether as unintelligible as these
Christian mysteries.

And to come a little nearer, the results of the Divine Omnipotence and
Omniscience, how God can create something out of nothing, and how he can know
the free determinations of our secret thoughts, and these not only present but
future, all which is notwithstanding part of our natural Creed; this perhaps is
as unconceiveable as any thing that is contained in our revealed Religion.

3. It is not in the power of mere natural Reason to perform the precepts of
the Christian Religion without the concurrence and assistance of the Divine
Spirit. Here for a man to deny either the being of God, or the operations of
his Spirit in us, is (to use a familiar resemblance) as if we should deny a
sharp Rasor to have an edge, because we cannot see it, whereas indeed the very
invisibility of it is an Argument of its being; or as if we should deny any
motion in the world, because we cannot explain the communication of it, though
here as in the other, the visibility of the effects does sufficiently prove the
truth of both.

There are some who argue the duty incumbent on us to believe the Christian
Religion, from the benefit that accrues from it to mankind, making this the
foundation of their argument, that men naturally ought to believe that which is
for their advantage: how far this is true, I shall not here enquire, yet this
is certain, that where we have all the Reason in the world to believe a thing,
and none to oppose it, where God makes that our duty, which is also our
interest; there to deny or disbelieve such a thing, is not only to act against
our selves, but to fight against heaven: and of this nature is the belief of
the Divine assistance. Such is the amiableness of the Divine Nature, that some
are of opinion, that if the Atheist did but frame a notion of it, though he
could not believe that there was a God, yet he must necessarily wish there was
one; so here such is the advantage that accrues to us from the belief of this
Divine Assistance, that, methinks, those very men who deny it, ought
notwithstanding to believe it, in order to their own designs of acting to the
utmost extent of the powers of nature, for they might more vigorously exert
these, if they lived under the imagination at least, that they had a greater
power then their own concurring with them.

As for that controversy concerning Grace and moral Virtue, if the question be
first clearly stated, and the sense and acceptance of the words justly
determined, and then the thing calmly discoursed without the heat of contest
and disputation, the difference betwixt the contenders on either part seems not
so great, but that it seems easily reconcilable.

Here Grace may be considered in a double sense, either first as it signifies
the Divine Assistance, that inward root and Principle of all Christian Virtues
and Graces; or secondly, as it signifies the fruits and effects of the Spirit,
the Christian Graces themselves, as now reduced into acts and habits: In this
latter sense Moral Virtues, as to the substance and matter of them, are the
same with Christian Graces, they differ only in the principle from whence they
flow, thus the Christian Virtues and Graces spring from a more Divine Original,
then the Moral Virtues of Heathens. In the first sense there are none, but
professed Pelagians, that assert morality or moral virtue, in opposition to or
derogation from the Divine Assistances; but those who perhaps by some are now
thought too great friends and Patrons of it do mean and intend nothing of this
by it.

That which has rendered this question more obscure and intricate, is, that
they are not rightly agreed about the sense and meaning of the word morality;
some say that by morality is properly meant such a degree of virtue and honesty
as is attainable by the mere strength of nature, without the advantages of
Divine Revelation; others by morality seem to understand not only this, but
also include in it all the assistances and encouragements that attend
Christianity. Whether is the properer acceptance of the word I shall not here
enquire; yet however those who take it in this latter sense cannot be thought
to ascribe too much to the power of nature, only they include more in the sense
and meaning of the word so taken, then perhaps can properly belong to it.

I shall here only add one consideration, which refers to Reason in matters of
Speculation, and so put an end to this digression.

It Is this, that it no ways reflects dishonourably upon Reason, that it is not
in its power to convince a Sceptick, Scepticus nec potest alium redarguere nec
ipse redargui, and the Reason of both, is, because he neither asserts nor
grants any Principles whereby he may either prevail upon others, or he himself
be confuted: Skepticism is a capricious frenzy of the mind; and it tends no
more to the disreputation of Reason that it cannot cure it, then it does to the
dishonor of Grace, that it does not always captivate the perverse wills of
wicked men.

But there are degrees in this Skeptical humor, and we then seem to retain some
Tincture of it, when we unreasonably and immoderately undervalue and enervate
those Arguments which natural Reason, brings for the proof of some of the
Articles of our natural Religion, viz. The being of God and the Immortality of
the Soul, Revelation indeed has advanced these to higher degrees of certainty,
then before they had; but I see not how it tends to the advancement of the
Honor of Divine Revelation, by too rigid, if not Skeptical, denials to
invalidate all those Arguments that Reason may suggest in proof or confirmation
hereof. Reason, methinks, here should not be treated as an enemy, but rather
helped and encouraged then discountenanced in so good a design; we should
rather procure and maintain a certain rational tenderness and modesty of mind,
whereby we should be ashamed either to assert or deny any thing upon unjust
grounds; and this temper of mind is equally distant from a vain credulity on
the one hand, and an unreasonable demanding of demonstrations in matters
incapable of them, on the other, it assents not to things on weaker grounds
then Reason may justly require, nor does it require more evidence then the
nature of things, and the nature of men are capable of.

But I must remember that I write a Preface, not a Treatise, I shall now only
premise something concerning the Nature of Prophecy and Divine Revelation in
general, and so refer thee to the following discourse for further satisfaction.

An operose attempt to prove that which no sober and considerate man ever went
about to deny, would rather weaken, then add any strength to the thing
designed; yet I could wish that either the affectation of singularity, or a
more pernicious design of some in this present age had not rendered the proving
the truth of Divine Revelation (in opposition to those who would ascribe all
prophecy to some lower principle) not altogether unnecessary.

It is indeed both unjust and uncharitable to suggest unreasonable surmises of
the possible intentions of an Author contrary to his express words; only here
give me leave to show the Reasons why it may be suspected that the Author of
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, notwithstanding what he there speaks of it, yet
may indeed assert no other Prophecy or Revelation, then what is within the
power of nature to perform.

1. In his sixth Chapter, he absolutely denies all miracles in general, and
then it is very inconsistent with, and naturally consequent upon this his
principle to deny this of prophecy in particular. The opinion of miracles
according to him, is founded in the ignorance of natural causes, since nature
never goes out of her fixed order and settled course, whatever we may weakly or
ignorantly conceive of it, now according to this way of arguing, prophecy may
as well be the result either of blind chance or natural causes, though such as
are not commonly known, as other miracles. Now the nature and notion of a
miracle, does as well belong to the certain Prediction of future contingencies
and the declaring and revealing things naturally unknowable, as it does to
those things which leave more immediate and sensible effects behind them: and
if God by such an eternal decree has so fixed the course of nature, that it
can no ways now be altered, then prophecy must run the same fate with
miracles, and he that denies one, if he be consistent with himself, must deny
both.

2. He tells us, that God may reveal by way of prophecy such things as we
already know by the light of nature, that which I here take notice of, is not
the falsness of the assertion, but only that he does no where plainly and
clearly tell us, whether the prophesies contained in Scripture, be above the
power of nature or no, or whether they may not naturally follow from such a
System of the world as he supposes.

3. He himself does sufficiently explain his own opinion herein toward the end
of his first Chapter; Denique Prophetae Dei spiritum habere dicebantur, quia
homines causas Propheticae cognitionis ignorabant eandemque admirabantur, and
propterea ut reliqua portenta, ipsam ad Deum refer, Deique cognitionem vocare
solebant: wherein he positively resolves prophecy, as well as other miracles,
into natural causes, though such as are unknown to us.

My design here will not give me leave fully to examine his opinion either
concerning miracles or prophecy, only I shall observe in general, that it is
but a very weak way of arguing, which he there uses, viz. That because God
sometimes makes use of natural causes, or the accidental ministry of some
other means in working of miracles, therefore to ascribe the whole causality or
efficiency to those things which God for other Reasons thought fit to employ on
those occasions, thus he asserts Moses his throwing Ashes into the Air, to be
the natural cause of the Biles that thereupon befell the Egyptians.

Thus also because God makes use of the phansy in the conveying of prophesy,
therefore must it wholly be subjected here and reach no farther, therefore he
concludes that the Prophets prophesied according to the various temperaments
and complexion of their bodies, and some Prophets were more obscure in their
prophesies then others, because their phansy was not so good, nor their
imagination so strong as the rest.

But this kind of Reasoning seems much what like that of the man who speaking
of the miracle of Christ's feeding five thousand with five Barly-loaves and two
fishes, Joh. 6. 10. gave this account of it, that what they wanted in meat,
they made up with grass, because it is there occasionally said, that there was
much grass in the place.

Prophesy in the notion of it, may include those two things, 1. A prediction of
future contingencies, a foretelling, not only the (...), but the (...), not
only such things, the events whereof depend upon the natural and necessary
connection of causes, but such as come to pass by the free determination of Men's
wills and though the proper nature of prophesy does not consist herein, yet is
it a certain character of a true Prophet, where it does occur, for it is not in
the power of any lower principle certainly to foretell such things.

2. Prophesy more properly implies the Communication of the Divine Will to men,
and that with this particular design, to instruct and inform the world in
things of great concernment; for there may be private notices and personal
commands conveyed from God to Men, which yet are not sufficient to denominate
them Prophets.

Prophesy in the first sense does suppose the being of God to a Christian, and
proves it to an heathen, for there may as strong an Argument be drawn from the
punctual predictions of future contingencies in all the particular Modes and
Circumstances of them, to prove a Divine Being, as there may from the regular
order and constitution of the universe; for it is as impossible certainly to
foretell things to come in that very way and method wherein they happen without
Divine Revelation, as it would have been for the world to have reduced it self
into this stately frame by the fortuitous concourse of Atoms.

And as prophesy proves the Being of God, so the being of God proves at least
the possibility of prophesy, si dentur dii, datur divinatio, says Cicero, and
the consequence is good and valid; unless with the Epicureans, that granting a
God we deny his providence, and the government of the world by him: Prophesy
and Divine Revelation being one great instrument which he makes use of herein,
and indeed it would have seemed a great defect in providence to have created
such a Noble Creature as Man, without a way of communicating suitable notices
to him, as the conveniences or necessities of things might require.

Thus the Stoics argue in this case, if, say they, there be Gods and yet they
do not declare to men future events, then either they do not love men, or they
know not themselves what will come to pass hereafter, or they think it nothing
concerns men to know, or they think it inconsistent with their Majesty to do
it, or lastly they know not how to communicate this their knowledge to others:
but all these consequences are false, therefore the Being of God proves such a
kind of prophesy or divination. This argumentation of theirs refers to prophesy
in the first sense, but it would be more strong and undeniable if from thence
we inferred the being of prophesy in the latter; that is, the Revelation of
things much more considerable then the mere knowledge of future events; for he
that denies prophesy in this sense, must either grant all those false and
unworthy consequences before mentioned, or some of these, which are as false as
the other, either first that God has declared his whole Will by the Light of
Nature, so that nothing more remains further to be revealed; or Secondly, that
nature has declared enough, and that there is no need of any more; or Thirdly,
that it is inconsistent with the free determination of the Divine Will to make
any further Revelation, then what nature has already discovered.

But now this kind of Prophesy or Divine Revelation was both necessary in
respect of man, and no ways contrary to any resolution of the Divine Will, 1.
It was necessary, because all the several Religions that ever appeared in the
world, either really had, or at least pretended to Divine Revelation, now
things being in this posture at our Saviors appearance in the world, it was
necessary that his Religion should have the truth of that which many of the
others only pretended to, both to free Christians from the danger of being
seduced by the false pretenses of others, and also fully to assure them of the
truth of their own Religion.

Not though as if the false Oracles of the Heathens did first occasion that
Revelation that was truly Divine, for this had always a precedence in nature to
that which was false and counterfeit; thus God first gave the command to Adam
not to eat of the forbidden fruit, before the Devil ever tempted him thereunto.

And the reason of that resemblance, which we sometimes find betwixt Sacred and
profane Rites, is not, that God took occasion from them to institute the like
amongst his own people; but because the Devil, being Gods Ape, does many times
either pervert Divine Institutions to Superstitious or Idolatrous purposes, or
erect something of the like nature of his own to keep some in the belief and
practice of the false Religion, and to seduce others from the true one, so that
it is no ways inconsistent with the subtilty or malice of the Devil, but rather
highly promotive of both, to borrow some Divine Rites and Sacred Institutions
and insert them into his own Worship.

And it seems more probable, that the Egyptians here borrowed from the Jews,
then the Jews from the Egyptians; for notwithstanding the great hatred which
they bore to the Jews, yet they might imitate them in some part of their
Religious Worship, and that not out of any love they had either to them or
their Religion, but that they might the better secure some of their own people
in their Idolatrous Worship, who perhaps had entertained too great an opinion
of some of the Jewish Ceremonies, or that by this means they might some other
ways more effectually manage their malice against them; but what ever was the
first occasion or original of the Devils Oracles, yet this is certain, that at
Christ's appearance in the world, they had very much prevailed in the Heathen
Nations; and therefore it was necessary that Christ should both silence these,
and institute a more certain method of Divine Revelation of his own.

1. Revelation was necessary to assure the world of Gods reconciliation to
mankind, and upon what terms and by what methods we may attain Salvation: for
though the Divine Goodness be as knowable by the Light of Nature, and as easily
apparent in the notion of a Deity, as any other of it is attributes of Power and
Justice; yet being conscious to our selves of daily offending God; and guilt
being naturally full of Jealousy; We could not be so fully assured of Gods
mercy without such a Revelation, having forfeited the effects thereof, as to
our selves, and however though we might have some notions of Gods parability
and willingness to pardon, yet we could scarce have imagined that his mercy
would have extended thus far, not only to pardon our sins, but also to confer
upon us such a degree of happiness.

Nor does their way of reasoning seem cogent and necessary, who tell us that
Natural Reason leads us to a Mediator, and that such an one, as God indeed has
appointed to be God and Man: God, say they, is perfectly just and perfectly
merciful, and being just he must condemn all mankind, because sinful, but this
would be repugnant to his mercy, which must also be perfect with effect, now
seeing the perfection of these two attributes of justice and mercy may consist
in God together, and since this cannot be, unless God does satisfy, and Man do
suffer, therefore Reason dictates such a Mediator, as is both God and Man.

But this is a Post-nate way of arguing, found out since Gods Revelation of his
Will in this matter, for where did ever appear any such way of reasoning
amongst the Heathen Philosophers, or any others, before Gods declaration of it;
so that all that can follow hence, is only an agreeableness of the Divine
Methods of Salvation, here made use of, to Reason, not any ability in Reason to
prove that the things ought to be so, Antecedent to the Revelation.

2. This Argument does suppose or endeavors to prove the Incarnation of
Christ, knowable by the Light of Nature, which is so far from being true, that
it is not fully and clearly conceiveable how it could be done, even now when it
is revealed; there are indeed some instances in nature which seem to facilitate
the belief of the Incarnation, thus what is man, but as it were a previous
Essay to the Incarnation? being compounded of Principles as far distant as
Heaven and Earth, of Soul and Body: but then this is only an illustration of a
truth already revealed, not any Antecedent Argument to prove it.

I might easily enlarge further on this subject, but I am very sensible that I
have already transgressed the due limits of a Preface: the ensuing Treatise
will be a sufficient demonstration of the other particular, viz. That Divine
Revelation is no ways contrary to the free determination of the Divine Will, it
being that which God has promised in general, and particularly by this way of
Dreams and Visions.

Errata in the Preface.
b PAge 7. for might or might, read may or may. c p. 3. line 10, after
particular, insert, actions. d p. 6. l. 15. read consistent. page 7. for Biles,
r. Boyls. p. 3. l. 13. for seems, r. is.

Errata in the Book.
PAge 17. l. 5. for leave, r. bear. p. 17. l. 16. for your, r. the. p. 20. l.
19. for that, r. the. p. 25. l. 3. for that, r. their. p. 41. l. 17. insert
the. p. 44. l. 23. for it and its, r. their. p. 58. l. 10. insert and. p. 118.
l. 11. r. phrensies.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Divine Dreams.
THE INTRODVCTION.
Doubt not but you remember the conference we had, as we went to Councellor
Amproux his lodgings: one of our Discourses was concerning the Nature of those
Dreams which God sometimes sent unto his Servants, and particularly concerning
the marks and characters, by which they might know them to be truly Divine. For
as much as you found a great deal of difficulty in that matter, I should have
been glad if we had discoursed further upon it. But the night came on, and
obliged you to retire to your lodgings; and Mademoiselle de la Suze, who staid
for me in another place, and I went also to ours, we had some discourse in our
return concerning it, and she desired me (according to my ability) to
illustrate and explain what did seem more obscure and difficult in that
subject, which she thought worthy of a more attentive consideration. I bestowed
some thoughts upon it in my journey, and if other affairs had not prevented me,
I had e're this committed them to Paper: But if my occasions, which are at
present so urgent, and importunate do permit, I will do it: and I here begin
this little work in midst of their disturbance, on purpose to engage my self to
a necessity of finishing it, that so I may send it as a testimony of that
respect which I bear you, and of that singular esteem which I have of your rare
qualities, and of the Honor of your Friendship.

CHAP. I.
Of natural Dreams and their several Causes.

THere are three kinds of faculties in man, which are subservient to him, both
in acquiring and preserving knowledge, viz. the External Senses, which are as
it were, at the one extreme; the Understanding at the other; and the Internal
Senses in the middle betwixt these two. The impression of external objects made
upon the Corporeal senses is not called by the name of Dreams, seeing it is
made upon us waking; neither are the ratiocinations of the understanding called
Dreams, because Dreams are formed in some of those faculties, which are common
to us with beasts, to whom also, as to dogs and horses belongs the power of
dreaming: so that it necessarily follows, that that impression, wherein the
nature of dreams does consist, must be made in the internal senses. Now these
are commonly accounted three, the Common Sense, the Fantasy, and the Memory:
all which three, some do think to be but one and the same faculty, but diversely
considered according to its diverse modes of acting upon its respective objects:
others do distinguish them as different faculties in themselves, and not only
in their operations. I I shall here follow this latter opinion, both as more
universally received, and more fit and proper for the explication of that which
I here undertake, and shall assert, that dreams are not made in the common
sense or sensus communis, because that does not act, but when the external
senses are awake: nor to speak properly, are they made in the memory, because
the Idea's of things there are only in Potentia, and when they are reduced into
Act, do then pass into the imagination or fancy. But the images whereof
dreams are formed, are in Act, as we say, and therefore must necessarily be in
that part which we call the Fancy; to which all the world do more generally
agree. That impression then (which is the cause of dreams) must be referred to
one of these three causes, Nature, Angels or God; and accordingly there can be
but three kinds of dreams, natural and supernatural; and these, such as proceed
either from the operation of Angels, or such as are more purely Divine.

As for natural dreams, they may be divided into four Classes, (1.) there are
some which are to be imputed to the mere temperament of the body, or to the
Constitution wherein the person that dreams, chances to be, when he has such or
such visions. For Example, those who are of an hot or Choleric constitution,
or at that time have their Stomachs overcharged with Choler, they commonly
dream of fire; those who are naturally Phlegmatic, or who then chance to
abound with Phlegm, do dream of ponds and rivers, and inundation of waters: and
it is proportionably the same with others, according to the diversity of their
constitutions. And although experience shows this to be true, and that
Physicians do take indications from dreams, whereby to judge of the temperature
of the body, yet the reason, why it is so, does not so easily appear. I shall
briefly offer something, as a reason hereof, as I pass along, though my design
does not at all oblige me hereunto: it is this, I think we may truly assert
that the operations of our outward senses do convey into our memory the Idea's
of all sensible things, which are there preserved upon all occasions; and that
it is from thence that the subject matter of natural dreams is taken. For if we
could imagine a man to have lived to the age of twenty five years without any
use of his senses, we must also imagine him to have lived so long without ever
dreaming, in as much as he had not the Idea of any sensible thing in his
memory; since also it is certain that in sleep the natural heat is more intense
in the inward parts, as the liver, the heart, the diaphragm, and in all those
parts that surround the Stomach: Hence it causes vapors to arise into the
brain, which on the one hand are hot by the heat they draw from their cause,
that raised them; and on the other hand retain something of that humor, which
is more universally predominant in the temperature of the body, or more
particularly in the stomach, whether it be Choler, or Phlegm, or Blood, or
Melancholy, which are the four usually here taken into consideration; according
therefore to the heat of these vapors, so they put the Idea's in the memory
into motion, and reduce them into Act in the imagination; and as they retain
something of such or such an humor, so they affect the brain, and particularly
that part which is the seat of the fancy, with the quality of that humor from
which they proceed. Now that which produces the effect, is, that the organ
being thus affected, does better receive the images of those things which do
suit with its present constitution, and does better retain them; whereas those
others which do not at all agree therewith are dispersed and fly away: so that
if these vapors do arise from a Phlegmatic humor, then the fancy is apt to
represent to it self waters and inundations, if from Bile and Choler, then fire
and burnings; and those other forms of things of a different nature, which the
heat had raised and drawn from the memory into the imagination, slip away and
make no abode there. But however it be, that we decide this question, the
dreams that proceed from such a cause, can have no other power of
signification. but only from the effect to give some knowledge of the cause:
The reason hereof is this, because that which produces them being altogether
void of all understanding (for neither the heat, that is in the inward parts,
has any; nor the memory, nor the imagination, and as for the understanding, it
is not at all concerned herein) therefore these cannot be designed to any
particular end.

2. But there are others (which is the second kind of dreams) wherein the
temperament, and the disposition of humors have no place, and these proceed
from no other cause then the heat, which arising from the lower parts to the
brain, does put the Idea's and images of things in the memory into motion, and
represents them to the fancy, but in a confused and disturbed manner, in
proportion to the greatness of the heat, and according as the vapors, which
arise from the stomach are gross or subtle, and as they are more or less
abundant, and so accordingly fill the vessels of the brain; for when they are
gross and in great plenty, the images of things recalled from the memory, are
there so swallowed up, that either it presents none to the fancy, that it can
take any notice of, which is the cause that we then dream not at all; or if it
do, yet it is attended with so much weakness and obscurity, that when we awake,
we remember nothing of what we dreamed; and hence it is, that some, though very
few, never dream at all; because the vapors that arise in their sleep, are
always thick and darksome; and hence also it is, that ordinarily we do not
dream immediately after meals, for as much as the stomach being then full, does
send up to the brain vapors in too great abundance; but if the vapors be more
thin and subtle, if they be in less abundance and more calm, then the images of
things do present themselves to the fancy with more distinction, and yet not
without a great deal of disorder, for let us suppose the images of themselves
orderly placed in the memory, yet there are two things that may cause
confusion; the one, that the heat that moves them, does also disturb them, as
we see small pieces of matter in a vessel full of water, remain each in its
proper place, so long as the water is calm and unmoved: but if you put fire
under it, the water by boiling is put into motion, and the several substances
are jumbled together by its agitation: the other, that while the external
senses are awake and in action, they govern and fix the fancy by their
influence, but when they are laid asleep and the fancy thus more at liberty,
there is a great deal of irregularity in all its actions; from hence it comes,
that the images, (wherewith the memory, agitated by the heat, has filled the
fancy) do join themselves one to another fortuitously and without order, from
whence is formed an infinite number of fantastical and extravagant
compositions: we see the experience hereof in a fever, when the violence of
the heat and the choleric vapors do disturb the imagination; and we see it
also in fools, who though they neither sleep nor are in a fever, yet have
their imagination disturbed by reason of the distemper of their brain; which
makes them conceive so many Chimaera's and utter such strange inconsistencies,
and diverse kinds of things, which have no natural connection among themselves,
passing into the fancy and joining themselves one to another with a great
deal of irregularity; for the imagination is a faculty, which of it self is
able to receive the impression of those Idea's, and also join them together;
but because it is corporeal and by consequent void of understanding, it can
neither perceive their agreement nor their disagreement, nor conveniently
dispose of them according to reason: So that it acts here, as a blind man would
do, who being among a great number of broken and mutilated statues, should go
about rightly to reassemble their parts by groping: for it would frequently
happen without doubt, that he would, for example, set Marius his head upon
Cleopatra's body, and put the thighs of a Brasenhorse under the trunk of
Epaminondas.

And these dreams have yet less power of signifying things to come, then the
former; for as much as the composition of the images is altogether fortuitous,
and by consequent incapable either to represent any thing, as in an allegorical
Emblem, or nakedly and without any such representation to foretell it; for every
Emblem and Symbolical representation is the work of an intelligent agent, and
the foreseeing things to come requires still more light of reason. It Is true
indeed, that the understanding sometimes makes some reflections upon the things
thus presented to the fancy in sleep; for there is this difference betwixt
our dreams, and those of Dogs and Horses: those of such animals do not reach
any higher faculty, then the imagination, for as much as they have none higher,
whereas ours do sometimes affect the understanding; so that we do sometimes
make rational reflections upon those phantasms, and sometimes long discourses,
as it frequently happens to those who are accustomed to speak in public. But
then in the first place, it is not the understanding that forms these Idea's,
it only acts upon them, as they are represented by the imagination, so that it
cannot give them the least power of signifying things to come; and further how
can that which cannot foresee things future, when awake, do it when asleep, and
be able to represent them in those different shapes which then concur in the
fancy? so far is it from doing any thing of this, that it cannot pass any
rational judgment either of the past or present, of which yet it has much more
knowledge then of things to come, and indeed no extravagance is able then to
check or set bounds to our understanding; we raise our friends whom we know to
be dead, and discourse with them, as if yet living, we set Paris in Quercy and
London in Germany, and this without any great wonder to us, we become Beggars
and Kings in a moment, nor does this so strange an alteration any ways amuse
us, and there is nothing so fantastical or disagreeable, which does not thus
seem reasonable to us.

3. The third sort of natural dreams are such as proceed from those employments
of our life, to which we apply our selves with great intention of mind; for
studious men dream of books, covetous men of money, Soldiers imagine they see
battalions of foot and squadrons of horse, and generally those who are
delighted in any employment dream of things relating thereunto: And it is not
difficult to render a reason hereof, for the images of these things are most
familiar to them, and do most frequently occur; so that it is no wonder, if
when the inward heat, which is much more intense in sleep, does move and
agitate this storehouse of sensible Idea's; no wonder, I say, if these do
first and more frequently offer themselves, but yet always, almost with the
same phantasticalness, as the former, so that we may make the same judgment of
both, and believe that they have no more power to signify things to come, then
they had.

4. The fourth kind of natural dreams is that which arises upon occasion of
some passion which has either possessed us, whilst yet waking, and upon which
we now reflect being asleep, or such as takes its first rise in our sleep by
the motion of the irascible or concupiscible appetite; and here it fares with
us almost in the same manner as in those, which proceed from the temperament of
the body and the constitution of the humors, for thus it presents to our
imagination objects, which leave some resemblance to our passions. Those who
are hungry imagine they see feasts, and those who are thirsty believe they
drink at fountains. The amorous see their inclinations; and the choleric the
objects of their anger, and run to meet their enemies, who present themselves
in arms before them. But as these dreams have without doubt a cause antecedent
in your passion, so it is certain that ordinarily they are no less extravagant,
then the former, nor more capable to give any certain knowledge of things to
come, nor of those very things which already exist, if they be altogether
unknown to us before our dream; for the sensitive part of our soul is indeed
able to submit to reason, but in it self does no ways partake of it: so that it
being in its own nature irrational, it is impossible it should produce any
thing, which as we said before, requires an intelligent agent for its cause.
It Is true, sometimes it happens that some of these dreams do come to pass,
which makes us think, there is some resemblance or agreement betwixt the dream
and the event, and by consequence, that some Angel or Spirit is concerned
therein: But as Aristotle has observed, this happens by mere chance, as he that
without any aim should shoot a thousand arrows, may at last by chance hit the
mark: so in our dreams such an infinite number of visions do pass into our
imagination, that it is not only no wonder, if one should sometimes chance to
be true, but it would be much more strange if once or twice in our life it did
not so happen; but if any of our dreams do not only come to pass, but there
also be a remarkable agreement betwixt it and the event, and such as that we
ought necessarily to suppose the operation of an intelligent agent to
intervene, we ought not then to reckon this among natural dreams, but to refer
it either to God or to some action of Angels.

CHAP. II.
Of Angelical Dreams in General, and some rational reflections on particular
ones.

THere are two sorts of dreams which we may impute to created Intelligences,
the one where the things signified are contained in Symbolical and Mysterious
Representations; the other where they are proposed naked without any such
resemblances; as for the first, those who undertake to give rules of their
interpretation, do it in two different ways, for they tell us that we ought
sometimes to take the direct contrary to the dream for it is interpretation: as
if one dream of marriages, they say, it is a sign of death; and on the
contrary, if we imagine in our sleep that we see Mourning-weeds and
Funeral-attire, we shall then suddenly hear of a Marriage; but one may dream of
such things without Angels any ways concerning themselves herein, for that the
images of those things may remain in the memory, and by the mere force of
nature return into the Fancy, when we are asleep; but when any such dream
shall happen and it be imprinted in the imagination by the operation of an
Angel, we may assure our selves that it is not a good one that does it, for
they are the Ministers of God, who is never that Author of those dreams, whose
signification is thus to be read backward, much less has he established any
such rule to interpret them by, and there is not the least footstep hereof
either in Scripture or Nature, and there is too much of uncertainty in these
interpretations to entitle them to Divine Revelation. And this makes me call to
mind that which they report of Buchanan, who every year inter-leaf'd his
Almanac with white paper, and where the Almanac foretold Fair-weather, he
writ over against it Fowl, and where it said it should be Rain or Cloudy, he
set opposite to it, a Fair and Clear Sky, and that after he had observed it
fifty or sixty years, he said, he always came nearer the truth, then the
Almanac, but hence it follows not, that those who made Almanacks, did design
by the contrary predictions those events, which Buchanan did thus prognostic,
but that the Astrologers making for the most part their Prognostications at an
adventure, and some of them not having the least knowledge of the stars, it
might very well happen that Buchanan, thus by chance might foretell fair or foul
weather, by taking always the contrary to their Predictions.

But the more common rule of Interpreting of dreams is to observe the agreement
and resemblances which are betwixt the dreams and their events; thus they tell
us, that he that dreams he has lost a tooth, shall loose a friend, and he that
dreams that a rib is taken out of his side, shall ere long see the death of his
wife. I shall not here stay to relate examples of this nature, which have been
verified by the event. Cicero among others relates this, a certain man dreamed
that there was an Egg hid under his bed, the Sooth-sayer to whom he applied
himself for the interpretation of the dream, told him that in the same place
where he imagined to see the Egg, there was treasure hid: whereupon he caused
the place to be dug up, and there accordingly he found Silver, and in the
midst of it a good quantity of Gold, and to give the interpreter some testimony
of his acknowledgement, he brought him some pieces of the Silver, which he had
found; but the Sooth-sayer hoping also to have some of the Gold, said, and will
you not give me some of the yolk too? Now these dreams, which we cannot
reasonably impute either to natural causes, or to mere chance, yet do they not
exceed the power of Angels to convey; for an Angel either good or bad (for I
shall not now examine the question, which of the two it is) I say, it is not
impossible for an Angel to know that there was treasure hid there. An Angel
might also imprint such a dream upon the man's imagination, whilst he was
asleep, and also reveal to the Sooth-sayer, that the Egg did signify a
treasure, where there was Gold and Silver hid, or might furnish him with
occasions to conjecture so.

There are also some of this nature, which respect the future, which may
proceed from the operation of Angels. The Poets say that Hecuba, the wife of
Priamus being with child of Paris, dreamed that she brought forth a burning
torch; upon occasion whereof the Soothsayers did presage, that the Child should
be the cause of the ruin of Troy and of its conflagration. The Ancient
Historians tell us, that the Mother of Phalaris dreamed that among the Statues
which she consecrated in the house of her Son, she saw that of Mercury, who
from a bowl, that he had in his hand, poured out blood upon the Earth, which
boiled out in so great plenty, that it overflowed the whole house, which was
interpreted and confirmed by the cruelties of Phalaris the most bloody man upon
Earth. Cyrus in a dream fansi'd he saw the Sun at his feet, and that he thrice
attempted to catch it in his hand, but that it always rolling away escaped him:
which the Magicians thus interpreted; his attempt thrice to catch the Sun
signified that he should reign thirty years, which the event confirmed. These
dreams, I say, may proceed from the operation of Angels, for as much as the
impression of these images in the fancy is not above the Sphere of that
Activity; the Idea of the Sun is in all men's memorys; and that of burning
torches, of Statues and of blood; so that there was nothing wanting in these
occasions but to reduce them into the fancy, and there to put them into a due
place and motion.

And as for the prevision of things to come, which Angels would signify
hereby, this they can do partly of themselves and their own proper Conjectures,
partly by a certain kind of revelation from God. The Devil who seeks all
opportunities of doing mischief to the world, had resolved to promote and carry
on the barbarous humor of Phalaris to all manner of cruelties, and seeing the
house of Priamus flourishing and his state great and potent, he propounded to
himself to do all he possibly could to ruin it, and to that purpose to make
use of all occasions that presented themselves, and to make Priamus his very
children instrumental thereunto. And although these were but mere designs, of
the event whereof, he could have no certainty, for as much as the will of God
and his providence superintends all things, yet he does not forbear to hope,
and to foretell the manner of that thing which he himself designs to do, which
God, for reasons best known to himself, would not hinder the ratification of by
the event. As for that of Cyrus, it was impossible for Angels to Divine how
long he should reign, but God suffers sometimes some of his more secret
Counsels to appear to the view of created intelligences, and from these
radiations which proceed from the Cabinet of the Divine Counsels, they either
certainly foresee some things to come, or at least form such reasonings and
conjectures as come very near the truth.

Those other dreams which propose things nakedly, as they are in themselves
have no need of an interpreter to understand them, but when the event confirms
them, they are not therefore the less wonderful. I shall produce two or three
examples which seem very remarkable. Two Arcadian friends traveled together and
lay one night in the City Megara, where the one lodged in a public Inn, the
other in a private friends house, as was usual in those days. After Supper, he
in the private house being gone to bed, and asleep, the other appeared to him
in a dream, and prayed him to come to his assistance, for as much as the Master
of the Inn designed to murder him: the affright of the dream having wakened
him, he rose up, but being come to himself he took it for a mere dream and idle
vision, and went to sleep again. In his second sleep, the image of his friend
came again into his fancy, and he imagined that he prayed him, that since he
would not help him whilst living, yet at least he would not let his death go
unpunished: for that the Master of the house had murdered him and had cast his
body into a Cart full of dung, and desired him to go early in the Morning to
the Gate of the City before the Cart went out, the man being very much moved by
his dream rose up, and going to that Gate, there stopped the Cart laden with
dung ready to pass, whereupon the Carter being frighted fled away, and the body
being there found, the crime was by this means discovered, the Host punished,
and all the City struck with admiration at the wonderfulness of the dream.

Cicero relates this in the book already cited: See also another taken out of
the life of Monsieur Peiresc, Councellor of the Parliament of Provence. This
excellent Personage going from Montpellier to Nismes lay all night in an Inn,
which is the Midway betwixt those two places; he had in his company one James
Rainier, Citizen of Aix, who in that journey lodged in the same Chamber with
him: as that great man slept, Rainier observed that he talked and muttered
something in his sleep, otherwise then was usual with him, whereupon he wakened
him, and asked him what was the matter; Oh! said he, you have made me lose a
most excellent and pleasant dream; for I was dreaming, that I was at Nismes,
and that a Goldsmith showed me a golden Medal of Julius Caesar, which he would
sell me for four Crowns, and as I was ready to give him them, both my Goldsmith
and my Medal vanished away together by your awakening of me. Being arrived at
Nismes and having not forgot his dream, he went to walk in the City, till such
time as dinner was ready, and passing up and down he went into a Goldsmiths
shop, to ask him whether he had any rarity to show him, whereupon the Goldsmith
answered that he had a Julius Caesar of Gold; Monsieur de Peiresc asking the
price of it, he answered, four Crowns, which thing did fill the mind of that
great person, both with joy and admiration, as well for that he had found a
Rarity, which he had long very much sought for; As also for the surprising, and
strange manner whereby it came to his hands.

A third shall be another out of the same book of Cicero. Hannibal having taken
Sagunta, dreamed that Jupiter called him to a Council of the Gods, where
Jupiter commanded him to carry the war into Italy, and that one of that
Assembly should march in the head of his Army, and having begun his March under
the Conduct of him, who was appointed to be his guide, the guide forbad him to
look behind him, but he could not prevail so far with himself, being
transported with a desire to know what that was, which came behind him, where
he saw a great and terrible beast all compassed with Serpents, which did wind
themselves about it, and where ere it passed, it turned all upside down, houses
and trees, and shrubs, and generally all that ever came in its way: being
astonished at the sight, he demanded of the god that conducted him, what that
Monster signified, whereupon he told him that was the ruin and desolation of
Italy, but as for the rest, that he should not trouble himself with what should
come after, but march on without losing of time.

This last dream did certainly proceed from some evil Angel, for a good one
would never have sent into his imagination the Idea of a Council of false gods.
But an evil one made use of the Images of the false Deities, which their
Statues, had left in the Memory of this Heathen General, and joined other
things necessary thereunto for the perfect constitution of the dream. As for
what was foretold of the desolation of Italy, it was easy for an evil Angel to
Divine, viz. That if this Carthaginian Captain did follow the Counsel given
him, and enter into Italy with a Splendid and Victorious Army, that he would
there make very great Desolations. And if the event was answerable and exceeded
even what the Devil was able to conjecture, it therefore so happened, because
God had so ordained it in the Counsel of his Providence. The first of these
Examples, as it is recited by Cicero, may be referred to good or bad Angels,
(1.) To bad ones, as they had a great Empire among the Heathens, and having had
a great part in the design of him who committed the Murder, they then by the
discovery drew two Signal Advantages: the one, that after they had caused an
innocent man to be slain, they then caused also the guilty to die, this being a
great pleasure to the enemy of mankind, whose destruction he delights in, and
if he were permitted, he would unpeople the whole earth. The other, that hereby
they gave some Credit and Authority to Dreams of this nature, which passing for
Extraordinary and Divine, did further confirm some men in the respect they bare
those Deities, to which they were attributed.

2. It may also be attributed to good ones, for as much as, although, God has
left the Heathen Nations in a great measure to walk in their own ways, yet
notwithstanding, he has not cast off all care of them in respect of his
Universal Providence, of which the Angels are his Instruments, and the
Executors of his Will and Pleasure. And although for good reasons he might
suffer the poor Arcadian to be slain, it was yet an effect of his Providence to
punish the Murderer: for this is one great means, by which he preserves Humane
Societies, for the subsistence whereof God always takes a particular care. As
for the Second, I should without any great difficulty attribute it to a good
Angel, who would thus testify, that though they be invisible, yet they do not
only converse here below with men, but also that they have a kindness for great
Persons, who are lovers of Learning and Virtue; for to impute this Dream to
mere chance, I think it can no more reasonably be done, then to those natural
causes, of which I spoke before. The Author of Peiresc his life, has indeed
reason to say, that considering all the parts of that Story separately, there
is not any one singly that seems to be very wonderful. The City of Nismes,
says he, might come into the Imagination of this great man, as he slept,
seeing he had a Design to go thither, and was almost arrived at it: he might
also dream of Julius Caesar's Medal, being very curious of those Antiquities;
Although the Medals of that kind were very rare, yet it was no strange thing to
meet with one there, seeing that Nismes was a City which had been very much
frequented by the Romans. It was more probable to find one in the hands of a
Goldsmith, then elsewhere, for they into whose hands such pieces of Antiquity
do sometimes come, do often desire rather Current Money, and find better
opportunities of putting them off at Goldsmiths, then elsewhere. It might
easily come to pass, both that Peiresc should dream that he bought it for so
reasonable a price, and that a Goldsmith should be content with four Crowns for
a piece, which those that are curious would without any difficulty buy at a far
greater rate. But that so many circumstances should meet together in one and
the same Dream, and that they should all exactly answer the particularities of
the event, is that which far surpasses both the accidental hits of mere chance,
and all natural causes, so that we must necessarily attribute it to some
intelligent cause.

And every one may see that this is no ways above the power of Angels; they
then certainly knowing that at Nismes, in the hands of a Goldsmith, there was a
Julius Caesar, which they had seen and heard valued at four Crowns, they might
hereupon go and make this impression in the Imagination of this great Person.
However I do not see in this Dream any the least Character, which does
necessarily oblige us to refer it to evil Angels: no more then (briefly to
mention it) that of Calpurnia, the wife of Caesar, who the night immediately
before the death of her husband, dreamed that she saw one run him through with
a Sword in the Senate: though the relation which she made, and the prayers by
which she endeavored to divert him from the Senate that day, proved all
ineffectual: but good Angels may give us good advertisements, though we do not
follow their advice, and this is a testimony of the care they have for the
conservation of the life of Princes; as the neglect thereof is a proof of the
imprudence of those who are concerned therein. It is not related to us in
Scripture, what was the dream of Pilate's wife, when she sent to pray him not
to have any thing to do in the death of our Lord Christ: however it was, it
seems to have come from the impression of a good Angel, though Pilate did not
submit thereunto: However it was sufficient for the Angel in this case, to have
caused his wife thus to give testimony to the Innocence of our Savior;
However, I say, it was (for I would not make it an Article of Faith) and every
one here may use the liberty of his own judgment; perhaps this was done to
distinguish betwixt those Dreams which Angels cause in our Imaginations by the
express Command of God, and those which proceed from their operation by bare
permission: those ought to be more powerful and efficacious, for as much as
they are intended for the execution of some Design, which God has purposed
with himself, and therefore it is necessary that he so far dispose the
understanding of those, whom these visions concern, that they defer so much to
them, as is necessary to bring about the Design; but these coming only from the
good Inclinations of Angels, which God suffers them to follow and to discover
on such and such occasions, it is of no great importance, though they do not
produce the effect, which their Authors designed; and it is sufficient
satisfaction to them, that they have shown that good will, which they have for
men, and especially for those who are eminent in virtue or dignity.

CHAP. III.
Of Divine Dreams.

AS for Divine Dreams, they are also of two sorts, the one contains future
things under AEnigmatical and Mysterious Representations, the other are much
more plain and naked; there are very remarkable Examples of the first sort in
the History of Joseph, as well in those, which concerned himself, to foretell
his own grandeur, as in those of Pharaoh, to forewarn him of the seven years of
plenty, and seven others of dearth.

The Image of Nabuchodonosor is yet more remarkable, as the stone cut without
hands, which from small beginnings came to be a great mountain and filled all
the World; There are Examples of the other kind in the History of the birth of
our Savior; as well those which were sent to the wise men, to warn them to
return some other way, then where Herod did expect them, as in those by which
Joseph was commanded to carry Christ into Egypt, and to bring him back again in
due time. As for Jacob's vision which was conveyed to him in a Dream, when he
went into Padan-Aram, it was compounded of both the sorts, for the Ladder upon
which the Angels did ascend and descend, had without doubt a mysterious
signification, which related to Christ, but the words which he heard, contained
the promises, plain and intelligible, which were not wrapped up in the vail of
dark and mysterious representations. Now concerning these and all other Divine
Dreams in general, we may make these three Enquiries: 1. Why God has sometimes
revealed himself in Dreams to his Servants? 2. How they could certainly know,
that those Dreams had God for their Author, and that they were not vain
delusions? 3. Whether this way of Revelation by Dreams, be yet practiced, and
whether God does still make use of it under the Dispensation of the Gospel.


As for the first of these questions, the Apostle tells us, That God at diverse
times, and in sundry manners spoke of old to the fathers by the Prophets, but
has now in these last days spoke unto us by his Son; where he opposes the
dispensation of the Son to the former of Law, in three things, 1. That God
formerly spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, but has now spoke to us by his
Son. 2. This he did at diverse times, that is, he revealed the knowledge of
himself by degrees, and as it were by parcels, adding one light to another
successively, whereas he has now revealed to us all at once so much of his
truth, as he designed us to know even to the end of the world. 3. He now only
reveals himself in one way, viz. By the preaching of the Gospel, whereas then
he did it in diverse manners.


And these diverse manners may refer to those several kinds of faculties, which,
as I said before, we make use of for the getting and preserving of knowledge,
viz. The External Senses, the Internal, and the Understanding.

As for the External, God makes little use of three of them for this end, viz.
Touching, Smelling and Tasting, but does frequently employ the other two: for
he has been presented visibly to our eyes, as well in humane appearance, as to
Abraham and Manoe and to some others, as in other shapes, as to Moses in the
burning Bush: And as for hearing, he has often caused voices to be heard from
heaven, as by Abraham, and also by Moses, in the Bush, and in many other
instances. As for the Internal Senses, he employs them both waking and sleeping.

1. Waking, by Ecstasies which he has sometimes sent to his Servants: for then
he acted in such manner upon their Imagination by that Power and Virtue which
he there displayed, and made so great and so powerful an abstraction of their
souls from their External Senses, that their functions did altogether cease,
though they were not then asleep: and yet in the mean time he Imprinted in
their fancy the Images of Extraordinary and Admirable things, and made them
inwardly to understand the voice, which gave them, either some Instruction or
Command:

We see a famous Example hereof in S. Peter, when he saw the sheet descending
from heaven, and heard the voice, Kill and eat, for he was then in an Ecstasy
or Trance, and the things which S. John relates to us in his Revelation, were
thus conveyed to him.

2. In sleep, by dreams, such as I have already mentioned, and others of the
like nature; and there is little difference betwixt Ecstasies and Dreams, only
that, though in both there was a Cessation of the Functions of the bodily
senses, yet in an Ecstasy, it was not altogether so entire and absolute, as in
sleep, nor did it proceed from the same cause; for in sleep this cessation
proceeded from natural causes, from whence it usually comes; but in an Ecstasy,
it was caused by the extraordinary and miraculous power of the Spirit of God,
which drew a way the Souls of his Servants from the Organs of their External
Senses, and hindered it from displaying its power and efficacy.

As to the understanding, the Spirit of God in this case acted in these two
ways upon it.

1. That, whereas ordinarily the knowledge which we have in the understanding,
enters by the Ministry of the senses, which conveys the Images of sensible
things, and by these sensible objects furnishes us with the occasions of
ratiocination; yet here God did immediately imprint in the spirit of his
Prophets the understanding of those things, which he would reveal to them, thus
making them to understand without the help of ratiocination: and he revealed
many things thus to Moses and others. 2. That whereas we are not ordinarily
induced to great actions, but after an attentive consultation upon the end,
which we propound to our selves, upon the motives that induce us, and upon the
means by which we may attain them, God did sometimes inspire his servants with
miraculous and heroic motions, by which they were carried to extraordinary
things without such a deliberation, only, because they were inwardly sensible
to themselves, that it was God that thus excited them, such was that of Ehud
when he killed Eglon, King of Moab; such was that of Phineas when he slew the
Israelite and the Madianite at one blow; such that of David when he resolved to
fight Goliath with a sling; and if there were any other ways, which God
sometimes made use of to reveal himself by, under the legal dispensation, as
the voice that was heard in the Tabernacle, and the lights of Vrim and Thummim,
they may be referred some way to that which I now come briefly to speak unto,
and my design does not oblige me to enlarge my discourse further upon this
matter.
I shall only show in general, why God made use of all these diverse ways, and
particularly, why this of dreams. For the first, we must know, that the Church,
as S. Paul tells us, was then in its infancy, and there is a great deal of
difference betwixt the way whereby we instruct Infants, and that by which we
teach Arts and Sciences, to those who are of riper years; To these we only make
use of words, or if there be occasion, to make Demonstrations to the eye, we
only make them in lines and Mathematical Figures, or at the most content our
selves to propose to view the objects and the experiments of sensible things,
as those of the Vacuum or the Loadstone; and all this does only give occasion
to the understanding, to form its own reasonings; but as for Infants, for as
much as their faculty of reason is yet weak and imperfect, we make use of
Medals, Emblems, Representations, Hieroglyphics and other such like Artifices,
so that we have of late years seen painted Chards, full of Emblematical
Figures, whereby to imprint the Rules of Logic in the minds of the younger
sort by play, and the reason hereof is, that besides that men have no need of
those helps to make them understand these Sciences, the Maxims and Theorems
whereof they easily conceive at their first proposal, they also have no need of
those allurements to invite them to learn, for as much as the beauty of the
things themselves is a sufficient invitation hereunto: whereas children have
both need to be taught for Example, by the Figure of an Ox, what is meant by a
Real or Substantial Being, as we see in some Philosophical tables, as also they
must be enticed by these pretty devices, for the difficulty of the things would
discourage them, if we went about otherwise to instruct them.

The Jewish Church being then in this condition of Infancy, these diverse ways,
which God made use of to instruct it by, have contributed something to the
easier understanding of that which he designed it should know, and had more
power to prevail upon their minds, by affording matter of admiration by rare
and miraculous events, then if the things had been delivered more plain and
naked.

I say expressly, that which God designed they should know, because sometimes
the same things have been made use of for different purposes; For the
Institution of Types, Symbolical Representations of things to come and those
Admirable Prophetical visions have been often made use of, as a veil to cover
and hinder the understanding of those things which ought not otherwise to be
interpreted, then by the events.

2. For the Second, since it pleased God to make use of all these means to
reveal himself to the Prophets, and by them to others also, there is no reason
why he should have excluded that of dreams: and indeed there is yet this
further reason in particular for them above others, that although there is a
great deal of vanity in ordinary dreams, and that those which proceed from
Angels have very often much of uncertainty and ambiguity, and that some
Philosophers, as Aristotle among others, did suppose that there ought to be no
regard had to that way of Divination, yet it has always been almost the
universal opinion of all Nations, that the Divinity did principally Communicate
it self to Men by Dreams. Homer has attributed some to his Jupiter: The
Stoics held that there were some altogether Divine: Plato said the same in
some respects, and generally in the Eastern Nations, this opinion had a very
great reputation: So that it was principally in those Nations that they have
reduced the interpretation of dreams into an Art, and have laid down Rules
concerning it; and now because the people of Israel were also of the same
opinion, God therefore chose to send them such dreams, as were truly Divine;
thus firmly to fix them to these, and to divert them from that vanity, to which
other Nations suffered themselves to be carried by those others; and further
it is true, that the most natural way of conveying the knowledge of any thing
whatever, even of the Deity it self, to men, is either by the presentation of
some visible things, which furnish them with the means, and occasions of
reasoning, and thus to rise from the consideration of the effect to the
understanding the nature of the Cause, as is done in the dispensation of
nature; or by way of speech, and to make known truths to them by vocal
instruction, as under the dispensation of the Gospel; thus S. Paul joins these
two dispensations together, when he says, that since in the wisdom of God, the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
save those that believe: But to be thus instructed, there is need of more
clearness and strength of understanding then we ordinarily have in our Infancy,
so that the Church being then in that estate, it ought to be instructed some
other way: Now among all the ways and methods made use of for this purpose,
there was none more proper nor suitable, then that of dreams; for as Plato
says, when a man, whose stomach is full of wine and victuals, comes to sleep,
it is certain that such an one is very unfit to receive the communication of the
Deity, and the visions framed in such an ones fansy would be very obscure,
confused and turbulent.

But when an honest man, one who is sober and temperate, when such an one
dreams, and that after a perfect concoction of his meat, there now rises no
more vapors to his head, but is in a profound sleep, his humors calm and
sedate, his imagination still and clear, as the smooth surface of a mirror or
looking-glass, being then sequestered from all the things of this present life
and the commerce of sense, he is thus a very proper subject to receive the
impression of Divine things, therefore God himself declaring the way by which
he would reveal himself amongst the Prophets, which he raised to his people
Israel, he said, that he would do it by visions and dreams.

CHAP. IV.
The Characters by which they might know that those Dreams were truly Divine,
and not vain Delusions.

BEfore I come to decide the second question, I must briefly premise this, that
when I did distinguish dreams into three kinds, and placed those that proceed
from the operation of Angels in the second, and Divine Dreams in the third
rank, I understood the distinction thus; among those that proceed from the
operation of Angels, there may also be found Divine ones, in as much as God
does not only permit, but also may command the impression of them: but those, I
call Angelical Dreams, are merely such as those, which I have given Examples
of, in as much as neither the formation of the images of which they consist,
does exceed their power, nor is the knowledge of the thing, which these Images
represent, above their natural intelligence, nor above the quickness of their
conjectures and divination; for their Spiritual Nature, their long experience
of things, the knowledge they have of the secrets of nature and of the
inclinations of men, with diverse other assistances, which we have not, do
enable them to reach much further, then we can, into the knowledge of future
things.

Among those I called Divine Dreams, there are also some which consist of
certain Images, the formation whereof is not above the power of Angels; and yet
I call them Divine, because that, whether it was God that employed these Angels
to convey them, or whether they were immediately caused by himself,
nevertheless the things signified by them did so far exceed the natural ability
of an Angels understanding, that it was absolutely impossible they should ever
attain to the knowledge of them, but by a particular Revelation; for though
their knowledge, if compared with ours, be much greater, and their foresight
of things reaches much further, yet it is limited, and that so, that they
neither see things to come either long before, or with any great certainty.

Those then may be reputed to come from God, which by what messenger soever
they be conveyed, yet contain such things, as God only is able to know and to
reveal.

To return then to my purpose, we may boldly affirm, both that those dreams had
some marks by which they might be known to be Divine, and also, that is was
necessary, that they should have so; although we do not now certainly know,
wherein those marks did consist.

First, that they had such, for all those other ways, by which God is revealed
to men, of which we have spoken before, have been distinguished, each by it is
particular mark and character, by which it might be discerned from all other
things, where the resemblance or similitude they bare to each other, might
cause any doubt, whether these might come from God or no. The voice which
Abraham heard had something in it, whereby to distinguish it from other voices,
which might be made by the ministry of evil Angels, and especially that where
God commanded him to sacrifice his Son; This command being so contrary to his
natural affections, and having the appearance of a barbarous and unparalled
cruelty, How should this holy man be persuaded to execute it, if he had not had
some mark, to know God to be the Author of it; and that so certain, that it
could not be imputed to any other cause. Moses his vision in the bush, to
persuade him to undertake the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and his
Introduction of it into the Land of Canaan, ought likewise to have some such
signal character upon it; for how could he resolve upon so great an enterprise,
accompanied with so great difficulties, if he had not been well persuaded, that
it was God, who promised that he should overcome them all? S. Peter's vision
could not be less remarkable, which prevailed with him, to begin the preaching
of the Gospel among the Gentiles, being a thing which the Jews had a great
aversion against. The impression of those things in the understandings of
Moses, of David, and Solomon, and diverse others, ought also to have some signs,
by which they might be acknowledged for Divine truths, otherwise these great
Persons would never have related them with so great confidence to others, and
as to themselves, could never have received so great satisfaction therein.
Lastly, Those Heroic transportations of Ehud and Phineas to those actions
related in Scripture, ought to be very distinct, clear and evident, otherwise
they would not have suffered themselves to be carried to those actions, which
had been truly punishable, and even in some sort horrible both before God man,
if they had not proceeded from a Divine command. Dreams then without doubt have
likewise had their certain marks, whereby to distinguish them from the
Nocturnal illusions that proceed either from the impression of evil Angels, or
from natural causes, as I intimated before.

2. And it is also necessary that they should have such marks, for the same
reasons which I alleged before upon former occasions; For when God commanded
Joseph in a dream to carry Jesus into Egypt; Such thoughts as these might have
come into his mind. This dream perhaps may be only a vain imagination, and a
mere phantasm of my own brain, which has no foundation of truth in it: Perhaps
the great solicitude I am always in for the preservation of this miraculous
Infant, has sent into my soul this Idea or opinion, that they now seek his
life, though perhaps they never so much as think of any such thing: Perhaps it
is some evil spirit which either takes pleasure to give me needless fears, or
would incite me to remove this Infant from hence, that so upon the way he might
more easily lay and execute his treacherous designs; in a word, diverse such
like things might come into his thoughts, and cause a great uncertainty of
resolution, what he had best to do upon the command. And nevertheless it
appears by the history, that he did not at all hesitate upon it, which shows
that he had a powerful persuasion of the truth of the dream. Now though we
cannot at present certainly know, wherein this full persuasion did consist, and
upon what it did depend, yet notwithstanding we ought not at all to question,
but that this and the like persuasions were founded on something that was both
in it self sufficient, and to them a sufficiently evident ground of their
assent.

But we must enquire what that was, and this is the proper subject of this
Meditation; since there are but three sorts of dreams, those which are produced
by natural causes, those which proceed from the operation of Angels, and those,
which I call Divine. The readiest way to come to the knowledge of the truth in
this case, will be to show that these can neither belong to the first nor the
second rank, and thence it will necessarily follow, that they must belong to
the third. As for natural dreams, I suppose, that it is easy to distinguish
those from such as proceed from a Divine impression: these natural dreams, I
said, were of four sorts; the first depends upon the temperament and
constitution of the body, others acknowledge no other cause, then the mere
motion of the Idea's of the brain by the natural heat in the time of sleep; the
others come from a very attentive application of our minds to some things when
we were awake; and the last from the passions of the sensitive soul, which is,
as it were, awakened and acts more vigorously during the repose of our senses.
But now, for Example, to which of these causes can we refer the dreams of
Joseph or Pharaoh? What mark do they bear of the temperament of their bodies,
or the constitution of their humors? What Idea's of things could remain in
their memory, which could be able so regularly to proportion these dreams, as
to see in the one, the number of the sheaves, and of the Stars, the Sun and the
Moon, and their prostrations before him; in the other, the number of the Ears
of Corn, both the empty and the full ones, of the Kine, the fat and the lean
ones, and their action in devouring one another? What so great attention of
mind could be upon any worldly care or employment as to cause any such
representations in their sleep? What passion could move either their
concupiscible or their irascible appetite, as thereby to form such phantasms?
And further, the dreams that come from any of these causes are always irregular
and composed of parts not consistent with one another, so that nothing is
commonly more fantastic and extravagant then they: but those of Joseph and
Pharaoh and the Image of Nabuchodonosor, and if there be any other of the same
nature mentioned in Scripture, they are so admirably well composed, that they
seem to be the result of a very intelligent Cause. The dreams which proceed
from natural causes are obscure and always presented to our minds with a great
deal of confusion, so that we observe nothing distinct in them, or if one part
have something of clearness and perspicuity in it, the others are commonly
perplexed and intricate. Whereas those dreams related in Scripture, are not
only clear, but full of light, whether we consider them in the whole, or in
their parts; natural dreams do make so little impression upon our Spirits, that
for the most part, we do not remember them when we are awake; whereas the
Divine are firmly fixed in our memory: for as for what is reported of
Nabuchodonosor, that he had forgot his dream, and that he stood in need of
Daniel, to recall it again into his mind, this happened by the particular
dispensation of the Divine Power and Providence which removed out of his mind
the Idea's of his vision, thereby to render the wisdom of Daniel more
remarkable: besides this Prince very well remembered that he had dreamed, and
the perplexity which his dream caused in him, the passionate desire he had to
recall it, the manner of his behavior to the Soothsayers and all the rest
which passed upon this occasion, fully showed that this vision did very nearly
concern him, and that also in his dream he had observed something that was
singular and extraordinary in it: if in the morning we remember our natural
dreams, yet we disregard them and count them but mere trifles; whereas those to
whom God sent those Divine Dreams, did not only distinctly remember them, but
had them still firmly represented to them when they were awake, and did look
upon them as Divine advertisements, and were very solicitous about the
interpretation, or the event of them. When dreams proceeding from natural
causes have made any impression upon our Spirits, so that they hold us in some
suspense in the morning, as it sometimes happens, we commonly do these two
things: First, We make an attentive reflection thereupon, and carefully examine
and consider them in all their circumstances, and at last find them to be mere
vanities, and produced by some of those natural causes before mentioned, and so
we free our selves from that disquietness they had before caused in us.
Secondly, If we cannot thus wholly free our selves, then we compare them with
those true and real operations, which our senses produce in us waking, and by
thus comparing them, all those impressions which these dreams had made upon our
spirits, do altogether vanish. For it is here almost as in the comparison of
things represented upon a Theater, with those that are really done. Whilst we
see a Tragedy acted, we feel a concernment and passion in us, sometimes even to
the effusion of tears. But this only touches, as it were, the surface of the
soul, and is not of any long continuance, or if this emotion of the mind do
continue longer, yet it is as good as nothing in respect of that which the real
view of these actions and passions, and murders actually committed in our
sight, do cause in us; but in Divine Dreams it was directly contrary, for if
those, to whom they were sent, did in the least doubt of their Divinity, and
did set themselves seriously to examine them, the more they considered them,
the less reason they found to doubt of them; and when they compared them with
the operation of their senses, they found, to their great astonishment and
admiration, that even those of sense were less true and real, then they; these
Divine Dreams, I say, made a more strong and firm impression upon the Spirits
of those that received them, and they were more fully persuaded of their
Divinity, then we are of the reality of the operation of our senses, when
waking they exercise themselves upon their respective objects, and it is no
difficult thing to give a reason for it. That which causes sensation, and makes
us believe the truth and reality of the actions of sense, is, that those
sensible species, which affect the outward senses do also pass into the
Common-sense, which is a faculty superior to them, so that it can judge of
their actions and of the things imprinted thereupon. It can also compare the
action of one sense with the operation of another, and laying them together
confer their respective properties and qualities; and the judgment that results
from hence, depends as well upon the impression, which the object makes upon
the external organ, according as it is more or less intense, as upon the nature
of the Internal and Common-sense, which is a corporeal faculty, and that which
belongs to the sensitive part of the soul, of which Dogs and Horses and other
animals do also partake. As for Divine Dreams, the impression was indeed make
in the fansy, which is also a corporeal faculty, it being one of the internal
senses; but the reflection which the servants of God made thereupon, when
waking, was the work of the understanding, which is more clear and exact in its
operations, and which in the Prophets and those other faithful men, to whom
these dreams were conveyed, was further enlightened by the Spirit of God, to
judge aright of the object which it had so attentively considered. The
impression then of these dreams being more profoundly imprinted upon the
phansy, for as much as it came from a supernatural cause, then that which the
sensible objects make upon our outward senses; and the faculty, which did
consider and reflect upon them (both as to the whole and the parts and the
circumstances that attended them) being more excellent and more exact in its
judgments then it is possible for the common sense to be, consequently the result
thereof ought to be proportionably more perfect, and the persuasion of the
divinity of these dreams more certain and more undoubted.

As for the dreams which proceed from the operation of Angels, it must be
acknowledged they are more difficultly distinguished from those that are
Divine: for they are capable of a more regular formation, then those that are
produced by natural causes; they may be more strongly imprinted upon the
imagination, and so may be of longer continuance, so that we may more easily
remember them, when we do awake; in a word, they are of greater force to
persuade us, that they proceed from a Divine principle. For the understanding
of an Angel does manifestly show it self, as well in the methodical placing of
the parts of the dream, from whence it draws its symmetry and proportion, as in
the resemblance which they bear to the things, which they are designed to
represent; as we have seen before in the dream of the Egg and the Treasure, to
which we might add many others of the like sort: Yet here we must call to mind
what was before said of this matter, that there is a great deal of difference
betwixt the dreams which may have been caused by Angels only, for as much as
that which they contained and whereof they did consist, was not above either,
the understanding or the activity of Angels; and betwixt those of which they
were only the Instruments to form the Images in the phansy of Gods servants,
according to the Command, and according to the Revelation which he had given
them, of his Will: As for the first, the comparing the actions of good and bad
Angels would easily show the difference, and it might more especially be made
in this double respect: (1.) The Images that good Angels did imprint upon the
phansy, did never contain any thing of Idolatry or Pagan superstition, whereas
those, which proceeded from evil ones, were commonly full of it: for in these
there was always either some representation of false gods, or something which
concerned their worship, or some other vision of that nature, which denoted the
author of the dream to be willing to authorize Idolatry or Superstition, from
which the Inclination of good Angels was always very distant.

(2.) The dreams caused by evil Angels did always, or at least for the most
part induce to some evil actions, which the good ones never do, who as they are
free from temptation to evil themselves, so do they never tempt others to it.
That which might render the discerning betwixt these two more doubtful or more
difficult, is, that upon this, as upon other occasions, these Angels of
darkness might transform themselves into Angels of light, and endeavor to
impose upon the credulity of the faithful, by causing them to have such dreams
which should not seem to contain any thing of that vice, we before mentioned,
and which should tend to actions indifferent in themselves, or such as perhaps
might have the appearance of good, but yet such as they might make use of for
some evil design. And the dream sent to Joseph, to command him to carry Christ
into Egypt may serve for an Example; for, as I have already said, Joseph might
perhaps think that this was a mere illusion of the devil, who designed hereby
to lie in wait for him to destroy him.

Here we may lay down these several considerations. First, That how great a
cheat soever the Devil is, yet he can never counterfeit so well, but something
will happen whereby he may be discovered: they say, that when he visibly
appears in humane shape, what ever care he takes to disguise himself, yet there
is always something in the apparition, by which he may be known, either by the
horror of his Claws, or some stinking smell or some such like thing which
presently appears and renders the vision terrible and frightful.

Whether it be so, or no, I know not, I will not affirm it, though it be not
without some appearance of reason. But as for what concerns his actions and the
means he makes use of, whereby to deceive men, whether by dreams or by voice,
or any other illusion, neither is his own malice able, nor will the Divine
Providence suffer him so perfectly to resemble the actions of good Angels, but
there will be some mark by which to discern them. And what I said before upon
occasion of the dream of the Arcadian, is founded only upon the relation that
Cicero makes of it.

If we had had a perfect and entire account thereof, with all its
circumstances, one might certainly have found something in it, whereby we might
easily have known, whether it proceeded from a good or bad Angel. Hence I dare
boldly affirm, that if the dream sent to Joseph had come from an evil spirit,
there would have been something more in it, then what is related of it, whereby
this holy man would easily have known, that it was not of a Divine Inspiration.

Secondly, Not only dreams proceeding from the Devil have some character, from
whence we may conclude their original, but also those that come from good
Angels have something on the contrary, whence we may conclude their Author
truly good, for naturally every effect retains some mark of its cause; Fire
leaves something of it self, where it exercises its power; and Water, where it
passes; Beasts do imprint something upon their proper operations; and Men and
other intelligent agents, on theirs, and generally all manner of productions
bear some indications of the nature of their cause. And the more excellent the
causes are, the more knowable they are in their effects, unless on set purpose
they corrupt their action and designedly disguise it, as when David
counterfeited the fool, which yet Angels never do. From whence I conclude, that
since it was a good Angel, which by the command of God, conveyed this dream to
Joseph (for the Scripture does openly attest it) it was without doubt
accompanied with very evident arguments of the nature of its cause.

First it is absolutely said, that an Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream, and afterward that he spoke to him, saying, Rise and take the little
Infant and his Mother, and fly into Egypt and stay there, until I bring thee
word, for Herod seeks the Infant, to put him to death.

Where we have the Apparition, after that the Command, lastly, the Reason which
he there alleges; as for the Apparition, that could not be, but in some Image,
which must appear visible, which might symbolically represent the Angelical
Nature, for that being spiritual and immaterial, it could not otherwise be
represented to this holy man: For who can doubt but that Image had something so
splendid and glorious, that Joseph seeing it in his sleep, and after remembering
it, when awake, was in both equally struck with admiration of its Magnificence?
and what essay made by an Angel of darkness to imitate the splendor of such a
vision, could come near the glory of the appearance of a Divine Messenger, who
brought the Commands of God to men and for that purpose was adorned with a ray
of the Divine Majesty?

As for the Command, that could not be given but by the mediation of a voice,
which Joseph in his sleep imagined to hear, as he apprehended he saw the Angel
encompassed with light. I do not here say, that men's voices have such different
marks of distinction one from another, as that blind men, as Historians do
testify, have distinguished them in a multitude, by the mere characters of
their voices, although they have but once heard them speak; Since perhaps it
might be replied that blind men having often heard other men speak, are thus
better enabled to make the distinction; whereas it is possible that Joseph never
heard the voice of any, either good or bad Angels before, and upon this account
could not compare them together: to which may be added; that the natural voice
of men is of one kind, and that which Angels form only by representation in the
imagination of a man asleep, of another. I shall here only return, that as the
Image or apparition of the Angel had something particular in its luster and
Majesty, so the voice had something in the tone, and in the nature of its
articulation extraordinarily Majestic. So that as the Devil could never be
able to frame an apparition of himself which might come in competition with the
Magnificence of that vision, so neither could he counterfeit a voice, which
might equal the Majesty and Authority of that of a good Angel.

Lastly, the Reason of the command is very remarkable, for it would have been
very strange, if the Devil should have been careful for the preservation of the
life of an Infant, from whose birth, if we do consider the miracles that did
accompany it, he could expect nothing, but the ruin of his Empire: he is a
murderer from the beginning, and if it were in his power, would destroy all
the Infants that come into the world from the very Cradle, but that he foresees
some, who come for the ruin of mankind, as Nero's and Caligula's. And since if
this Infant was in any danger, it was certainly under the dominion of Herod,
who of his own nature was cruel, who had more reason of fear from the birth of
Christ, then any other Potentate whatever, and who had an absolute power in
those Countries, if the Devil had had a design to impose upon Joseph by his
delusions, would he ever have induced him to have left the place, where he was,
to have gone to another? Where could he have laid his designs against Christ
with greater hopes of success then where he was, being, as it were, in the Paws
of a Lion, or in the den of a wild beast?

Thirdly, It plainly appears that Joseph was fully persuaded of the Divinity of
the vision, seeing that without any deliberation, as soon as he awoke, he arose
and took the Infant and fled into Egypt; now the dreams which come from natural
causes, do not carry us to any action, and we think we should be taken for
fools, if we undertook any thing, though of never so little importance upon the
mere solicitation of a dream. And those very dreams which yet have something
more of life and vigor in them, then natural ones have, and upon this account
may be attributed to some Spirit; these indeed may cause a great deal of
disquiet, of hope or apprehension, but they do not induce us to undertake any
resolution in things of Consequence, unless it be those of Melancholy tempers
or unsound brains: Since then Joseph, who was a wise and sober man, betook
himself so readily to the execution of the command, it is certain that he was
fully persuaded of the Divinity of the Revelation: for since Jesus was his Son,
we cannot think that he would have rashly taken up such a resolution; much less
certainly would he have done it, the question being then of him, of whom he had
the honor to be appointed Guardian.

Now this persuasion must necessarily come from one of these two things, 1. He
either found in the object it self such irrefragable arguments of its truth,
that there remained no place for deliberation, but his understanding
immediately determined it self:

Or, Secondly, if the Arguments were not altogether so strong and evident as to
force his judgment to embrace the object, then God by the incomprehensible
power of his Spirit did so effectually determine it on this side, that it could
not possibly resist.

This latter is the less usual method of Gods proceedings; but when it does so
come to pass, then it is an undoubted proof that the object is truly Divine.
For it is only God, who does so rule in the understanding of wise and virtuous
men, and who so powerfully inclines it to such a belief and resolution,
although it does not see in the object reasons altogether proportionable to the
effect it feels in the soul: So that if Joseph was thus persuaded to the
execution of the command, he then had in his own private sentiments and in the
extraordinary determination of his understanding, an evident proof of the
Divinity of his dream.

The first of these is without doubt the more common and natural: for what the
Loadstone is to Iron, that is truth to the understanding, which does greedily
embrace it, and inseparably joins it self to it, when once by evident
demonstrations it clearly apprehends it: If then Joseph by this means was
persuaded, then his understanding saw such marks of the truth and Divinity of
the dream, that he did more certainly believe it, then he either did or could
do those corporeal objects, which represented themselves to his sense.

As for those dreams whereof Angels may have been the instruments, but not the
Authors, they were easy to be distinguished from all others: For besides, as I
said before, that every effect draws something from the nature of the cause,
and causes the more excellent they are, the greater impression they make upon
their effects, whether God did mediately or immediately convey those dreams; so
far it was necessary they should bear some undoubted mark and character of his
power: this only thing was enough to distinguish them from all others, that
they contained in them things which passed the reach of the understanding both
of Men and Angels; for how could it enter into the understanding of either of
them, that Joseph should come to that grandeur which his dreams promised? What
created intelligence could Divine, that there should be in Egypt seven years of
plenty and abundance, and after them seven others of dearth and barrenness, as
Pharaoh saw in his? For grant that Angels have very much of the knowledge of
natural causes, yet two such admirable events, so regular and constant, each
for the space of seven years, how could they be searched into, being so closely
and obscurely hid in the secret foldings of a particular providence? What
humane understanding, or what foresight of Angels could discover both the
succession and the disagreement, the duration and the end of all those Empires,
which were represented one after another in the image of Nabuchodonosor? What
conjecture could divine that, which the stone cut without hands did presage,
and what it was to do and to become, as the same vision of Nabuchodonosor does
represent it? And if it were necessary here to speak of Jacob's vision, none, I
say, not only of men, but none of those Angels themselves, which he saw
ascending and descending upon the ladder, were able to foretell (if God had not
extraordinarily revealed it) that that did represent the Messiah to come, who
should make peace between heaven and earth, and reestablish a communication
betwixt God and men by the intermission of Angels; and as for the promises,
which God, who was at the top of the ladder in heaven, made to the Patriarch,
they were plain and clear according to the truth of things, without any shadow
of Allegory or mysterious Symbol, but they were of things so far remote, that
it was only God who could foresee or foretell the event, so that that vision was
altogether Divine.

This is well indeed, will some here object, these dreams appear to be Divine
when they are understood, or when they are confirmed by the events; but let us
here enquire, how they could be judged so, by those to whom they were sent,
before the interpretation, and by the mere consideration of the dreams
themselves. We must then distinguish betwixt the dreams themselves and their
interpretations, (which were sometimes made by the servants of God, as Joseph
and Daniel) and their events. And to begin with the consideration of their
events, it is certain that when they were once come to pass, they did then
fully evidence the Divinity of those visions, that did represent them; For not
to speak of the Image of Nabuchodonosor, which did prefigure things at such a
distance, that all the Angels together were never able to foretell them; I shall
only speak of those of Joseph and Pharaoh, and the Officers of his house, who
were in prison with Joseph; who, having seen the things so punctually
accomplished, could in the least doubt, but that they were of Divine
Revelation? But this is not that which we here principally intend.

2. As for their interpretations, it is certain that those admirable
resemblances, that are betwixt them and the visions themselves, must needs be
matter of great wonder to those, who heard them, even before the event: for
these resemblances could not come by mere chance: since there did appear in
every particular so exact a relation between them, and we see that
Nabuchodonosor was ravished with admiration of them, and Pharaoh was so fully
persuaded, that without any further consultation he preferred Joseph to the
highest dignity, with an absolute power to dispose of the affairs, particularly
of the revenues, of Egypt, according to his own pleasure, to provide himself by
the provision of the plenty of the seven first years, against the desolation
which should be caused by the seven years dearth: but it is true, that this also
does not reach to a full and proper answer to the objection: since the divinity
of the dreams ought to appear in themselves.


Thirdly, Here then we ought to observe the difference betwixt those dreams
which brought with them matter of express commands, as those which were sent to
Joseph and to the wise men, which came to worship our Savior, and those which
consisted simply in Symbolical and Allegorical representations of things to
come. Those of the first sort ought to contain in them evident and undoubted
characters of their Divinity, otherwise they could never have powerfully enough
persuaded the servants of God to obey them: those of the latter did not
absolutely require so great a force and evidence, and yet it is certain, that
these have been able to make such a powerful impression upon the minds of those
that received them, that they certainly believed them to proceed from a
supernatural and Divine Cause. Joseph sufficiently testifies this by the
earnestness he shows to relate his, for that was indeed to acknowledge that he
had seen something that had made very sensible impressions on him. The Officers
of Pharaohs house did the same in theirs, and testified that they did not take
them for rash and vain delusions: and Pharaoh did yet appear more lively and
deeply moved by his, in regard of that pain and uneasiness he was in, till he
had obtained the understanding and interpretation of it.

Not to repeat what I have already said concerning the means by which the
divinity of dreams sent from above might be discerned from the vanity of those
that proceed from natural causes (though it be also necessary to remember all
those characters which do distinguish them) I say, there was never any of that
kind which did not cause a great astonishment in those that received them. I
shall begin with the consideration of those which are less remarkable and by
degrees proceed to those that are more famous. Pharaoh's Cup Bearer dreamed
that he saw a vine, which had three branches, from whence sprang certain buds,
which increased and blossomed: that at the same time the bunches of grapes
blossomed and brought their fruit to maturiy; That he had Pharaoh's Cup in his
hand, and that he took the grapes and pressed and strained them into the Cup,
and then gave it into Pharaoh's hand, now I pray, the dreams which proceed from
our bodily temper and constitution, or from the motion of the Idea's in our
memory caused by natural heat, or from the application of our minds to the
cares and businesses of life, or from the motion of our passions, are they
either so emblematical on the one side, or so regular on the other, as to
present, in their very constitutions, Symbols consisting of so many parts,
which answer one another with so great proportion? To which if you add that
this emblem, as it was distinct and articulate, so was it also lively, clear,
deeply impressed upon the imagination, you will not find it any way strange if
it passed in the apprehension of the Cup Bearer for a Divine and extraordinary
dream: but he had yet more reason to be of that opinion, when his Companion,
the Baker, told him in the morning that he had also dreamed the same night,
that there were three white baskets upon his head, and that in the uppermost
there was all manner of provisions relating to the Bakers trade for Pharaoh,
and that the Birds did eat them out of the Basket, as it was upon his head: for
this circumstance, that they both dreamed at the same time, and saw visions
rare in their compositions, proportionable in their parts, Symbolical, without
doubt, in their signification, suitable each to the Office of the dreamer; which
agreed both in the number three, although they did otherwise differ in some
remarkable circumstances; lastly, which had made very great impressions upon
them both; all this, I say, could not be brought about but by an intelligent
and heavenly cause; so that, it is no wonder if the perplexity which these
visions caused in their minds did equally appear in the Morning by the change
of their countenances: The dreams of Pharaoh had yet something of more
exactness in the just proportion and symmetry of their parts; seven young kine
on the one hand, and seven more on the other; the good and strong constitution
of the one seven, and the leanness of the other; the beauty of the fat ones,
and the ghastly ugliness of the other; the action of the one, which devoured and
swallowed up the other, and all this without any mixture of any thing that was
fantastical or extravagant, as it commonly happens in dreams, and without any
circumstance from whence Pharaoh might infer that there was any thing in it,
which might in the least argue any tincture, either of his cares or passions,
either of the constitution of his humors or the temperament of his body, this
was sufficient even at first to cause admiration and perplexity in his
thoughts. And indeed, in that it is said, he wakened upon his dream, this shows
that he was very sensibly touched with it, for those dreams that make any great
impression upon us do awaken us. Nevertheless Pharaoh was not much frighted at
his first dream, and went again to sleep as before; but when another vision
answerable to the first represented to him on the one hand seven fair and full
ears of Corn, and on the other seven small ones, blasted with the East wind,
and that the small and withered ones devoured the fair and full ones; then he
did not at all doubt, but it was God that spoke to him by these
representations, so that his very soul was terrified. And indeed these two
visions thus presented one upon the neck of another, were too clearly and
visibly mysterious, not to cause something of astonishment. Those of Joseph
appear to me yet more admirable.

He first saw the sheaves of his brethren which did encompass his sheaf and
prostrate themselves before it; which had so clear and plain a signification,
that his brethren understood it at the very first: a little after in another
dream he saw the Sun and Moon and Eleven Stars, which also fell down before
him; which still contained the same thing in such an illustrious and glorious
Emblem, that when he came to recite it, his father did not only understand it,
but was offended at it and chid him for it: Whether then we suppose, that Jacob
and his other children did really believe that Joseph had thus dreamed, or that
they suspected that he had contrived it, yet it manifestly appears that they
acknowledged, that that could not proceed but from the operation of an
intelligent agent. For mere chance could never have adjusted the parts of these
visions singly, much less could it so well have joined them both together: This
then was enough to make them believe these dreams were supernatural. But yet
there was another thing that might persuade Joseph, that they were truly
Divine, his conscience bare him witness that he was void of ambition, and if
perhaps he had had some kind of inclination or tendency that way, yet however
it would not have been to desire dominion over his brethren, much less would he
have desired it over those who begat him, for this is a monstrous desire, and
such as is altogether unnatural. But grant he had such strange elevations of
Spirit as to desire to become so great, as that his father and mother should
prostrate themselves before him, whence was it that his imagination set it self
to find out the Sun and Moon and Eleven Stars precisely, whereby to presage
this Empire? It is a very rare thing, if in a mere natural dream, any one
imagines that he sees the Sun, for there is always something that is black and
dark in these nocturnal visions: But though that should happen much oftener, yet
to see it in such a state of humiliation, and the Moon and Eleven Stars to
represent that, which this dream prefigured, is a thing so far above that which
natural causes are accustomed to do, that it would be too great an impertinence
to impute it to them.

Lastly, the dreams of Nabuchodonosor are yet in my opinion somewhat more
magnificent: for there a great Image was represented to the imagination of this
Prince, the splendour whereof was excellent, and it is appearance terrible: the
head thereof was of fine gold, the breast and arms of Silver, its belly and
hinder parts of Brass, its legs of Iron, its feet partly of Iron, partly of
Clay; after that appeared to him a Stone, which of it self fell from a Mountain
without being cut with hands, which rolling down struck against the feet of the
image, and bruised them to pieces, afterward the Iron, the Clay, the Brass,
the Silver, the Gold were all equally bruised to pieces, and became like chaff
in the air in Summer, blown up and down, and driven to and fro with a strong
wind; so that all the materials, whereof the Image was composed, did vanish and
wholly disappear. But as for the Stone that broke the Image, it became a great
mountain, and filled all the universe: let us a little lay aside the
interpretation of this vision, and not at all consider the things designed
thereby; let us only consider the vision in it self, and see if ever any thing,
like unto it, did enter into a humane understanding: Certainly the Idea of such
an Image, is so fair, the variety of the Metals and Materials, that composed
it, so remarkable; the continued series of them so admirably succeeding each
other; the stone which broke and dashed it in pieces and the manner of its
coming so extraordinary and surprising; its increase so miraculous, and in
general the whole series of this representation so majestic, that it could
never enter into the imagination of man, if it had not been sent from above:
for certainly humane understanding was too little to serve for a mould, where
so great and magnificent a work should be framed. And the effect, which it
produced in the Spirit of Nabuchodonosor, is very considerable: he was a
Prince, and those of that birth and dignity are not easily moved by
extraordinary things; He was a great Monarch and Conqueror, and such Princes
have commonly more elevated thoughts, then others: and of Monarchs and
Conquerours, he was one who was puffed up with the opinion of his own grandeur,
and this would be apt to make him in all conditions either sleeping or waking,
to think most things either Ordinary or Common; and further, when he awakened,
he did not at all remember his vision. Now when our dreams are vanished from
our minds, the motion and impression, which they then made upon us, do usually
cease and vanish with them: and though there did not remain the least footstep
of his dream in his memory, but only thus far, to remember that he had dreamed,
yet when he came to acquaint his Soothsayers, Astrologers and Magicians
herewith, he told them, that his Spirit did remain astonished, and the passion
which he had to retrieve what was fled from him, that so he might have the
interpretation of it, caused him to denounce threatenings and terrible
punishments to them, in case they did not acquaint him with it; so that it must
necessarily be, that he was inwardly sensible of something of divinity in the
dream, that produced in him such a passionate desire to know the interpretation.

I shall not here speak any thing of Jacob's vision, for that speaks enough of
it self; for certainly the words he there heard did promise such great things,
so far above either the power or knowledge of humane understanding, the voice
of the speaker was so Majestic, the image of a Ladder which reached from earth
to heaven, upon which the Angels did ascend and descend, upon the top whereof
God himself did seem to sit in a visible and humane shape and figure, as a
presage of the future Incarnation of Christ; all this, I say, had so great, so
glorious an aspect, and Jacob himself was so struck with Reverence, Admiration
and Amazement, that he was forced to cry out that the very place was terrible,
and that in seeing this vision, he was set, as it were, in the threshold of the
house God, and in the very porch of heaven. And this shows that this dream had
made an impression in him quite different from those which proceed from natural
causes. I suppose I have already sufficiently discussed this question, it only
now remains to resolve the last.

CHAP. V.
Whether God does make use of this kind of Revelation by Dreams, now under the
Dispensation of the Gospel.

JOel has thus prophesied concerning the time of the coming of the Messiah, It
shall come to pass in those days, says God, that I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, your young men
shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. And in those days I
will surely pour out of my spirit upon my servants, and upon my handmaids, so
that they shall prophesy: And I will do wonders in heaven above and signs on
earth beneath, blood and vapor of smoke; the Sun shall be turned into darkness
and the Moon into blood, before that great and notable day of the Lord come. It
is clear from these very words of the Prophet, without any need of producing
others, that at the coming of the Messiah, God would pour out a great abundance
of his Spirit upon his Church, which should render the extraordinary and
miraculous gifts of prophesy, of visions and of dreams almost common to all the
faithful, which God before did but sparingly communicate to some particular
persons: and indeed, the Apostles have applied this passage to the sending of
the holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost, and the experience of things at that
time did very authentically testify the truth of this Prophesy; for the
abundance and variety of gifts, which God poured upon Christians, at the first
establishment of Christianity, is a thing much to be wondered at; in as much as
he did not only inspire the Apostles, and Prophets and Evangelists, the
Pastors, Doctors and Deacons, and generally all those who had any public
Office or charge in the Chruch, but also many particular persons without any
difference of Age, Sex or Condition. And the History of the Acts of the
Apostles, with that which we have yet remaining of the succeeding Age, does
give us a very sufficient testimony hereof.

But here are yet further two things very remarkable; the first, that the
fulfilling of this prophesy, if we regard the Emphasis of the terms, wherein it
is expressed, is not limited to the Infancy of the Church or an hundred or
sixscore years after, but extends to all the ages of Christianity, even to the
end of the world. For here is an opposition of the times of the Gospel to the
times of the Law, and by consequence of all the duration of the one
dispensation, to all the duration of the other.

The second, that notwithstanding this, we see by experience that those
miraculous gifts of the Spirit of God are ceased long ago, so that it is now
many Ages since we saw the least footsteps of them in the Christian Church: for
all that has been either spoke or written these twelve hundred years
concerning those miraculous gifts, is either very much suspected, or altogether
false and supposititious, and full of vanity and imposture; how then shall we
reconcile our experience with this Prophesy?

In Order to do it, and to clear the way for the solution of the present
question, I think it convenient to lay down certain previous considerations.

First, It is certain, That which God promised by his Prophets, to give a great
measure of his Spirit in the time of the Revelation of the Messiah, must have
its accomplishment from the first coming of Christ even unto his second; but in
what manner it shall be done, is a thing that deserves a more attentive
consideration: for though the words of Joel seem only to design the
extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Spirit, yet under them are also
comprised, those more ordinary ones, which consist in the illumination of the
understanding of the faithful, in knowledge of the Divine truth, in
consolation, in sanctification, in hope, in patience under temptations and
afflictions, and in all Christian virtues; for it would have been a small thing
for God to have promised abundance of those gifts, which are truly miraculous,
but such as of themselves are not effectual for the procurement of Salvation,
and have kept back those which only are necessary and sufficient thereunto: And
indeed, we ought to understand that Prophesy of Isaiah in the same manner, Your
God shall come himself, and shall deliver you: then the eyes of the blind shall
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped, then shall the lame
leap, as the Heart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing in triumph, for the
waters shall spring in the desert and torrents in solitary places. It is very
true, that those words have a proper and literal sense, which was accomplished
at the coming of our Savior, but they have also an Allegorical and Figurative
one, which respects the saving graces of the Spirit, which have their
accomplishment all along in all Ages of the Church.

Secondly, It is further certain, that the reason for which these miraculous
gifts are expressly mentioned in this prophesy, and not the more ordinary and
saving ones, is, because these promises are conceived in terms more
accommodated to the legal dispensation, for under that economy, the faithful
very well knew, that all the good, that was in them, did come from God, and
accordingly returned him thanks; Moses himself has thus taught, and the Psalms
of David are full of such acknowledgments, yet nevertheless they did not
distinctly know, that it came from a particular operation of the third Person
in the Deity: the Spirit of Faith, the Spirit of Consolation, the Spirit of
Adoption, the Spirit of Sanctification being terms unknown to the Faithful of
the Ancient Church; So that until David, who began to speak something of the
Spirit of God, in matters relating to Sanctification, no one before spoke any
thing of it, and after him these Expressions, were very rare. Whereas there is
nothing more ordinary in the Books of the Old Testament, then to attribute the
Visions and Revelations of the Prophets, their extraordinary and miraculous
gifts, which did both enlighten and astonish the World, to the Spirit of God;
in so much that the particular skill which was bestowed on Bezaleel and Aholiab
to work in all manner of carved work for the building of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation is particularly attributed to the Efficacy of the Spirit of God,
in the Books of Moses: It is true, the ordinary gifts of the Spirit of God are
much less resplendent and cause less of admiration, then the extraordinary: for
those are so internal, that they do not show themselves, but in Actions of
Piety, Charity and Sanctification, which are commonly very Moderate and
Regular, and which unless we take a more close and exact view of them, do not
seem to proceed from any other Principle, then that of right reason; Whereas
the other do so dazzle the eyes of all beholders with their luster, that no one
who sees their effects, can judge them to proceed from any thing less then a
Divine and Supernatural Cause.

And this difference was so much greater under the Law, as the ordinary gifts
were there less liberally bestowed, and the virtues which they produced were
more obscure and less frequent then they are now: and on the contrary, the
extraordinary and miraculous gifts were then more common and agreed better with
the genius of that Dispensation, in that it did prevail upon the minds of men,
not so much by the knowledge of the truth, as this does now, as by the
admiration of the power of God, and by the astonishment which those surprising
and prodigious passages did produce.

From hence, for a third consideration, results the knowledge of the manner how
this promise of Joel, and such like, were to be fulfilled, for it was very
agreeable to the truth, that at the beginning of Christianity our Savior
should plentifully bestow upon his Church those miraculous gifts, which were
there especially designed. And two reasons among others invited him thereunto:

The one, that the expressions which the Prophets had made use of, had filled
the minds of men with expectation of these gifts: with expectation of theirs,
if it had been frustrated in this respect, it would have given an occasion of
scandal; therefore that men might not have any thing to object about the
accomplishment of those promises, God was willing to signalize the beginning of
the Preaching of the Gospel by those mavelous instances.

The other, which is the Principal, is, that the first establishment of the
Gospel had need of such a manifestation of the Spirit by the gift of miracles;
because otherwise it could never have destroyed the dominion of Satan, as it
did, and have vanquished the resistance it met with in the Roman Empire, and in
all other nations of the earth: for the Preaching of the Gospel, the working of
miracles the distribution of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit have been the
wings upon which the Church has been carried through all the Nations of the
World. Therefore the Apostle joins these two together in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, when he says, That salvation being first begun to be Preached by our
Lord, it has been confirmed to us, by those who heard it; God besides bearing
witness by signs and miracles and diverse powers and distributions of the spirit
according to his pleasure. But when the Gospel was once well planted in the
world, so that the Preaching thereof alone was sufficient to preserve and
continue it, the necessity of miracles being now ceased, the use of them ceased
likewise, and these extraordinary gifts of the Spirit therefore disappeared,
because they were no longer necessary; thus the performance of this promise of
Joel, as far as it was to be extended to all the times of the Christian Church,
even to the consummation of the world, has been restrained to the ordinary
gifts of the Spirit of Faith, of Consolation, of Sanctification, which are
indeed much more plentifully poured out under this dispensation of the Gospel,
then ever they were under that of the Law.

To come therefore to a particular solution of this question, I think, we ought
carefully to distinguish betwixt Divine, Angelical and Natural Dreams: for as
for those Divine Dreams, which are designed to foretell things to come under the
Emblem of an Allegorical Representation, or to convey some new commands to men
in order to some great and extraordinary design, for which there is need of
Divine Authority for the undertaking and executing of it: I conceive that time
is now wholly expired, and those who pretend to and boast of any such, they are
either impostors, who would abuse the world by their feigned visions, to serve
their own private interest; or else fools, who have their brains disturbed by
Hypocondriack vapors: for we are no longer now under the legal dispensation,
which was, as it were, the proper place for such things, nor under the Infancy
of the Church, where such were necessary for its establishment. And if I may
here speak my own thoughts of a certain kind of people of both Sexes, who both
in Poland and Germany have pretended to Divine visions in these latter days; I
will not accuse them of imposture, for that they have given sufficient
testimony of their Piety; but I dare be bold to say, that in their actions they
had some transport of the understanding, which proceeded from some other cause
then what was truly Divine. They were persons who partly out of devotion,
partly out of great curiosity, did extraordinarily give themselves to the
reading of the Apocalypse and the other Prophesies: the constancy they used
herein, and the great affection they did it with, imprinted in their memories
the Idea's of those things they there saw; and the Copies of those fair tables,
where future events were represented, having given a tincture to their Spirits,
two or three things have hereupon superven'd, which have contributed to their
persuasion, that their very dreams and the things they imagined they saw in
their ecstasies, they sometimes fell into, were real and Divine visions.

First, they suffered themselves to be carried away by the hopes of those, who
expect in due time a great prosperity of the Church of God on earth, and a
terrible subversion of all those States and Powers, which now oppose the
establishing the kingdom of Christ, and since they desired this with a great
deal of zeal and passion, they hereupon easily imagined it to be certain and
indubitable. For on the one hand diverse Texts of Scripture have some seeming
appearance of some such promises made to the Church of Christ: and on the other
hand, it is one of the frailties of Humane Nature easily to believe what we
desire should be true. Besides the melancholy humor, which was naturally
predominant in them, the afflictions, hardships and anxieties they underwent,
as well from the public affairs, which did not go well to their satisfaction,
as from their own private concerns, which did not much more please them; all
these concurring together, made them very ready to receive all impressions of
phansy, which might show them either any hope of deliverance, or of any
mitigation of their troubles.

To conclude, their bodies were so affected with the passions of their souls
and with the quality of the humors, which were predominant in them, that they
fell into some black melancholy indispositions, which all the world knows to be
capable of very strange accidents. Be it then, that they either merely dreamed,
or that waking they were surprised with some transport of phansy, in which
their soul was perfectly abstracted and separated from their body, and from all
commerce with the senses (for that does sometimes happen in Hypocondriack
distempers) these Apocalyptical Images were thus put into a violent motion, and
framed in their imaginations these pretended visions, which they have since
related to us. To which might be added the operation of some evil Angels, who
seek all imaginable occasions to deceive both the sound and the sick, and who
helped to join together and to paint these representations in the brains of
those poor people: And we have seen in a great part by experience, that those
images, which they saw in their pretended Enthusiasms, did either signify
nothing at all, or if they did, yet their vanity and falseness have been
confuted by the events.

As for those people beyond the Sea, which now boast of Visions, Revelations,
Divine Inspirations, the extraordinary gifts of the holy Spirit, of ecstasies,
and strange transportations, who by their tremblings and quakings would
represent the motions of the Enthusiasts and Prophets; I should very much
wonder if honest and understanding men should favor their frenfies: The Spirit
of Christ is a Spirit of understanding and prudence, and of sober and well
settled sense, and not a smoke which fills empty brains with dark and
fantastic imaginations; the grace of the Gospel puts the faculties of the
soul into a grave and sober constitution, which gives both joy within to it
self, and edification to others without, and does not expose the true Religion
to the laughter of its enemies and to the scandal of sober and intelligent men,
by its indecent and unnatural motions.

As for those dreams which may proceed merely from the impression and operation
of Angels, I will not deny but that there may be yet some examples of that
nature to be seen; for as for evil Angels, they may concern themselves in those
illusions which happen to men sleeping, whether it be to imprint upon them some
false opinions in matters of Religion, and to incline them to Superstition; or
thus more to excite and inflame their passions, and to put them into more
disorder. And as for good ones, although the dispensation of the Law, under
which they were more especially employed in things relating to Religion, be now
passed; yet they still continue to be Ministers and Instruments of Divine
Providence in what relates to civil life, and humane society, and especially
the protection of the faithful and the defense of the Church of Christ. And as
then it is not impossible, but that they may sometimes appear to men waking, so
is it not incredible, but that God may make use of them, from time to time to
convey the notices of some things by dreams; there are many examples of both
kinds in the books of those who have made collections of such memorable
instances, to which I shall refer the Reader. I have heard the late Monsieur
Cameron, a Person whose memory will be ever blessed in our Churches, say, that
he had from the mouth of Monsieur Calignon, Chancellor of Navarre, a man of
singular virtue, a memorable passage that befell him in Bearne: He went into a
certain Town in the Country, either for diversion, or for some reason, relating
to his health; for he did not acquaint me either with the place or the occasion
of the journey; one night as he was asleep, he heard a voice which called him
by his name, Calignon; hereupon waking and hearing no more of it, he imagined
that he had dreamed, and fell asleep again; a little after he heard the same
voice, calling him in the same manner, which made a greater impression upon
him, then before; so that being awakened he called his wife, who was with him,
and told her what had happened, so that they both lay waking for some time,
expecting whether they might hear the voice again, and whether it would say any
thing more to them; At last the voice awakened him the third time, calling him
by his name, and advised him to retire presently out of the Town, and to remove
his family, for that the plague would rage horribly in that place within few
days; to which he added, that it was very well that he followed this direction,
for as much as within few days after the plague began in the Town, and
destroyed a great number of people. This was certainly an Angel that spoke to
him, who by the favorable and benign providence of God drew him out of that
danger, which otherwise had been unavoidable. For whether the plague came by
the infection of the air, or by the Communication of some infectious persons,
or whether some Sorcerers and Witches (as they say, they sometimes do) had
resolved to diffuse their infectious poisons in that place, it was that which
did not exceed the knowledge of an Angel. Now if these blessed Spirits, which
are appointed as a guard to pious men in obedience to God's Command, do
sometimes by speaking give them such advertisements, they also by the same
command may convey the same notices to them by dreams. The history of the last
age does so fully attest the truth of that of Lewis of Bourbon, Prince of
Conde, that we cannot reasonably doubt thereof. A little before his journey
from Dreux, he dreamed that he had fought three battles, successively one after
another, wherein he had got the victory, and where his three great Enemies were
slain. But that at last he also was mortally wounded, and that after they were
laid one upon another, he also was laid upon their dead bodies. The event was
remarkable: for the Mareshal de St Andre was killed at Dreux, the Duke of
Guise, Francis of Lorrain, at Orleans, the Connestable of Montmorency at St
Dennis, and this was the Triumvirate, which, they say, had sworn the ruin of
those of the Religion, and the destruction of that Prince. At last, he himself
was slain at Bassac, as if there had been a continuation of deaths and Funerals.

Although there were some Circumstances in the dream which did not exactly
agree with their accomplishment, as that he imagined that his Enemies died in
three battles; for the Duke of Guise died otherwise, being assassinated by
Poltrot, and that he conceived in his dream, that he always came off
victorious, for he himself was taken at Dreux, and the glory of the victory at
St Dennis was disputed, and it is believed, that at Bassac, he did not only lose
his life, but the Battle too. Yet notwithstanding upon the whole, this vision
did not cease to be very admirable, and it has been looked upon as such by
reason of the greatness of the events: But there might be something natural in
it, in respect of the formation of the images in the fancy of the Prince. For
he having the temperature of a Lion, and being brought up in War, and
Commanding an Army, might easily dream of Battles, the evening before so great
a Combat. And he himself seemed sufficiently to acknowledge this when repeating
the dream he used this Preface; I know very well that we must not give any
credit to dreams, but yet I must relate to you what I dreamed last night, and
in truth one who thus speaks sufficiently testifies, on the one side, that his
dream appeared to him extraordinary, and that it had made a great impression
upon his mind: and on the other, that he did not look upon it as absolutely
supernatural, seeing he somewhat doubted whether he should make any relation of
it: But nevertheless, an Angel, to whom God had given some little foresight of
the success of these Civil Wars, and of the end of these Captains, might very
well concern himself herein by his permission, with design to give the Prince
some advertisement; for he might draw this advantage from hence, either not to
continue the War any longer if he had a mind to escape death, or seriously to
prepare himself, as he should see his enemies to depart this life: and both
these things were worthy of a good Angel, who had a care of the life of this
great Prince and also of his Salvation. There are also several memorable things
of such who were saved from the Massacre, by the advertisement of dreams, which
if true, as I see no reasonable cause to doubt of them, they could proceed from
nothing else, but Angels, as the truth of the things, and the punctual
accomplishment did sufficiently evidence.

But my intention here is not to report histories, but to make Theological and
Rational Reflections upon this matter. And the conclusion I draw hence is, that
God has not now tied his hands; but that he may still give such notices to men,
although this be done very rarely: However we may here make this observation,
that as, when the question is concerning such miracles as may be done by the
Ministry of Angels (for every one knows that there are some, which cannot be
done but only by the power of God) we ought carefully to examine whether they
be done by good or bad ones, that so we suffer not our selves to be abused by
the seducement of lies and error; so here there is need of a great
circumspection, to judge of these nocturnal visions. All the actions of men are
either good in themselves, or evil in their own nature, or indifferent and
intermediate betwixt these; if then any such dream induce us to a good action,
and from whence there can follow no bad event, such a dream ought not to be
suspected by us, but if it incline us to any evil, we ought absolutely to
condemn and reject it, as a delusion of the Devil; and as for indifferent
actions, the circumstances, that accompany them, usually determining their
nature, I would here rather be guided by Prudence and Charity, which are the
general Rules of our conversation, then by the inducement and persuasion of
dreams. And nevertheless where Prudence and Charity should both agree with an
extraordinary vision, I do declare that such an inducement to me would be very
considerable.

Lastly, as for dreams that proceed from natural causes. I suppose that where I
have spoken of their causes from whence they proceed, I have sufficiently
discovered their vanity. It is certainly a great weakness of mind or a
superstition very unworthy of Christians in the least to rely on them, either
for the conjecturing of that which is come, or for founding our resolutions of
least importance upon them. I shall only here give two advertisements, the one
whereof respects the health of the Body, the other the safety of the Soul.
First, then we ought to have a regard to our dreams, when they may furnish us
with some indications concerning the constitution of our own bodies; that if
they mark out any fault in our tempers, or any disorder in the humors of our
body, and so threaten us with some disease or sickness, that then we may
provide against it by the Course of Physic.

As for the second, if the frequency of certain dreams, and their evil quality,
do inform us that we are inclined to some vicious passions (although this may
be better known by our actions waking, then by our dreams) that we then
endeavor to correct them by Christian Morality, Lastly, since as Philosophers
have observed, the quality of dreams is a sign and token not only of the
constitution of our bodies, but also of our minds, that the most virtuous have
always the most sober and temperate dreams, every one therefore ought
carefully, to give himself to the exercise of Virtue, Temperance and Sobriety,
that so he be not importuned and molested with turbulent imaginations.

Thus, most Honored Brother, you have the results of my thoughts when at
certain spare hours in my journey I set my self to meditate on this subject: if
other affairs had not denied me further leisure, and if I had not been upon
other designs, which I both promised, and which have been long expected from
me, I had bestowed more care and study in this little Work. All that I was able
to do, was to finish it, which I partly doubted whether I could or no, when I
first set Pen to Paper: Such as it is, I heartily present it to you, and shall
esteem it happy, if it receive your Approbation; for as much as that which you
receive from the public ought to render your testimony beyond exception. Sir,
I beg the assistance of your good Prayers to God for me, not only that he would
give me grace and strength to finish, what he has put into my mind to
undertake, for the clearing of his truth, but principally that, notwithstanding
the many hindrances I meet withal, he would strengthen me with his good Spirit,
that I may finish my course to his glory, and the edification of his people.
And I also do heartily pray, that he would heap upon you the choicest of his
blessings, and am assuredly,

Most Honored Brother, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, Amyraut.
Saumur, the first of the year. 1659.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1.
CHAP. I.
Of Natural Dreams and their several Causes. Page 3.
CHAP. II.
Of Angelical Dreams in General, and some rational reflections on Particular
ones. Page 19.
CHAP. III.
Of Divine Dreams. Page 39.
CHAP. IV.
The Characters by which they might know that those Dreams were truly Divine,
and not vain Delusions. Page 53.
CHAP. V.
Whether God does make use of this kind of Revelation by Dreams, now under the
Dispensation of the Gospel. Page 101.
FINIS.

