THE Amorous Conquests Of the Great Alcander, OR, THE AMORS Of the French
KING, And Madam Montespan.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and S. ^^gnes, in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden, 1685.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough these Memoirs seem to have very much of the Air of a Romance, yet
there are very few that are more true. I Originally know the greater part of
the Affairs, which I relate, and the rest comes from so good Hands, that I
should be too blame to doubt the Truth of them. However if some certain
Circumstances, which ought to have been very secret, make it be believed, that
I have added a great deal of my own, as those often do, that take upon them to
Write, I desire the Reader to suspend his Judgment, until he can enquire after
them from some body, who shall not be suspected by him. For example, if that
which I relate of the Lyings in of Madam de Montespan, is any way surprising,
since there were in the Chamber only the Grand Alcander, and two other Women, I
pray him to consider, that one of those (...)o Women, may have told (...)e of
them, and that I ^ould not mention them as do, if I did not very well (...)ow,
what it was I say. (...) I am accused of indiscretion, for Revealing that which
has been told me, will answer to that, that am not at all engaged keep the
Secret, neither was it required at Hands, that I should k(...) it. As for the
other Ma^ters, there are few M(...) who have been abroad the World, that have
(...) had some knowledge of the and if I have had a mo(...) particular notice,
it m(...) be believed, that it is, because I probably may ha^ been my self
engaged in t(...) Intrigue.

THE Amorous Conquests Of the Great Alcander, With the ^NTRIGUES OF HIS COURT.
THE Affairs of the Great Alcander* who was become the Terror of all ^his
E(...)s, band the Wonder of all (...), did not hinder him sometimes from making
Love. A(...) whereas it was impossible for (...) to make their Fortune, at
le(...) without having the Honor of (...) good Graces, the Ladies as w(...) as
the Cavaliers, made it their (...) siness to please him, and those w(...)
succeeded best therein, thou(...) the better of themselves, althou(...) at
bottom all People of Hon(...) did the less esteem them.

Madam de Montespan was (...) of those, and though she mi(...) pass for one of
the fairest C^^tures in the World, yet there (...) something more agreeable in
Wit, than in her Countenan(...) but all these fine Qualities (...) obscured by
the faults of her S(...) which was accustomed to the (...) notorious Deceits,
so That (...) cost her nothing: She was one of the most Ancient fa^^lies of the
Realm, and her (...)ance, as well as Beauty had been (...) Cause, that Monsieur
de Montes(...) (...)ad Courted her in Marriage, and had (...)referred her
before several others, who would have better fitted his (...)ccasions.

Madam de Montespan, who desired to be Married, only that she (...)night take
the more liberty, no (...)ooner came to Court, but she had great designs upon
the Grand Alcander's Heart; but whereas it was at that time taken up, and that
Madam de la Valliere, a Person of a mean Beauty, but who had in recompense a
thousand other good Qualities, wholely possessed it; she made many unprofitable
advances, (...)nd was obliged at last to seek a Party elsewhere. She then
despising every thing, that was not near the Crown, cast her Eyes upon the
Heart of Monsieur, Brother to the Grand Alcander, who showed her a (...)ood
Will, rather to make it be be^ived, that he was capable of being Amorous of
Ladies, than because he resented any thing for her, like love. Monsieur
surpriz(...) thereby a great number of Peop(...) who did not think that he was
sensible in regard of the fair Sex; b(...) the Chevalier de Lorrain, jealous
(...) this new Correspondence, soon ma(...) this young Prince return to his
fo^mer inclinations, and having (...) Ascendent over him, Madam (...) Montespan
enjoyed only some appearances, whilst he alone stoo(...) possessed of his whole
Favor.

Madam de Montespan, who (...)ve^ed a place in Monsieur's Hea(...) only because
she had failed to g(...) the Kings, was yet more disgust(...) when she saw that
she was to sh(...) it with the Chevalier de Lorrain and not being able to
comprehen(...) why so fine a Woman as she w(...) should be slighted for the
sake that Chevalier, who had nothi(...) recommendable besides his By(...) she
resolved to scorn him, (...) slighted her, and mightily repro(...)ed Monsieur,
who comforted hi(...) (...)lf with the Chevalier de Lorrain.

In the mean time Madam de Montespan's Beauty was the object (...)f the whole
Court's desiers, and (...)articularly of Monsieur de Lau(...)'s, the Great
Alcanders Favou^^te, a Man of no advantageous (...)tature, and of a very mean
Meen^ (...)ut who made up these two Faults, with two great Qualities. That is
(...)o say, with much Wit, and a -- ^ertain I know not what, which
(...)ccasioned, that when a Lady once (...)new him, she did not easiy quit him
for another. Besides his Favor with the King, rendered him (...)ecommendable,
so that Madam de Montespan, who had heard these (...) Qualities discoursed of,
and desired to know by Experience, whether they did not attribute to (...)im,
more than he effectually had, (...)d not disdain the proffers of service that
he made her. However (...)here being a great deal of cunning mixed with her
Curiosity, (...) made him languish five or six Week(...) before she would grant
him th(...) least Favor, and while she mad(...) him wait for it, there happened
t(...) this Favorite, a business that migh(...) have ruined him with his
Master if he had not been born more happy than wise.

The Great Alcander, as muc(...) advanced as he was above all others, was not
of any other humor, or temper, than Ordinary Men; although he passionately
loved Madam de la Valliere, yet h(...) sometimes felt himself smitten wit(...)
some other Ladies Beauty; and wa(...) glad to satisfy his desire. He ha(...)
then such Sentiments as these fo(...) the Princess of Monaco, whose Favor
Monsieur de Lausun was possessed of, and Monsieur de Lausun, because he did
believe himself capable, by reason of his great Qualities, which I have before
mentioned, to preserve the Princess o(...) (...)aco's Amity, and to gain
Ma(...)m de Montespan's Heart, did for(...)d the Princess, who had
disco(...)red to him Alcanders Passion, to (...)vour it at all, and threatened
her, (...)at if he perceived she did, he (...)old ruin her Reputation in the
(...)orld.

These threatenings, instead of plea(...)ng the Princess of Monaco, made (...)er
think of casting off the Tyran(...)y, which he would exercise over (...)er, and
at the same time taking (...)ch measures with the Great Alcander, as she never
did before* (...)e made him resolve to send Mon(...)eur de Lausun to the Wars,
where (...)e had a considerable Command. Having told Monsieur de Lausun,
(...)hat he should prepare himself to depart within two or three days, Monsieur
de Lausun remained altogether surprised at these so unexpected News, and
immediately guessing at the cause, he told Alcander the Great, that he would
not go to the Army, at least (...)less he would give him the Co(...)mand of it;
however, that he s(...) well enough, why he sent him t(...) there; that it was
to enjoy his (...) stress the more peaceably, duri(...) his absence; but that
it should n(...) be said, that they had so grofly d(...)ceived him, at least
without (...) showing, that he was sensible their deceit; that this was the
Action rather of a perfidious Ma(...) than of a great Prince, such as (...) had
always esteemed him, and th(...) he was glad it had served to dis(...) buse him.

Although the Great Alcande(...) had been always accustomed t(...) speak like a
Master, and that n(...) Man had until that time dared t(...) make him any
reproaches; yet h(...) failed not to give Monsieur de La(...)sun a hearing
until the end; bu(...) seeing that his folly still increase(...) more and
more, he coldly asked him if he was mad, and if he well remembered that he spoke
to his Ma(...)er, and to him, who could cast him (...)wn, in as little time as
he had (...)ised him. Monsieur de Lausun (...)nswered him, That he knew that as
well as he; that he very well knew, (...)hat it was to him alone he was
indebted for his Fortune, having never made his Court to any Minister, (...)ike
the other Great men of the Realm; but all that should not hinder him to tell
the Truth, and continuing in the same tone that he had begun, he was yet about
to say several ridiculous and extravagant things, when Alcander prevented him,
by telling him, that he gave him only four and twenty hours (...)o resolve upon
his departing; and that if he did not obey him, he (...)old consider what he
had to do.

Having left him after these few words, Monsieur de Lausun began (...)o be in
an unconceivable despair, and attributing all this accident to the
Correspondence, which the Princess of Monaco began to have(...) with Alcander
the Great, he wen(...) to her Lodgings, where not finding her, he broke a large
Looking Glass, as though he had revenged himself sufficiently by that The
Princess of Monaco complained of him to Alcander, who replied, That he was a
Fool, on whom she was likely to have revenge enough by his absence, that he
himself had suffered surprising things but that he pardoned him all considering
that he might well be in despair, for losing a Ladies Favor, whose merit was
so great as hers.

When the four and twenty hour(...) were expired, he demanded of Monsieur de
Lausun, what he was resolved to do, who answering, th(...) he was resolved not
to depart, unless he gave him the Command of the Army, the Great Alcander was
moved with anger against him (...)d again threatened to reduce him (...)to such
a condition, as he should (...)ave cause to repent of having (...)rovoked him
so far; but Monsieur (...)e Lausun, not becoming more di(...)reet for all these
Menaces, repli(...)d, That all the mischief he could (...)o him, was to take
from him the office of General of the Dragoons, (...)hich he had given him, and
that (...)e having fore seen that, had brought his Commission with him in his
Pocket, and at the same time taking it out, he threw it upon a Table, near
which the King was seated, which did so exasperate the Great Alcander, that he
sent him that very hour to the Bastile. This did very much amaze all the World,
no Man yet knowing what could have drawn the disgrace upon this Favorite.

Madam de Montespan, having heard of his Misfortune, was overjoyed at the delay
she had used in her Intrigue, and was with no great difficulty comforted,
believing, that after his indiscretion, which beg(...) to be the public
discourse of t(...) World, there was no more retu(...)ing for him into
Alcanders favor However his disgrace did not continue so long as was imagined;
(...) the Great Alcandex, having (...) found in the Princess of Mona(...)
Charms powerful enough to re(...) him, had no sooner satisfied his Fancy, but
he pardoned Monsieur (...) Lausun, who returned to Court with more Credit than
ever: Yet everybody was sufficiently astonished (...) it, because it was not
thought, th(...) Alcander was of an humor eve(...) to forget that want of
respect, which Monsieur de Lausun did show him.

Monsieur de Lausun's return to Court, having made all the World conceive,
that he must needs have a great Ascendent over Alcanders Spirit, all men were
very industrious to give him some marks o(...) their inclination to his
Service, and among others, Madam de Montespan, who no longer could deny (...)m
the last Favors. This new (...)trigue, that ought to have com(...)rted
Monsieur de Lausun for the (...)incess of Monaco's Infidelity, did (...)ot
hinder him from meditating (...) some revenge, whereof he in a (...)ew days
after found an opportu(...)ity. This Lady with many o(...)hers was sitting upon
a green turfe, (...)nd laying her Hand upon the (...)rass, he trod upon it as
it were (...)nwittingly, and having made a (...)ind of turn on purpose to
wring (...)t the harder, he addressed himself (...)o her to demand Pardon.

The pain, which the Princess of Monaco felt, made her squeak out, but she was
less sensible of that, than of a mocking Laughter, which Monsieur de Lausun
affected in excusing himself, she gave him a thousand injurious Terms, and made
all those who were present comprehend, that she could not be so passionate
against him, without having some other reason for it. Monsieur de Lausun, who
was concern(...) to preserve his Reputation amon(...) the Ladies, suffered the
Princess (...) Monaco's resentment to evapora(...) in reproaches, without
desiring (...) answer them otherwise, than (...) submissions and excuses. And
t(...) Ladies who were present, havin(...) taken upon themselves to reconcile
them, she was obliged to b(...) quiet; for fear of discovering (...) them, that
her vexation proceed from another cause.

The Princess of Monaco havin(...) thus lost her Lover, and having b(...)
tasted, if I may so say, of the Gre(...) Alcander, sought to comfort h(...)
self for it, by the Conquest of some(...) other, but her Temper being n(...)
severe, nor her Appetite content(...) with one Man alone, she tried (...) many
Chances, that at length sh(...) fell under them. She having like a Page who was
a proper handsome(...) Fellow, but one that run over a (...)ris, after the
manner of Pages, (...)e had a mind to know, whether she (...)old find him a
better Man, than (...)ose Persons of Quality, of whom (...)ly she had until
that time made (...)yal: But he having a Distemper (...)pon him, infected the
Princess of Monaco with it, who did not put (...)er self under Cure for it, as
soon (...) she ought, perhaps because she (...)id not at first know what it
was, (...) else out of shame and trouble to (...)iscover it. Therefore when she
en(...)ed into a course of Physic, she (...)ied under it, giving by her Death
(...)trange apprehensions to those, who (...)ad imitated her in her Pleasures.

The Princess of Monaco's Relations did very carefully conceal the nature of
her Distemper; but Mon(...)eur, the Great Alcanders Brother, who had had some
familiarity with her, though of no long continuance, and who in recompense of
some Services rendered him, and the Chevalier de Lorraine, had given her the
charge of Houskeeper to (...) Wife, was afraid of being in(...)ved in her
Misfortune, and c(...) not be at rest, until he had ass(...)bled four Persons,
who were (...) most skilful in that kind of (...)stemper, to know whether he
(...) not in danger of it; they ass(...) him, that he was not, which (...)
wholly restore him to his Spirits, (...) made him soon forget the Prince of
Monaco.

The Great Alcander suspected th(...) Intrigue of Madam de Montesp(...) and of
Monsieur de Lausun, a(...) whereas Love enters by seve(...) ways into the
Hearts of Men, th(...) reflection which he made upon h(...) Favorites good
Fortune, made hi(...) consider more narrowly, than b(...) had done till that
time, the Me(...) and Beauty of Madam de Montespan. Besides, the Possession of
Madam de la Valliere, began to breed in him some distaste, the inseparable
mischief of long enjoyment (...)w whereas Madam de Montes(...) had a very
particular atten(...)n upon Alcanders Person, she (...)n perceived by his Words
and (...)tions, that he was not unsensi(...) of her Charms, and whereas (...)
knew, that presence was the (...)st necessary thing in the World, (...) foment
Amorous Sentiments, (...) endeavored all she could to e(...)blish her self at
Court, which (...)e believed might be easily done, she once entered into a
confidence (...)th Madam de la Valliere, who for (...)r part sought to
discharge her (...)f upon some good Friend, of the (...)spleasure, which she
conceived (...) the lukewarmness of the Great (...)lcander's Flames. Madam de
Val(...)re did very well approve of the (...)dvances which Madam de
Mon(...)span made her, and there imme(...)ately was a kind of friendship knit
(...)etween these two Ladies, or at (...) least some appearance of a
friend(...)ip; for I very well know, that Madam de Montespan, who had h^^ end,
was far from loving Madam de la Valliere, who was the only obstacle of her
designs. The Gre^ Alcander who did already rese^^ some tenderness for the
other, w^^ overjoyed to see her every d^^ with Madam de la Valliere, who^ Madam
de Montespan did likewise Charm, because she industrious^^ embraced all her
Interests, and h^^ an admirable Complaisance for he^ blaming the Great Alcander
for h^^ indifference, and furnishing her wi^^ means to make him return.

In the mean time, the Great Alcander went oftener to Madam de (...) Valliere's
Lodgings than he w^^ accustomed to do, that he might have the pleasure of
seeing Madam de Montespan, and Madam de la Valliere applying to her s^^ these
new Assiduities, loved Madam de Montespan the better, believin^ that it was by
her Cares she enjoyed his sight the oftener. B^ last, she having once had a
part the true Affections of his Heart, ^n perceived that every thing ^ich the
Great Alcander did then unto her, was counterfeit, and (...) Passion for him
serving her in* ^ad of Wit, whereof she had no ^eat share by Nature, she
apprehended, that Madam de Montespan ^ceived her, and that Alcander ^s more
intimate with her than (...) had hitherto imagined.

As soon as this suspicion had seiz^ her mind, she observed them narrowly, that
she no longer ^ubted that they deceived her, ^^d her Passion not permitting her
keep the secret any longer, she ^^derly complained of it to Great Alcander, who
told her, that he ^as too generous to abuse her any ^rther, that it was true,
he did ^ve Madam de Montespan, but yet ^at it should not hinder him from ^^ving
her, as he ought, that she must be contented with what he should do for her,
without de^ing more, because he did not lo^ to be constrained.

This answer more like a Misters than a Lovers, was far from satisfying so nice
a Mistress, as Madam de la Valliere, she wept, ^ lamented, but all that did not
^^ten the Great Alcander; he once again told her, that if she desired
continuance of his Love, she should exact nothing from him beyond (...) will;
he prayed her to live wi^ Madam de Montespan, as she h^ done before, and
assured her, the if she showed the least unkindness that Lady, she would oblige
hi^ to take other measures.

The Great Alcanders Will was Law to Madam de la Valliere: S^^ lived with Madam
de Montespan in an Union, that could not (...) reasonably expected from a Riv^^
and she surprised all the World by her Conduct; because all the World began to
be persuaded the ^^ Great Alcander did by little ^d little forsake her, and
gave himself up entirely to Madam de Montespan.

In the mean time, the Great Alcander being a nice Lover, and not ^le to endure
that a Husband should share with him in the Fa^urs of Madam de Montespan, he
^solved to remove him out of the ^ay, upon pretense of giving him ^me great
Employments, but Monsieur de Montespan was of no Com^alsant humor, he refused
all that they offered him, doubting indeed, ^^at his Wives Merit did contribute
more to his advancement, ^^an any thing he could have recommendable in himself.

Madam de Montespan, who had taken delight in the Kings Em^^aces, could no
longer endure those (...) her Husbands, neither would ^^e grant him any more;
which (...) Monsieur de Montespan into such despair, that although he tenderly
loved her, he did not ref^^ from giving her a good box the Ear. Madam de
Montespan who well knew where to find support, gave him extreme Language, and
having complai^ of his proceeding to the Great cander; he banished Monsieur
Montespan the Court, who w^^ his Children departed into his o^^ Country,
bordering upon the reneans: There went into (...) Mourning, as if he had lost
Wife indeed. And he being m^^ indebted, the Great Alcander s^ him two hundred
thousand Liv^^ to comfort him for the loss whi^ he had been the occasion of.

However, some time after Monsieur de Montespan's departure, Madam de Montespan
became wi^ Child, and although she might w^ imagine that all the World kn^ what
past between the Great Alcander and her self; yet she being ashamed to be seen
in that con^^tion, invented a new Mode, which was very advantageous for Wo^en
who would hide their great ^ellies; it was a short Wastcoat ^ke a Man's,
reaching only to the ^aste, where pulling out some part of the Shift, they made
it sit in as ^rge Puffs as they could upon the ^etticoat, and so hid the Belly.

All this did not hinder the Great Alcander's Court, from perceiving ^learly
how matters went; but whereas the Courtiers did almost door that Prince, their
incense reached even his Mistress, whose ^avour every one began to Court; and
she having an infinite deal of ^it, made as many Friends as she ^ould, which
Madam de la Valliere had never done, who to show the Great Alcander, that it
was himself only that she loved, never would ask any thing for another.
Therefore her Rivals Credit was ^o sooner perceived, but every one with
pleasure left her, whereof one day complaining the Mareschall Grammont made her
answer, (...) she should have taken care to hi^ made others Rejoice with her,
w^^ she her self had cause to Rejoice if when she should have cause Mourn, she
desired that other should Mourn also.

Madam de Valliere seeing (...) self thus abandoned by all the World, resolved
to go into a Convent, and having chose that of (...) Carmelites, she retired
thither, a^ in a little time after took the ^ bit, where she lives, as it is
said great Sanctity; which I easily believe, for that having tried, as had
done, the inconstancy of world Affairs, she plainly saw, that it ^ in God
alone, in whom she (...) to trust.

Her retreat did equally sati^ the Great Alcander, and Madam de Montespan, the
last, because was in a continual apprehen^^ ^est Madam de la Valliere ^i^ again
return into the Great Alcanders Favor, whose most ten^r Affections she had
once possessed; and the other, because her presence still upbraided him of ^
Inconstancy. In the mean while, the time of Madam de Montespan's lying in
approaching, the great Alcander retired to Paris, whither he went but seldom,
ho^g that she might be more secretly brought to bed there, than St. Germains,
where he usually ^^ded.

The time being come, a Woman Madam de Montespan's Bedchamber, in whom the
Great Alcander and her self had a particular confidence, took Coach, and (...)
into St. Anthonies Street to Monsieur Clements, the Renowned ^ Midwife, whom
she asked if would go along with her, to ^er a Lady, who was in La^^ but at the
same time she him, that if he would go, he must be Hood-wink't, because (...)
was desired, that he should (...) know, whither he went. (...) Clement, to whom
the like a(...) dents had often arrived, see(...) that she, who came to fetch
h(...) had a gentle Air, and that (...) Adventure presaged nothing, (...) what
was good, he told the W(...) man, that he was ready to do (...) that she
desired, and suffering himself to be mufled, he took Co(...) along with her, out
of which, (...)ter several turns about the To(...) he alighted, and was led
into very stately Appartment, wh(...) his mufler was taken off.

However he had no time gi(...) him to consider the place where (...) was, and
he had no sooner re(...)vered his sight, but a Girl, w(...) was in the Chamber,
put out (...) Lights; after which, the Great (...) cander, who was hid behind
(...) Curtain of Madam de Montesp^^ Bed, spoke to him, in order to (...) ^^sure
him, in case he were afraid, ^^d bid him fear nothing. Mon^^ur Clement answered
him, that ^^ was not afraid, and having ap^roached his Patient, he felt her,
^^d finding that the Child was not ^^t ready to come into the World, ^^ asked
Alcander, who was near ^^m, whether the place where they ^ere, was the House of
God, where (...) was permitted neither to Eat, (...) Drink, that for his part,
he ^as very Hungry, and that they would do him a great kindness to ^^ve him
something to Eat.

The Great Alcander, without ^^aying for either of the Women, ^ho were in the
Chamber, be^^ired himself to serve him, he ^ent immediately into a Closet, ^^om
whence he took a Pot of ^weat Meats, and brought it to ^im, then from the other
side, he ^^ch'd some Bread, which he likewise gave him, and bid him not ^^
spare either the one, or the other; for there was more yet the Lodgings. After
Monsieur (...) meant had eaten two or three M(...)sels, he asked whether they
woe(...) not give him any thing to Dri(...) the Great Alcander ran himself (...)
to the Closet, to fetch him a (...)^le of Wine, and filled him two (...) three
Glasses, one after another When Monsieur Clement had dr(...) the first Glass,
he asked Alcande(...) if he also would not drink, a(...) the Great Alcander
having answered, no, he told him, that the si(...) Lady would not have so happy
a(...) speedy a deliverance, unless (...) drank a Glass to her Health.

The Great Alcander did n(...) think it proper, to reply to t(...) discourse,
and a pang, which (...) that time took Madam de Montespan, interrupted the
Conversation; in the mean time, she he(...) Alcander by the hand, who
encouraged her to take heart, a(...) asked Clement every moment, (...) (...)e
business would not be soon done. (...)er Labor was hard enough, (...)ough it
was not very long, and (...)adam de Montespan was brought (...) bed of a brave
Boy, at which (...)e Great Alcander expressed a great (...)al of satisfaction,
but he would (...)t have it presently told Madam Montespan for fear it might be
(...)rtful to her Health.

Monsieur Clement having done (...)ery thing that belonged to his (...)fession,
the Great Alcander fill(...)d him himself a Glass of Wine, (...)er which he
teturned behind (...)e Bed Curtain, because they were (...) light a Candle, to
the end that (...)onsieur Clement might see, if all (...)ngs were well, before
his de(...)ture. Clement having assured (...)em, that the Lady in the Straw
(...)s out of all danger, she, who (...)nt to fetch him, gave him a (...)se
wherein there were an hun(...)d Lewidores, and being again (...)od-wink't, they
lead him to a Coach, which carried him h(...) to his own House, after havi(...)
made many more turns than it h(...) done in coming.

In the mean time Monsieur (...) Lausun did endeavor to comfo(...) himself in
some others Arms, and (...)ing very proud that the Great Alcander had only his
leavings; he d(...) not at all envy his good Fortune either because he had
never had (...) real Passion for Madam de Montespan, or for that he had found
o(...) in her some secret imperfection which her Husband himself d(...)
attribute unto her. However (...) did not omit to make use of h(...) Favor in
those things, which (...) would not ask himself, and Madam de Montespan, who
had given him so great advantages over her, durst deny him nothing, for fear
that he should ruin her with the Great Alcander, with whom h^ had no less power
than her self. (...) the mean time, as we seldom have a(...) great kindness for
those whom (...) stand in awe of, so she would (...)any rate have rid her self
of (...), but she durst not yet attempt (...) for fear of not being powerful
(...)ough to bring it about. While (...) was in these Sentiments, the (...)ce
of a Lady of Honor, to the (...)eat Alcander's Queen became (...)i would, by the
Duchess of Mon(...)zier's Death, and the Duchess (...) Richlieu, and of
Crequi, pretending both to it, each made use of (...)r Friends for the
obtaining it. Madam de Montespan declared her (...)f for the Duchess of
Richlieu, and ^onsieur de Lausun for the Duchess (...) Crequi, which began to
sow an (...)en Division betwixt them. For Monsieur de Lausun would by all
(...)eans force Madam de Montespan (...) desist from speaking, in the behalf of
the Duchess of Richlieu, (...)nd Madam de Montespan, who ^ould not honorably
give over, (...)er having gone so far, thought it strange that Monsieur de
Lausun when he knew that she had undertaken that Affair, should com^ in her
way, to take the Interest of the Duchess of Crequi. It was the Great Alcanders
part to deci(...) in favor, either of his Mistress or of his Favorite; but
th(...) Prince being unwilling to discontent either of them, staid a long while
without disposing of tha^ place, hoping that they would agree together, and
that their reunion would give him an opportunity to resolve. But on the
contrary, his delay, making as well the one as the other believe, tha^ the
Great Alcander had no regard to their Prayers, they bore against each other a
greater grudge than they did before, and even Monsieur de Lausun began to talk
disadvantageously of Madam de Montespan, which she could not hea^ of without
desiring to be notably revenged.

Madam de Montespan complained of it to the Great Alcander, who gave Monsieur
de Lausun a (...)vere reprimand. But he so much (...)e more enraged against
her, as (...)e faw that her Credit prevailed (...)ove his, for the Great
Alcander (...)d just then, given the Duchess (...) Montauziers place to the
Duchess of Richlieu, could not for ^ar to take the liberty of railing against
her upon all occasions. The ^reat Alcander being informed of ^ by others,
besides Madam de Montespan, did again sharply reprehend Monsieur de Lausun, who
(...)rceiving that the Great Alcander understood no rallery upon (...)t point,
promised him to be more (...)reet for the future and to let him see, that he
designed to live (...)ndlily thereafter with Madam (...) Montespan, he desired
him to* (...)concile them, which the Great Alcander promised him to do.

In effect having disposed Madam de Montespan's Spirit to pardon him, he made
them on th(...) morrow embrace in his Presence obliging Monsieur de Lausun
(...) ask her Pardon for what he h(...) done, and to promise her not (...) do
so any more.

This reconcilement being made Monsieur de Lausun had mo(...) power than ever,
upon the Great Alcanders Spirit, and whereas th(...) Favourite's Ambition was
beyond all measure, which nothing cou(...) satisfy, he gave way to some
thought of Marrying the Princess Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier, th(...)
Great Alcanders Cousin Germai(...) which his Sister, that Princess's Confident,
had long ago put into his hea(...)

The Princess was already of (...) Age well advanced, but she being
extraordinarily Rich, and Monsieur de Lausun esteeming that Quality, and the
Blood from which she was descended, more than all other Ornaments of Face and
Body, he desired his Sister to continue her Cares for him, and in the prospect
^f arriving unto so great a Match, (...)e made very close Court to Madam de
Montespan, not doubting ^ut that her Credit, might be very useful to him upon
that occasion.

Although the Interest that Monsieur de Lausun had in the Great Alcanders
Heart, made him presume very much upon his Favor, nevertheless he believing,
that the King would never give his Consent willingly to that Alliance, desired
to engage him to it out of interest. To this effect, he dispatched a Gentleman,
in whom he had a great deal of confidence, to the Duke of Lorrain, who was
deprived of his Country, to offer him a Settlement of five hundred thousand
Livres of yearly Rent out of Lands, to him, and to his Heirs, upon Condition,
that he would resign his Rights to him. The Duke of Lorrain, who saw no great
appearance of being ever able to recover his own Estate, relish that proposal,
and Monsieur de Lausun seeing it likely to succeed, expressed something of it
to the Great Alcander, to whom he insinuated that it would be very advantageous
for him, that the Duke of Lorrain gave up his Pretensions to some one, who
would render him Faith and Homage for the Dukedom of Lorrain.

The Great Alcander having approved of the thing, Monsieur de Lausun discovered
to him, that with the design of doing him this Service, he had harkened to some
proposals of Marriage, which had been made to him in the part of the Princess,
Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier, by the mediation of his Sister. He asked his
Pardon, for giving him no earlier notice of it; which he believed he ought not
to have done, until he had first endeavored to dispose of matters so, as to
take effect. Saying far(...)er, that it was his part to approve of this Match,
which, though (...) appeared to be very extraordinary, was not however without
example: That it was not the first (...)me, that Mortals were allied to (...)e
Blood of the Gods, and that (...)istory taught him, that many (...)en, who were
of no better Family than himself, had arrived to (...)at Honor.

The Great Alcander was surprised at this proposal, which appeared very bold
for a Man of Monsieur de Lausun's Rank, yet considering that this was not the
first time, that a Princess of the Blood ^oyal had Married a private Gentleman,
and reflecting upon the advantages, which he himself might (...)ap from this
Alliance, he soon accustomed himself to hearken to it. Madam de Montespan, whom
Monsieur de Lausun had engaged to his (...)rests, finding the Great Alcander
already well inclined, did (...) dexterously represent to him, t(...) little
difference that there was (...) France, between Gentlemen, wh(...) they were
once become Duke (which he might easily cre(...) Monsieur de Lausun) and
stran(...) Princes (to one of which he h(...) not long ago given a Sister of
Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier(...) that he finally resolved in fav(...) of
the Match.

When the Great Alcander h(...) thus signified his approbation it to Madam de
Montespan, he to(...) some measures with her and wi(...) Monsieur de Lausun, in
order (...) clear himself to the World from all the blame, for his assenting
this Marriage; which he did believe could not be better done, th(...) by
seeming to have been force^ to give consent to it. To effe(...) this he desired
two things, t(...) one, that Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier should come
(...) self, to entreat him to give her Monsieur de Lausun in Marriage, (...)e
other, that the most considera(...)e of Monsieur de Lausun's Relations, should
come in a Body to desire permission for their Kinsman (...) marry that
Princess. They saw (...)en these Ambassadors, and this ^mbassadress arrive all
at a time, (...)d those having first obtained Audience, they told the Great
Alcander, that although the favor which they were to desire from him in behalf
of their Kinsman, should seem above their merit, and even their hopes,
nevertheless they in(...)cated him to consider, that it would be a means to
induce the Gentry to greater matters, each one hoping for the future, to be
able to attain^ so great an Honor, as a recompense for his Services.

They also represented to the Great Alcander, what I have above pointed at, (
viz.) that Gentlemen have ere now obtained the like Grace, so that the Great
Alcander, seeming to be persuade^ by their Prayers, answered the^ that for
their sakes, as being th(...) Chief Gentry of his Realm, ^e would be glad that
their Kinsman should have the honor of Espous^ing the Princess, Mademoiselle
d'Orleans Monpensier; but y^^ that he desired to know from her self, whether
she was willingly inclined to this Alliance; of which he was as yet altogether
ignorant.

Then the Princess entered, wh(...) without considering, that it was not very
usual for Women to desir(...) Men in Marriage, entreated the Great Alcander to
permit her to marry Monsieur de Lausun, which he at first denied, but after
(...) manner, that let her see, it was only for fashion's sake, then the
Princess renewed her Prayers, and at length obtained what she required.

The news of this Marriage made ^ great deal of noise, not only o(...) the
whole Realm, but even ^uch farther; none could forbear ^^miring at the Effects
of For^^ne, that did so much favor so (...)deserving a Person; than whom,
(...) his hidden Virtues be except^^, there were thousands more ^orthy in the
Kingdom.

In the mean time, though Mon^^eur de Lausun had a great deal (...) cunning,
yet he committed a ^^eat Error upon this occasion; (...) instead of Marrying
the Princess Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier, ^^ soon as he had obtained the
Great ^lcander's consent, he would make ^^eat preparations for his Nuptials,
^^d that having delayed them for ^^me days, the Prince of Conde, ^^d his Son,
cast himself at the ^ings Feet, to entreat him not to ^^ffer the conclusion of
a thing so ^^^graceful to the Royal Family, and ^hile the Great Alcander knew
not what to resolve upon, being on (...) side combated by their Reason and on
the other, by the Prom(...) which he had made to Monsieur de Lausun's Kindred.
Monsieur joined in Petition with these Princess, and made him resolve to (...)
tract his word. Madam de Montespan, for her part, though she (...)penly
appeared to act for Monsieur de Lausun, yet she endeavored (...)derhand to
break the Match, fe(...)ing that if he were once allied (...) the Royal Family,
he might have yet a greater influence upon Alcander's Spirit, over which she
desired to reign alone.

In the mean time the Great Alcander had so great a weakness toward Monsieur
de Lausun, that ^e knew not how to declare his Pleasure to him; but there being
a necessity of doing it, he caused hi^ to come into his Cabinet, and ther^ told
him, that after having thoroughly reflected on his Marriage, he would not have
him proceed to conclusion of it; that in every (...)g else he would give him
marks (...)is Affection, but that he must nothing more to him of that, (...)e
did design to retain his Favor.

Monsieur de Lausun finding by (...)s Language, that some body (...)d rendered
him ill Offices with (...) Great Alcander, thought it ^ould be in vain for him
to endeavor to prevail with him, but (...)ing immediately to Madam de
Montespans Lodgings, whom he respected, he told her every thing (...)at rage
and passion could dictate a transported Mad man; he (...)ld her, I say, that he
had been to (...)ame to confide in a Woman of (...)er condition, since he ought
to (...)ave known, that such as she, - having once forfeited their own Ho^ours,
might well do the same by their Lovers; that he would employ all the Credit he
had with the Great Alcander, to bring him b(...) out of a Love, that ruined
hi(...) in the world, and of which (...) did not know the unworthines*

He said to her many more thing with the same violence; after which he went to
Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier, to whom he declared the Great Alcanders
pleasu(...) The Princess had no sooner hear^ this news, but she fell into a
Tran(...) and all the Water in the Sci(...) would not have been enough (...)
recover her out of it; if Monsieur de Lausun had not put hi^ Face to hers, to
tell her in her ear, that it was not time to be thus desperate, but rather to
take suc^ measures as might defend then both from the hatred of their Enemies,
and secure their Pleasures that to effect this, they must us^ extreme
diligence, for the loss o^ one only moment drew after i^ strange Consequences;
that as for himself, he was of opinion, tha^ without taking any notice of the
^reat Alcander's Orders, they should privately Married; that when the (...)ing
were once done, he would well enough pleased with it, (...)ce he had already
consented to (...) But that whatever happened, (...)thing should hinder their
constant ^^telligence and communication. The Princess recovered out of (...)
Trance, at so eloquent and so (...)reeable a discourse, and being (...)th shut
up together in a Closer, (...)ey called to them the Countess Nogent for a
third, who con(...)med them, that they could not (...)ke a resolution more
advantageous to their happiness, and con(...)t. However it was resolved in
(...)s Counsel, that she should go (...)aight to find out the Great Alcander,
to try if she could not (...)ke him change his Sentiment, (...) indeed she took
Coach that (...)y moment, for that purpose.

The Great Alcander being ad(...)iled, that she desired to speak with him in
private, easily gu(...) at her business, and although was resolved not to grant
her quest, yet since he could not h(...) somely dispense with himself (...)
giving her Audience, he made (...) enter his Closet, having first commanded all
those, that were w(...) him there, to depart. The Princess threw her self at
his Feet, (...) covering her Face with her Handkerchief, not so much to wipe
way her Tears, as to hide her confusion: She said to him, That there acted a
part, that ought confound herewith shame, if he himself had not given her
confident in approving of, as he had do(...) Monsieur de Lausun' s intention
that it was thereupon that she (...) taken some engagements, which we not easy
for her to break; that though it was not over decent, a person of her Sex, to
talk af(...) that manner. Yet the Merit Monsieur de Lausun, to whom ev(...)
himself could not refuse his Affections, might well serve her for excuse, and
in fine, that whosoever would consider that her flames ^^re once authorized,
and approved (...)er King, would not possibly find (...)r so much in fault, as
they might (...)eed imagine.

The Great Alcander, who had (...)eral times commanded her to (...)e, without
being obeyed, told (...)r, when he saw that she had gi(...)n over speaking,
that unless she ^ould put her self into another (...)sture, he had no answer to
make (...)r, then the Princess rose up, (...)pecting with an unconceivable
(...)r, the Sentence either of her Life Death. But the Great Alcander (...) not
leave her long in uncer(...)nty, telling her, That the remorse which he felt,
for consenting to her (...)riage with Monsieur de Lausun, (...) sufficiently
punished him for that (...)akness, that it was a thing that should repent of
during his whole life, and that he could not i(...) how she, who had always
sh(...) courage above her Sex, could re(...) upon an action, that would re(...)
her for ever infamous.

Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier, having received this swer, returned home
with rage her Heart, against the Great cander, and having found Monsieur de
Lausun, who waited w(...) impatience for the news of w(...) she had done, they
agreed together, that seeing nothing was (...) to move him, they must b(...)
cretly Married. A Priest was so found for that purpose, and th(...) were
Married in the Princess's (...) set; but they expected from ^i(...) and fortune
some favorable opportunity of divulging the Marriage.

In the mean time the Weddi(...) could not be consummated so cretly, but that
the Great Alcander had notice of it from one of t(...) Princess's Domestics,
whom Monsieur de Louvoy, an Enemy to Monsieur de Lausun, had gained to
(...)vertise him of every thing that (...)uld pass in her Family. The (...)t
Alcander expressed very much (...)ger at it. Monsieur de Louvoy, (...)d Madam
de Montespan, who (...)ld intelligence together for the (...)truction of
Monsieur de Lausun, did endeavor to inflame it (...) the more. For Monsieur de
Lausun had ill used Monsieur de Louvoy upon several occasions, and Monsieur de
Louvoy sought to be (...)venged all manner of ways.

Nevertheless they counseled the (...)eat Alcander to dissemble his
(...)sentment, either because they (...) not believe that they could yet
(...)ocure Monsieur de Lausun's ab(...)ute ruin, or for that they apprehended
to offend the Princess, who did not willingly pardon those (...)om she once had
reason to be (...)gry with: The King did therefore continue in appearance to
(...) Monsieur de Lausun, as he* (...) formerly, but he gave Monsieur de Louvoy
Order to watch him narrowly, as that he might g(...) him an account of his
Conduc(...)

In the mean time Monsieur Lausun, being already of a Na(...) that was but too
much addict to Pride, did after his late W(...)ding grow every day prouder
a(...) prouder, so that almost all t(...) Court were become his Enemi(...)
However he underwent all t(...) with an extraordinary haughtine(...) but there
soon fell out an accide(...) that did occasion his disgra(...) which was long
ago designed.

The Count de Guiche, Eldest S(...) to the Marshall de Granmont, w(...) a
Colonel of a Regiment of t(...) Great Alcanders Guards, and w(...) banished by
the Great Alcan(...) for some designs, much resembli(...) Monsieur de
Lausun's, that is say, for having presumed to lo(...) Monsieur's Wife. At
length in consideration of the Marshall, for whom Alcander had a great
kindness, he permitted his Son to return. Nevertheless upon condition, that he
should quit his Office. Now the Count de Guiche's Office, being without
contradiction one of the fairest, and most considerable in all the Great
Alcanders's Court, all those who had any Credit with him, pretended to (...);
and amongst the rest, Monsieur de Lausun, whom the Great Alcander had not long
since made a Captain of his Guardes; yet he durst not demand it himself, either
for that he perceived, that he did begin to decline in his favor, ^r because
he would not every moment importune him for fresh Graces.

He had made his peace in appearance with Madam de Montespan, who to make him
fall the more readily into the Net, had seemed to pardon him. Monsieur de
Lausun believing therefore, that (...) would not deny him her medi(...)tion,
for the obtaining of that Office, did pray her, that she would be pleased to
serve him therein^ but desired her not to tell t(...) Great Alcander, that he
had ma(...) her that request. Madam de Montespan, did promise him to do it but
going immediately to find o(...) the Great Alcander, she told him that Monsieur
de Lausun was no^ become altogether a Mystery, th(...) he had made her promise
him t(...) demand the Count de Guiche's Office for him; but that at the same
time, he had exacted from he^ not to discover, that he had desire it; that she
could not imagine why he practiced all these slight with a Prince, who had
heape^ upon him so many Favors, an^ still continued to heap upon him more and
more every day; that admit there were no reason to be lieve, that he might have
ill designs in demanding that Office, (...)t she would not grant it him, (...)
she were in his place, since all ^is goodness toward him deserved ^t least, in
acknowlegment, a demonstration of more freedom.

Although Monsieur de Lausun's proceedings had nothing in the bottom, yet since
Madam de Montespan gave it the blackest Colors (...)at she could, the Great
Alcander reflected upon it, and telling Madam de Montespan, that he could not
comprehend what design Monsieur de Lausun might have, Madam de Montespan
advised him to discourse himself with him about ^t, to see if he would still
continue ^is slights. The Great Alcander did approve of this advice, and being
shut up with Monsieur de Lausun in his Closet, after having entertained him
with a discourse of several matters, he began to talk of those, who aspired to
the Count de Guiche's Office; telling him, th(...) he had no intention to
gratify (...)ny of those People, whom he did not think sufficiently experience
to supply so considerable a charg(...)

Monsieur de Lausun overjoyed (...) find the Great Alcander of th(...) opinion,
endeavored to confi(...) him in it, by adding to what (...) had said of these
Persons, something to their disadvantage. But Monsieur de Lausun not coming of
himself, to what the Great Alcander would have had him, that is to say, to beg
that Office for himself The Great Alcander asked him, it would not fit him, and
if (...) had no desire to have it. Monsienr de Lausun replied, that after
having received so many Favor from his Majesty, he had no min^ to pretend to
any new, so th(...) he durst assure him, that he nev(...) had the least thought
of it. Th(...) Great Alcander told him that he had however believed it, because
Madam de Montespan had spoke (...) him about it in his behalf, which he did
not believe she would have done, unless he had desired (...) of her; that he
could not conceive, why he made a Mystery of (...) thing, to which he might
pretend as well as so many others, (...)d desired him to tell him the (...)th
of it. Monsieur de Lausun being himself pressed in that manner by the Great
Alcander, swore ^o him again, that he had never (...)ought of it; Whereupon the
Great Alcander, with a mien able ^o make Monsieur de Lausun tremble, told him,
that he was exteam(...) amazed at the boldness which ^e had to lie to him so
impudent^^, that he needed not to disguise himself any longer, since Madam de
Montespan had told him all; and that he might assure himself, that he would
never give the least (...)dit to any thing that he might ^y hereafter; at the
same time the Great Alcander rose up, a(...) having dismissed him without
hea^ning to his excuses, Monsieur (...) Lausun departed full of despair and
rage.

At his going out of the Great Alcander's Closet, he met the Du(...) of Crequi,
who seeing him qui(...) altered, asked him what was t(...) matter, to which
Monsieur de Lausun replied, that he was a wretch who had the Rope about his
Neck and that he, who would strangl^ him, should be the best of his friends*

From thence he went to Madam de Montespan's Lodgings where he put upon her all
manner of affronts, and even gave he^ so gross Language, as it was not to be
believed, that a Man of Quality could have such in his mouth.

Madam de Montespan told him, that unless she hoped the Great Alcander would do
her justice, she her self would that very moment* have scratched out his Eyes;
but that she would now remit all her revenge to the King.

After he had once more given her all the foulest and basest Language, that
despair and rage could inspire him with; he went to Mademoiselle d'Orleans
Monpensier's, whom he could not caress as he was accustomed, so much had the
dejection of his Spirit contributed to the dejection of his Body. In the mean
time the Princess being thus disappointed, was very desirous to know whence
that proceeded, swearing to him, that the matter should be very difficult, if
she endeavored not to bring a remedy to it. Monsieur de Lausun believing
himself obliged to tell her what it was, imparted to her the conversation which
he had had with the Great Alcander, and the Visit which he afterward made to
Madam de Montespan, not concealing a Syllable of all the disobliging things,
that he had said unto her.

The Princess, to whom, Ag(...) had given more Experience, ve(...) much blamed
Monsieur de Lausun (who had indeed naturally a great deal of Wit, but very
little Judgment) for what he had done, telling him that all truths were not to
be spoken at all times. She apprehended the Great Alcander's Resentment, and
fearing, that the conjuncture might be destructive to her Pleasures, she did
what she could to enjoy them still for the time, out of a fear that she should
not be long permitted, to have them, as often as she would have a mind to them.

In effect the Great Alcander, having understood, that Monsieur de Lausun,
notwithstanding his Orders so often repeated to the contrary, had again railed
at Madam de Montespan, resolved to have him, apprehended; Monsieur de Louvoy's
Remonstrances, who did not cease: to tell him, that he could not otherwise
reduce that Spirit ^o reason, were of great use to confirm him in this
resolution, and to overcome all the returns of kindness which he had for that
under serving Favorite. The Order for the seizing him was given to the
Chevalier de Fourbins, Major of the Lifeguard, who presently conveyed himself
to Monsieur de Lausun's House, where having learned, that he was gone to Paris,
he left (...) Soldier to watch near the Gate, with order to come and give him
notice, as soon as he should be returned. Monsieur de Lausun arrived about an
hour or two after, and the Soldier having given the Chevalier de Fourbins
notice of it, the Chevalier de Fourbins having first placed some Guards about
the House, entered into it, and found him near the fire, little dreaming of his
misfortune. For as soon as he saw the Chevalier come toward him, he asked him,
if the Great Alcander had sent for him to which the Chevalier de Fourbins
answered, No, but that he had sent him to demand his Sword that he was sorry to
be charge^ with such a Commission, but where as he was obliged to do whatever
his Master commanded him, he could not dispense with himself from executing it.

It is easiy to judge of Monsieur de Lausun's surprise, at so unexpected a
Complement, for although he had given the Great Alcander cause to deal much
more rigorously with him, yet since Men an^ more apt to flatter themselves,
than to do themselves Justice, he believed that the kindness which the King had
always shown toward him, would prevail above his resentment. He asked the
Chevalier de Fourbins, whether he might not speak with the King, but the
Chevalier having told him that it was forbidden, he gave himself over to
despair. They kept as ^rict a Guard upon him all that ^ight, as they could
have done ^^on the greatest Criminal in the World, and the Chevalier de
Fourbins having on the morrow de(...)vered him into the hands of Mon(...)ur
d'Artagnan, Captain Lieutenant of Dragoons, Monsieur de ^ausun looked upon
himself as a (...)ined Man; because Monsieur de (...)tagnan had never been his
friend, (...)d, he believed, that he was cho(...) out on purpose, to make the
Great Alcander's indignation the ^etter known.

Monsieur d'Artagnan, having (...)ken Orders from Monsieur de (...)voy by the
Great Alcanders ^ommand, conducted Monsieur de Lausun to Pierre An^ise, and
from (...)ence to Pignerol, where they (...) him up in a Room with (...)
Windows, not setting him (...) speak with any one whomsoever, and having only
some Books for his Companions, together w(...) his Valet de Chamber, who was no
permitted to go out.

The Affliction, which he conceived to see himself fallen from so high a
Fortune into so depl^rable a Condition, soon reduc(...) him to that extremity,
that (...) life was despaired of, and he being once fallen into a Lethargy, it
w(...) so credibly believed, that he w(...) deceased, that a Courrier was
d(...)patched to the Great Alcander, (...) give him notice of his Death; b(...)
in six hours afterward, there a(...)ved another, who brought the Ne(...) of
his return to life again, at whi(...) there was neither joy nor grief (...)
press't, I mean in general, eve(...) one esteeming him already as ^ Man, who
was dead at least to t(...) World.

In the mean time, Madamoisel(...) d'Orleans Monpensier, being in de(...)pair,
because the pleasures, which she had expected to enjoy with hi^ were so
suddenly vanished, suffered (...) much the more torment, in that (...) durst not
make the least appear. However the most intimate of her Friends endeavored all
they ^ould to lessen her Affliction; but (...)ce they were not always with
(...)er, and especially by night, du(...)ng which the Senses are usually
(...)he most tormented, they rather contributed to render her more ^retched by
thus renewing the remembrance of her misfortune, than brought her any comfort.
^et her greatest Misery was, that (...)e durst not complain; for since (...)r
Marriage was secret, she truly (...)dged that her Sorrows must be ^lso secret,
unless she would resolve (...) expose her self to the laughter, not only of her
Enemies, but ^^en of all France, who had their eyes turned upon her, to see
after that manner she would take her ^^od Friends disgrace. Nevertheless that
did not hinder her from taking the Man who mana(...) Monsieur de Lausuns
business; a(...) making him her Steward; nor fr(...) receiving into her Service
his Gentleman, and the most faithful (...) his Domestics, who were o(...)
joyed to save themselves in t(...) Port, after their Masters Shipwra(...)

In the mean time, the Great ^^cander, just as if Monsieur de L^^sun had never
been his Favouri^^ heard every thing that was said him, without being concerned
(...) it, or even without answering (...) it; which was the reason that the^
who were still his Friends, w(...) were but very few in number dared no longer
to speak in his (...) half. Neither did hardly any p(...)sum to Petition for
the Count (...) Guiche's Employment; for all m(...) knowing, that it had been a
stu^bling block to that Favorite, th(...) seared, least it might have the
sa(...) effect for others, as it had for him yet while they were in daily (...)
(...)ectation of the Man, to whom (...)e Great Alcander would give it, (...)ey
were all surprised, when one ^orning at his rising, he told the (...)ke de la
Feuillade, that if he could (...)ocure fifty thousand Crowns, he ^ould give him
the rest to pur(...)se the Count de Guiche's Employment, to whom he must pay
(...)own six hundred thousand Li^es, before he could have his Re(...)nation.
The Duke de la Feuilla^^ smilingly answered the Great Alcander, that he should
easily pro^^re them, if he would be his security; and after having seriously
thanked him for the Favor which (...) did him, he took leave of him ^o go to
Paris, to fetch the sum, (...)at the Great Alcander demanded of him.

The News of what the Great Alcander had done for him, being ^pread amongst all
the Courtiers, he ^et a great number of them in the (...)tichamber, and upon
the Stairs, who came to make him their Complements; but without half hea^ing
them out, he returned in(...) the Great Alcander's Chamber, (...) whom he said,
that Men need (...) longer have recourse to Saints (...) see Miracles, since
His Majesty d(...) greater than all the Saints in Paradise; that when he came
in th(...) Morning he had not been regarded by any body, because none di(...)
believe that his Majesty would d(...) that which he had done for hi(...) but
that as soon as the favou(...) which he had granted him, w(...) known, all
pressed with emulation one of another to make him pro^fers of their Service; but
that they were proffers of Service after the Court Mode only, that is to say^
that no man had offered him h(...) Purse, to take thence the fifty thousand
Crowns which he wanted

The Great Alcander laughed a(...) Duke of Feuillade's jest, and seeing him
return in as much have as he came, he told him that he need not (...)o so fast,
if he had nothing to (...)o at Paris, but to seek the Mo^ey; that he was
willing to lend (...) him, but upon condition, that (...)e should pay it again,
when he (...)re able.

Thus the Great Alcander having (...) a day ruined one Favorite, rai(...)d
another almost in as little time; (...)r it is apparent, that the morning
whereon the King made the Duke de la Feuillade this Present, ^is Affairs were
in so bad a con(...)tion, that one of his Coach Hor(...)s being dead, he had
not money enough by him to buy another.

Although Monsieur de Lausuns disgrace had deprived the Court ^^dies of one of
their best Com(...)tants, yet since every moment presented them with fresh Men
to enter the Lists, the vigor of those did comfort them for the loss of the
other; and he was no sooner ^ut of sight, but they forgot all his Braveries.
Among the young Men, who presented themselves (...) supply his place, the Duke
of Longueville was without doubt the most considerable both for Bir^^ and
Fortune; for he was descended from Princess, who had p(...)sest the Crown,
before it fell (...) that Branch, from whence the Gre^^ Alcander was sprung,
and he ha^ an Estate of six hundred thousand Livres a year, in Land, to
maintain so Illustrious a Descent. A^ for his Person, his Youth was accompanied
with a Je ne sai qui^ that rendered him very Charming wherefore although he was
neither of so good a Presence, nor of so graceful an Air, as many other^ were,
yet he failed not to please all the Women in general; so that he no sooner
appeared at Court^ but they all had designs upon hi^ Person.

The Mareschaless de la Ferte was one of those, and thirty seve^(...) thirty
eight years, which had (...)st over her head, not permitting (...)r to hope,
that he would pre(...) her before so many others, who were much younger and
fairer (...)an her self, she believed that it (...)old not be amiss for her to
^ake him some advances, and that (...)ese advances might serve her in(...)ad of
Merit. One day that the ^uke of Longueville, with several (...)hers, was at
play at her House, which was the usual Rendezvous of (...) the People of
Quality, who had nothing to do, she entreated him (...) come to see her, at an
hour in (...)e morning, that she knew none (...)se would be there, at which
time, (...)e had the pleasure of entertaining him with all freedom; but (...)
very little purpose, for the young (...)inee was as yet so raw in Amorous
Mysteries, that he did no understand the meaning of an hundred wanton lo^ks,
and ^^ish tricks, which would have sufficiently advertised any other, that had
b(...) more experienced than himself*

Nevertheless, seeing that (...) Mareschaless, old as she was, h(...) not
displeased him, he came (...)gain on the morrow to see her the same hour, and
finding her her Toilet, he told her that would make her a Present of admirable
Powder; the Maresc(...)less asked him what Powder it w(...) and the Duke of
Longueville h(...)ving replied, that it was pol(...)ville, he had hardly let
the w(...) fall, when she cried out, that (...) would dispense with him
fro(...) sending for it, that it was an ab(...)minable Powder, and that she,
w(...) had invented it, deserved to (...) burnt. She immediately asked t(...)
Duke of Longueville, whether did make use of it, and the Du(...) having
answered, Yes; She bid h(...) not come near her, for that Powder was worse than
the Plague. T(...) Duke, who did not know wh(...) (...)e meant, desired her to
explain (...)e Riddle, and the Mareschaless (...)ving enquired of him, whether
(...) had not heard the Count de (...)ux's Story, and he having repli(...), No;
she told him that he must (...) informed of it from himself, and (...)r that
she did believe that he (...)old use no more Polleville.

She would not tell him any (...)ing more until her head was (...)essed, but
her dressing Woman (...)ing gone, she then told him, that (...)e Count de Saux
having had (...) Assignation with Madam de (...)uvres, did not come off with
honor, by reason of Polleville; and that she verily believed, that the same
thing would befall him, (...)he were in the like Rencounter. That reproach made
the Duke of Longueville laugh, and whereas the force of youth made him believe,
that he did not hate the Mareschaless whom he had found a handsome Woman at her
looking Glass; he told her that he had (...) day used Polleville, but that
(...) would make it appear, that (...) same thing should not befall h(...) as
did happen to the Count (...) Saux. Whereupon he began(...) caress her, and the
Maresch(...) seeming to be angry at his b(...)ness, to provoke him the mo(...)
resisted him, until she was n(...) the Bed, upon which she let h(...) self
fall, and there she tried, th(...) what was said of the Count (...) Saux, was
an effect of his weakness, and not of Polleville.

The Duke of Longueville ove(...) joyed at his Adventure, used (...) like a
young Man, which did n(...) at all displease the Mareschaless She entreated him
to be secret, and made him understand, that she had a severe Husband, who would
take nothing for raill^ry, if he on(...) had happened to discover, that the had
any familiarity together. The Duke of Longueville promised he(...) that he
would act very discreetly, and that she should have reason to be satisfied with
his Conduct, but he, (...) his part desired her not to (...)mmit any infidelity
against him, (...)ding that he would forsake her (...)at very moment, wherein
any (...)ing of that nature should arrive (...) his knowledge.

That Law was very severe to the Mareschaless, who till then had believed, that
one Man was too (...)tle for one Woman, but she be(...)g much in love with the
Duke, (...)d besides, having just then experienced, that he was worth two
ordinary Men she resolved to struggle with her Nature to keep her (...)ord with
him, as long as she (...)uld. Therefore from that day, (...)e dismissed the
Marquis Deffiat, (...)ho endeavored to obtain her (...)avour, and would
certainly have (...)und speedy success, had it not (...)en for the Duke of
Longueville's prohibition.

The Marquis of Deffiat was ^ little Man, wilful and brave, though he did not
love the W(...) addicted to Pleasures, and incapable of reasoning, when some
(...)cy had once taken him in the h(...) He found much severity in (...)
Mareschaless's command, w(...) whom he was almost come to bargain, and not
doubting, but t(...) there was some other Lover in (...) Field, he immediately
suspect the Duke of Longueville. His suspicions being fallen upon him, though
she received Visits from many others, he was vexed to h(...) to do with a
Prince, with who he durst not fight without expressing himself to dangerous
consequences.

However, his Passion being more strong than his Reason, he would before he
quarrelled with him, certainly informed, if he were (...) in a mistake, and
having for the purpose sent several Spies abro(...) (...)e was one day advised
of a meeting that those Lovers had together; whereupon he wrapped himself up in a
great Cloak, and stood watching before the Door, that he might be the more
certain, whether it were true or no. When he had seen with his own Eyes, that
he had been told nothing but (...)ruth, he resolved to quarrel with the Duke of
Longueville upon the first opportunity, and having met him soon after, he told
him in his (...)ar, that he desired to see him with his Sword in hand, the Duke
of Longueville answered him without any emotion, that he ought to learn to know
himself, and that she might fight with his equal, but as for him, he had been
instructed never to meddle with Fellows, whose Ancestors have not long been
known.

This was a sensible reproach to the Marquis de Deffiat, of whose (...)raction
the World had no great Opinion; nevertheless since th(...) were several others
in the pl(...) where he had spoken to the Duke of Longueville, he went from him
without making any thing appe(...) and without giving any suspici(...) of what
he had said unto him. The Duke of Longueville depart(...) in a little time
after, but having several Pages and Lacquaies in h(...) train, Deffiat believed
it prop(...) to wait for some more favorable opportunity to get satisfaction*
bot(...) for the affront which was just th(...) given him, and for the stealing
a way of his Mistress from him.

In the mean time, the Duke of Longueville, seeing that Deffiat did not follow
him, took that for an effect of his Cowardice, which was only an effect of his
Judgment; so that he began to speak ill of hi(...) upon that score, which being
reported to Deffiat, put him into suc(...) an excess of anger, that he
reso(...)ved to be revenged, though it should (...)ove his utter ruin* To this
effect he employed two or three (...)ies, to bring him notice when the Duke of
Longueville went abroad alone, which he often did, having besides his Intrigue
with the Mareschaless, some Amors in the (...)own, which gave him employment,
(...)d within two or three days after, one of his Spies having ad(...)ertised
him, that the Duke went but all alone in a Chair, and was (...)one to some
appointment, he po(...)ed himself upon the way, and (...)s the Duke returned
about two hours after Midnight, he presented himself before him with a Cane
(...)n one hand, and a Sword in the other, and called to him to come out, or he
would use him scurvily; the Duke of Longueville, having immediately caused his
Chairmen to stop, would have handled his Sword, but Deffiat assaulting him
before he had time to draw it, gave him some blows with the Cane, which the
Chair men seeing, they took the Staves out of the Chair, and would have
knoc(...) the Marquis on the head with them* if he had not judged it proper
(...) avoid their fury, by a speedy flight*

It is easy to comprehend the Duke's despair, after so sensible an affront,
and how much he desired to revenge it; he forbad the Chair-men ever to speak of
this accident, neither did he ever speak of it himself to any, but to one of
his best Friends, who advised him to make no complaint of it, for although the
Great Alcander would not fail to give the Marquis an exemplary punishment; yet
he did not believe, that a Prince, who had received such an affront, ought to
revenge himself by the Ministry of another; he told him, that he had nothing
else to do, but to cause his Enemy to be Assassinated, which indeed was the
only method he could take upon such an occasion, for although it were not
generous (...) commit actions of that nature; (...)t, since to Challenge
Deffiat ^ould expose him again* to be (...)aten, it was not just, and
especially for a Prince, to receive two (...)ronts at the same time.

The Duke being resolved, what(...)er happened, to follow this advice, (...)ght
after nothing more than (...)me opportunity of accomplishing it; but it was a
very difficult matter; because Deffiat after having committed such an
extravagancy, never went abroad without being well attended, and always stood
upon his Guard. In the mean time, it happened that the Mareschaless de la Ferte
became big with Child, which very much alarmed her; for whereas he did not lie
with her Husband, who had long lain bedrid with the Gout, she well imagined,
that if he once came to know it, he would lock her up immediately for the rest
of her life. That was therefore a necessity of us(...) a great deal of
precaution to conceal her great Belly from him but she discovered it to the
Duke of Longueville, who overjoyed (...) see himself likely to have O(...)
spring, although he was as yet but very young himself, loved the Maresehaless
the more tenderly for i(...) When she was four or five Months gone, she would
no longer verture to go into the Marshall Chamber; but sitting up at pla(...)
all night, she lay in Bed all day causing her meat to be brought thither to
her, and never rose, until the Gamesters returned, before whom, she never
stirred from her Seat, for fear they should discover, that which she earnestly
desired, should be concealed from all the World.

Although the Marshall mistrusted nothing, yet he failed not to find fault
with that manner of living, and having sent his Wife (...)ord, that he would be
glad to (...)ak with her, she ventured into (...)s Chamber, where he
reprehend(...) her for it to purpose; but the Mareschaless, who desired only
some pretense not to return thither any (...)ore, seemed to be very much
offended at his correction; so that he discourse growing hot between (...)em,
they gave each other a great deal of ill Language, which gave the Mareschaless
an opportunity to tell him, that he should quarrel with her when she came next
to see him, and at the same time (...)itting his Chamber, she never (...)et her
foot in it again, until after her lying in.

When she was within a Month of six Weeks of her time, she feigned an
indisposition to rid her self of the Company that frequented her, and her time
being come, she lay in in her own House, just as if she had been with Child by
her own Husband. It was Monsieur Clement that delivered her, a(...) the Duke of
Longueville who was present at her Labor, made him promise to keep it secret,
and gave him 200 Pistols.

In the mean time Monsieur Clement had many such windfals, f(...) in a little
time after, Madam (...) Montespan being again with Chil(...) by the Great
Alcander, she had recourse to him, and he was brought after the same manner,
and with the same Ceremony as he had been before; however there was some
difference in his reward; he having had this last time two hundred Lewidores,
whereas he had only one hundred the first time and the same measures were
always observed with him, as often as there was use for him; he having had as
far as to four hundred Lewidores, for the fourth Child that he delivered Madam
de Montespan of: But whether it were that it appeared a little too
extraordinary to this Lady, who was naturally very saving, or that she had some
other reasons for it, she having again conceived by the Great Alcander, and
being obliged to go into the Country, she sent to bargain with Clement, to send
her one of his Deputies to Maintenon, where she had resolved to ly in. She
passed there for one of the Marchioness of Maintenon's best Friends, so that
the Deputy, who delivered her, did not know, that he had brought the Great
Alcander's Mistress to bed.

In the mean time, to return to the Duke of Longueville, who finding (as I have
already said) no opportunity to be revenged of Deffiat, he was obliged to make
himself ready to follow the Great Alcander, who had declared War with the
Hollanders. This Campaign was extremely glorious to this Great Prince; but
fatal to the Duke of Longueville, for he being am(...)sed at a debauch, an hour
or two before the Great Alcander made h(...) Troops pass over the Rhine,
th(...) Wine caused him unhappily to discharge a Pistol against the Enemies,
who already talked of surrendering themselves, which was the reason that they
discharged again upon him, and upon the Chief of the Great Alcander's Army, of
which several were slain, and the Duke of Longueville among the rest, who was
the cause of this misfortune.

The News of it being carried to Paris, the Mareschaless almost died with
grief* as well as many other Ladies, who had an interest in that young Prince's
Person* he was also generally lamented by all Men, except Deffiat, who was
thereby rid of a powerful Enemy. In making an Inventory of his Papers, they
found his last Will and Testaments, which he had made a little before his
departure. All men were surprised to see, that in it he did knowledge the Son
which he had the Mareschaless for his natural* Son, to whom he left five
hundred thousand Livres, in case (...)happened to dye before he were (...)ried.

This News being soon published through the whole Town, the Mareschaless was
advised of it by Ma(...) de Bertillac her good Friend, (...)o at the same time,
warned her (...) have a care, least it should reach her* Husbands Ears. The
Mareschaless grew almost mad to see her (...)iness become thus public; but
(...) time brings comfort to every (...)ng, she bore it the best in the World,
and could at last hear it (...)coursed of without blushing. the Great Alcander,
knowing that the Duke of Longueville, had a Son by the Mareschaless, was very
glad (...) it. For whereas there was a (...)at resemblance between the Duke of
Longueville's advent(...) and his own; I would say, where(...) the Son, which
the Duke left behind him, was born of a Mar(...) Woman, as well as those which
the Great Alcander had by Mad(...) de Montespan; he desired, that th(...)
should serve him for a precedent legitimate his own Children, whenever he
should have a mind to (...) and he sent an Order to the Parliament of Paris, to
legitimate the Duke of Longueville's Son, without any obligation to name the
Mother, which was however contrary to the Laws and Customs the Realm.

When the first noise, which the News had made, was a little over the
Mareschaless, who saw her Reputation lost amongst all People of Honor,
resolved to cast off (...) the little continency she had le(...) She tried all
those who were gl(...) to be contented with the Duke Longueville's leavings,
and wi(...) the leavings of several others, and (...)ving tied a strong
Friendship with Madam de Bertillac, who was (...)e of the fairest Creatures in
all (...)ris, they became each others Confident, and tasted all manner of
Pleasures. The Mareschaless had a Foot man, who was since (...)oak on the
Wheel, and had one of the finest heads of Hair in the World, and detraction
would have it, that he had a great share of her good Affections because it was
observed, that she made some difference between him, and her other Footmen.

Madam de Bertillac's great intima(...)y with the Mareschaless, did not (...)t
all please Monsieur de Bertillac her Father in Law, who feared lest that
whilst his Son was in the Army, his Daughter in Law might be debauched; but
that was a thing already done; for she had not been able to hear the
Mareschaless discourse of the pleasure that there was in playing a Husband
falls(...) without having a desire to t(...) what it was. However Monsie^^ de
Bertillac held as strict a hand (...)ver her as she could, he had (...) Eye
upon her, and often recommended to her to have her honor before her Eyes. But
he was to^ much employed with the keeping of the Great Alcanders Treasure
which that Prince had trusted to him, so that as it was difficu^^ for him to
be able to answer for his Daughter in Laws conduc^ so it was easy for his
Daughte^ in Law, to make him think vve^^ of it.

In the mean time, Madam d^ Bertillac, being one day gone t^ a play with the
Mareschaless, vvher^ the last had seen le Basque the vaulter dance, she told
the other^ that she fancied, that a Man who had such a supple back, was an
admirable performer, and said, tha^ she had a great desire to make a trial of
him her self. The Mareschaless's Ingenuity having obliged Ma(...)m de Bertillac
to open also her (...)art, she told her, that she really (...)ieved, there
would be a great (...)al of pleasure in doing what she (...)d, but that for her
part, if she was curious of any thing, it was (...)f knowing whether Baron the
(...)maedian, was as agreeable a Per(...)n in Conversation, as he was upon the
Stage. This confidence was (...)llowed by the approbation of the Mareschaless;
she exalted Baron's Merit, to the end that Madam de Bertillac might commend le
Basque, and each encouraging the other to prove this Adventure otherwise than
in the Idea, they were (...)o sooner gone from the Play, but they resolved to
write to these two Men, to desire their Company for one moment.

Baron and le Basque were very much surprised at the Honor that was done them,
and having not failed to give them a civil answe(...) the enterview was at St.
Clou, from whence the Ladies returned so w(...) contented, that they agreed
between themselves, that it should not be the last time that they would see
them. They afterward imparted to each other what had happened to them, and
they went both obliged to confess unanimously, that it was not always men
o(...) Quality that rendered the ablest Service. As for the men, each of them
had not the same cause of contentment. If Baron were satisfied with his
fortune, le Basq(...) was unsatisfied with his; he found the Mareschaless
insatiable; and he told Baron, that although he much wearied himself at the
Play, yet he had rather be obliged to dance there all day, than be with her
only one hour; Baron did comfort him with the good fortune he had in being in
Favor with a Woman of great Quality, and he was fool enough to feed himself
with this Chimaera.

In the mean time Madam de Bertillac gave her self over to that (...)ravagance,
that she could not (...) a moment without Baron, and having understood that he
had lost very considerable sum at play, (...)e forced him to take her Jewels,
which were well worth twenty thousand Crowns. But it happened to her
misfortune, that one of her Father in Laws Friends being (...) go to some
public Meeting, (...)e prayed him to borrow them (...)t her of his Daughter in
Law, (...)d Monsieur de Bertillac being very glad to oblige that Lady, bid
Madam Bertillac lend them to her, which did extremely perplex her. She having
at first appeared surprised, Madam de Bertillac did believe, seeing that she
was a Gam(...)r, she had played away or (...)ed some part of them, and
(...)essing her to tell him where, to the end that he might fetch them out, she
confounded her self m(...) and more, by saying, sometim(...) that she had lent
them one of her Friends, and sometimes that th(...) were with a Jeweller, who
h(...) them to mend. Monsieur de Bertillac, who was a man of Experience,
plainly perceived that there was some Mystery in the matte(...) but not being
able to get any thing more out of her, he was forced to declare the business in
his Daughter in Laws Family, who after several Stories, did at length confess,
that she had given them Baron; however she endeavored t(...) disguise it,
under the name (...) lending them. Her Relations went immediately to the
Player, who (...) first denied the matter, believing that they spoke to him
only o(...) of suspicion, but understanding in a moment after, that Madam de
Bertillac her self had been obliged to discover him, and that they had already
acquainted the Great Alcander with it, so that it would (...)ove almost his
ruin, he chose (...) restore them, and avoided thereby a great deal of trouble.

Monsieur de Bertillac believing, that his Son, who was in the Army, ^ould not
fail being advised of what (...)ad passed, bethought himself, that it was best
for him, to give him ^otice of it himself, before any other; but Madam de
Bertillac, who had a great power over her Husbands Spirit, having prevented him
by a Letter, Monsieur de Bertillac was very much surprised, when instead of
thanks, as he expected from his Son, he received nothing but complaints, as if
his Wife were (...)ill in the right. Madam de Bertillac carried her cunning yet
farther; she desired her Husband to suffer her to retire into a Convent, saying
that she could no longer (...)ve with Monsieur de Bertillac, who used her after
such a manner, as had he not been her Father Law, she should have believe that
he had been amorous of (...) since he was become so Jealous*

These News tormented her Husband, who tenderly loved her, a(...) was very far
from believing (...) false, and attributing all the f(...) to his Eather, the
rest of the Campaign did seem to him to last thousand years, he was in so much
have to go and comfort this d(...) Spouse. In the mean time he desired his
Father to leave his W(...) in repose, of whose Virtue he w(...) sufficiently
persuaded, to believe none of all those Reports, which ran abroad to her
disadvantage and as for her, he wrote to her (...) no means to go into a
Conve(...) unless she desired to make him d(...) with Grief; to have patience
until the end of the Compagne, a(...) after that he would put every thing in
order. In effect, as soon as (...) returned, he would not hear a(...) thing to
her prejudice; he lived with her as he was accustomed, and if she had not dyed
in a little (...)me after* she had gained so great (...)n influence over him,
that she (...)old have done whatever she had pleased, without any
contradiction from him.

Madam de Bertillac's Death made the Mareschaless examine her self. She told
some of her Friends that she would renounce all the Vani(...)es of the World,
but since she had said as much after the Duke of Longueville's Death, and yet
had performed nothing of it, it was not believed that she would keep her word
any better this time, than she did the other. In which (...)one were deceived,
for her Husbands Death having set her at liberty, to live after her own Mode,
(...)e made an infinite number of Rascals, who were yet more un(...)orthy,
succeed le Basque. The Chevalier Grippefer kept her until he was weary of her,
to wh(...) the Abbot of Lignerac succeed(...) and as she gave him a part of
(...) Bed, she obliged him to give (...) a share of his Purse. At last (...)
Abbot of Lignerac, having qui(...) the Mother in Law for the Daughter in Law,
she is at this day (...)duced to give her self up to (...) little du Pre, who
not only give her some of his Orvietan, but a(...) teaches her all the tricks
of Ca(...) and of Cunning, wherewith the bubble together all new com(...) and
those, who are fools enough to expect fair play with a W(...) man, who has so
long since anounced all Honor and Hon(...)sty.

The Mareschaless's Example has moved the Duchess de la Fer(...) to be not
more Virtuous. However she being younger, and, as she thought, fairer, she did
not judge(...) it proper to expose her self to a(...) the World, as her Mother
in Law did but on the contrary, pre(...)ming that she had Beauty enough (...)
touch the Great Alcander's Sons (...)art; she began not to make Court (...)
him, but Love, and that so o(...)nly, that the whole World could (...)t look
upon her Impudence, (...)ithout blushing for her.

The Mareschaless de la Motte her Mother, who had been Governant (...) the
Great Alcanders Son, and who had Married another of her daughters to the Duke
of Vanta(...)r, of whose Conduct she was (...)ready not too well satisfied,
soon (...)rceiving her Daughters designs, (...)solved to stop the course of
them, to preserve what was left of Repu(...)tion in her Family. She
there(...)re told the Duchess de la Ferte; (...)ll that a Mothers Experience
and Authority could dictate to her: ^ut all her Remonstrances did no other
good, than to make her Daughter conceal from her, while (...)e exposed to the
Eyes of all others, designs that made the l(...) moderate murmur. For one
d(...) having found the Great Alcander Son in a good humor, she s(...) very
confident things to him, a(...) the Prince having praised the B(...)ty of her
Hair, which was ind(...) very fair, and of a beauteous Color, she told him,
that if he h(...) seen her Head undrest, he wou(...) have been much better
pleased with them, that when he pleased she would give him that satisfaction
and stooping her Head at the same time, to show him what quantity she had of
them, she put her hand into a place, which decenc(...) forbids me to name,
while the young Prince considered only her head, possibly without mindin(...)
what she did. The Prince b(...)ing then very young, the Duchess de la Ferte's
action made hi(...) more ashamed than it did her, and retreating back a step or
two, his confusion increased when he sa(...) that his Shirt hung out before,
and (...)at he must put it up again. The (...)ush, which at the same time
appeared in his Face, with some other circumstances that were ob(...)ved, made
it conceived, that (...)e Lady had not altogether lost her time while she
stooped down; (...)t she, not being the more out of ^ountenance for that, told
the Prince, who was putting up his (...)rt, that it was not very decent (...)
do what he did before Ladies, (...)d that if her Husband should (...)ance to
come by, it would be enough to make him Jealous.

The Prince gave her no leisure (...)o pursue a discourse, the matter of which
was disagreeable to him, (...) that after he went away, she (...)ld two or
three Ladies of her acquaintance, that she had seen a (...)n who was no man,
and they (...)ot knowing what she meant by (...)at, and yet desiring to know
it, (...)e told them, that she had been just then to see the Great Alcanders
Son, who nevertheless co(...) never be his Son. They pressed (...) to explain the
Riddle, which would not do, although they treated her; but these Ladies
(...)ving understood the young Pri(...) Adventure, did easily guess at(...)
rest, and it was not difficult to (...)lieve, but that the disorder, wh(...) in
he appeared, was the Dutchess's own handy work.

The Great Alcander, having be advised of it, told the Marescless de la Motthe,
that he was (...) at all satisfied with her Daughter, and he commanded her warn
the Duchess to have a m(...) honorable Conduct; otherwise should be obliged
to tell her Husband to look after it. In the me(...) time, this Husband was a
m(...) who took no great care, either of his Wives Reputation, or of (...)
own, and provided that he might drink, and frequent Baudy-hou(...) valued not
what men talked of, (...)r what might happen; he was (...)stantly with a
company of lewd (...)ung Fellows, whose brave exhibits did consist only in
promoting a Debauch, even to the last (...)tremity. So that the Wenches, (...)w
bold or impudent soever they (...)ere, never saw them enter their (...)uses
without trembling.

About this time they did act a (...)olick, that went a little too far, (...)d
that made a great deal of noise, (...)h in the Court and Town; for (...)er
having spent the whole day with some Courtizans, where they had committed a
thousand disorders, (...)ey Supt at the three Spoons in Bear(...)t; where being
overtaken with Wine, they took up a Wafer* ma(...)r, whose manly parts they cut
(...), and put them in his Basket. This poor wretch seeing himself (...) the
hands of these Executions, alarmed not only the whole ^ouse, but even the
whole Street with his Cries and Lamentatio(...) But although there came
abo(...) them many People, who would have dissuaded them from so (...) humane
an Action, yet they would not give over, and the operati(...) being finished,
they sent away t(...) unhappy Wafer-maker, who we(...) to dye at his Masters
House.

This excess of debauchery, rather of madness, being known to the Great
Alcander, he conceived a dreadful anger at it. B(...) the greater part of these
despe(...) men having Relation to the C(...) of the Court, and even to the
Ministers, he thought it proper, consideration of their Families, content
himself with their Banishment, and their Kindred found the Sentence so mild, in
comparison what they deserved, that they returned thanks to the Great Alcander
for it, seriously confessing, th(...) so enormous a Crime did merit nothing
less than Death.

The Marquis de Camardon and the Chevalier Gripesou, who had been concerned in
the Debauch, and who were always the first to draw the others on, were a little
mortified before their departure. For this last, who was the Son of the Famous
Monsieur Gripesou, was entertained by his Father with a good Cud(...)elling in
the presence of a great many People; as he was a great Politician, he was very
glad that it should be told the Great Alcander, that he could not hear of so
(...)rrid an irregularity without giveing it some chastisement. As for the
Marquis de Camardon, the Great Alcander said in discourse concerning him, that
he should not, during (...)is life, ever pretend to be a Duke, and that he
would always be more ready to give him marks of his disdain, than to do any
thing for him, that might raise his Fortune. However we now see, that the Great
Alcander has forgot his word, unless it will be said, that it was no^ to the
Marquis of Camardon th^^ he has lately granted the Dignity of a Duke, but to
Madamo^^selle de Laval, whom Camardo^ has Married.

The noise which this Frolic^ had made, being a little pacified the Kindred of
those who were Banished, did solicit their return while the Duchess de la
Fer^^ wished that her Husband might no^ return so soon, having very good reasons
for it, which I will relate in few words. When she perceived that she in vain
pretended to the Conquest of the Great Alcanders Son, she fell to the first
comer, with whom she had no reason at all to be contented. For some body made
her a very bad present, and she having no experience in a certain ilness that
incommoded her, took a resolution to go incognito to a Famous Surgeons House
to be better informed of it. Being arrived there all alone (...) a Hackney
Chair, which made (...)m expect no great good from a Woman of her fashion, she
declared her business to him without (...)y Ceremony, telling him, that some
days since she felt some indisposition, which made her fear that her Husband,
who was something debauched, had not had that consideration for her* which he
ought (...)o have had. Then she desired him to examine the matter, and to tell
her his opinion, and at the same time showing the Symptoms, she expected that
the Surgeon would at least show himself pitiful in entering into her concern;
but he, being accustomed to hear every day things cast upon the poor Husbands,
whereof they for the most part were innocent, told her, that he was so wearied
out with these kind of Stories, that he could no longer have any complaisance
for those that told them, that without giving her self farther trouble in
accusing her Husband, (...) should think only of putting h(...)self into some
speedy course of Cu(...) because the Disease, which she ha(...) might become
worse, if she should chance to neglect it.

That Declaration amazed the Duchess, who had often heard her Husband speak of
these kinds of Distempers, of which experienc(...) had rendered him skilful, and
being very desirous to know, if that, which she had, were the greatest of all
she inquired it of the Surgeon The Surgeon answered, No (...) but that,
as he had already told her, she must be speedily cured, or else it might become
such. When she heard that, she told him, that she had so great a confidence in
him, by reason of the Reputation which he had in the World, that she would put
her self entirely into his hands; and at the same time naming her self, she
surprised the Surgeon; who knowing that he had to do with a Person of the
highest Quality, was troubled he had talked to her after the rate he had done.
He asked her pardon for his having appeared so free in words, excusing himself,
that since the greatest Prostitutes did frequently entertain him with the same
Language, which she had used, he thought himself obliged to make her those
answers that he did, he not having the honor to know her.

The Duchess easily pardoned him, nevertheless upon condition, that he should
soon dispatch the business, which the Surgeon promised her, if she would
observe a certain rule of living. She told him, that she would do every thing
that he should order her. And did even more; for she would keep her Bed while
she took Physic, fearing, that if she had continued to live as she was
accustomed to do, watching might have heated her Blood, and rendered her Cure
more difficult.

In the mean time, though she had no mind to see any body* yet since it was
very tiresome for her to be alone continually, she permitted Monsieur the
Advocate, the Master of Requests, to come and Visit her, who had long since
made love unto her without being able to obtain any favor. Monsieur the
Advocate was a Jews Son, of the City of Paris, who after having gotten an
Estate of two Millions by his Usury, suffered himself to dye with cold, for fear
of laying out a penny upon a F^ggot. His Mother was also of the Jewish Race.
Nevertheless, with all that, he was esteemed a man of Quality, and though he was
of the long Robe, yet he never was pleased, but when he was in the Company of
Sword men, to whom he served for a Divertisement. He affected to appear a
Huntsman, although he understood not one term of the Profession, and if he ever
^hanced to discharge a Gun, which he very seldom did, he turned his head back,
lest the Fire should seize his Hair. Moreover he was a great Talker and a great
Liar, but withal the best natured man in the World, offering every man his
service, but never serving any man.

The Reputation which he had of being no dangerous man with the Women, to whom
it was said, that he could do neither good nor harm, having made the Duchess
de la Ferte believe, that he would perceive less of the reason which kept her a
bed, than any other, she (...)lowed him to come and Visit her, (...)nd he
putting a great value upon (...)t favor, returned her thanks proportionable to
his Wit. He protested (...) her, that after marks of so great distinction, he
would live and dye (...)t very humble Servant, and to give her more essential
Testimonies of his Attachment, he swo(...) to her, that neither her self or
a(...) of her Friends, should ever ha(...) a Suit depending, before him, b(...)
right or wrong he would judge of their side, without ever e(...)mining the
Merits of the Cause(...) it being enough for him to know that she had a concern
in it.

After a thousand other Protestations of Service of the like nature, he at
length returned to the love, which he had so long ago ha(...) for her, and
endeavoring to make his Eyes agree with his Words, he turned them languishing
upon her asking her, if she was resolved to be his death. The Duchess de la
Ferte told him, it was apparent(...) that she had no such design, as h(...)
himself might easily judge; since she had sent for him, well remembering, that
he had several times told her, he could not live without seeing her. This
answer made the Advocate begin again his Complements, which would not have had
(...)n end, if she had not interrupted them to ask him, how he managed Louison
D'Arquien. He blushed ^t that Question, and the Duchess, perceiving it, told
him, that she esteemed men that had some Modesty, that it was indeed true, that
this Girl being a common Whore, it was not over creditable to visit her; but
since that the Count de Saux, the Marquis de Camardon, the Duke de la Ferte
himself, and even all the Court did the same, it could not be more disgraceful
for him to Visit her, than it was for so many Persons of Quality, that,
provided he did not entertain her publicly, as was reported, there was no
great harm in it; but for her part, she never would believe any such thing,
having always thought him too discreet for that.

Monsieur the Advocate, Master of Requests, having loudly affirmed that it was
a lie, and even would have affirmed, that he had never seen her, if the
Duchess had no^ given him an opportunity to excuse himself, by turning the
conversation as he had done. He therefore told her, that he had never been with
Louison D'Arquien but with Company, and thinking to say the finest things in
the World, he swore to her, that wha^ Beauty soever those kind of Women had, he
made a very great difference between them, and a Person of her Merit; and at
the same time endeavoring to give a description of her, he let her see, that
though his Judgment was not very good, yet that he had a great Memory; for the
Duchess remembered, that she had some days since read in a Book of Gallantry,
all those things which he at that time applied to her.

In the mean time she was almost scandalized at the Comparison ^^ich he seemed
to have made between her and Louison D'Arquien, (...)r notwithstanding the
difference which he alleged, she could not forbear being offended at it, and
probably for that being conscious of the course of life which she her self
(...)ad, she took it as a private hint, which the Advocate would have (...)iven
her; but when she considered, that he was of no malici(...)us Nature, and that
these words had escaped him rather by chance, than out of any ill purpose, she
appeased her anger, and the conversation ended without any sharpness.

On the morrow he returned to Visit the Duchess, and found her very ill, she
had that day taken strong Physic, and she very much complained of the pains
which she suffered, attributing them to the Medicine, which she had taken,
whereof there still remained about (...)alf in a Glass upon the Table. He took
the Glass, and swallow^^ the Medicine, saying, that he cou(...) not endure to
see the Person, who^ he loved best in the world, in pai^ while he himself was
in perfe(...) health.

The Duchess could not for bear laughing at this extravaga^cy, which the
Master of Reque^^ did however cry up, as a mark (...) the greatest love that
ever was but afterward reflecting, that th^^ Physic might possibly hinder hi^
from going abroad on the mo^row, and consequently that (...) would not be able
to see the Duchess all that day, he fetched suc^ sighs and groans as made the
Duchess laugh, and put an end to th^^ Comedy; for the Gripes having
immediately taken him, he hardly had time to get to his Coach and retire home.

There being Mercury in the Medicine, he was sufficiently tormented all that
night, and all the next day, and not being able to go to ^he Dutchesses, he
writ to her a ^illet, of which I cannot give you ^he very words, they having
never fallen into my hands; but ha^ing heard it sufficiently talked of ^n the
world, as of a very ridicuous thing, I can relate the sense, which here follows.

That he could not have the Ho^^^r to see her all the day, because ^e was
become like those common Women, who could not warrant themselves from acting
lewdness with their Bodies, since they had got such (...) habit of it; that his
own Body ^as so inured to certain things, which (...)* durst not name, that he
must of necessity keep his Chamber, un^^l he was entirely recovered of his
indisposition. In the mean time, (...) prayed her to believe, that he did not
take the Physic as a Re^edy against Love, but to show her, that he should be
amorous of her during his life.

The Duchess read over and (...)ver again the Billet, with wond^ how a man,
who was fifty yea^ old and upwards, and who ha^ seen so much of the world,
could be so great a Fool, and being very glad to continue diverting he^self
with him, she was very imp^tient to see him again. The Advocate, after having
suffered, for two days, all that could be suffered from that kind of Physic,
came to tell her, that at length he was free^ (thanks be to God) from the
illness that he had endured; tha^ he wished her health equal to tha^ which he
enjoyed, and that if h^ knew, that the doing once more of that, which he had
done, would advance her Cure, he was ready to devote himself to all manner of
Torments for her love.

The Duchess thanked him for his good will, and told him, that, beginning to
be a little better, she was in hopes her Disease would soon leave her. That
however as ^er Body recovered, her Mind grew ^^ck; that she wanted two hundred
Pistols for an urgent occasion, and that not knowing where to get them, she
could not take any rest ^^her day or night.

Though the Advocate was, as have said before, a Rich man's ^on; yet three
things did contribute to render him not much* at ^^s ease. The first was, that
his ^^ther had left behind him a great ^any Children; the second was, that his
Jewish Mother, who pos^^st half the Estate, was still alive; and the other was,
that he had pur^hased an Office, which had cost him a great deal, but brought
him (...) no large revenue. All this (I say) was the cause, that he was often
put to his shifts for ready money. He could not at that very ^our offer the
Duchess the two hundred Pistols, which she had occasion for, but he promised
to bring them to her on the morrow, (...) indeed he did not break his wo^^
which was a thing very extra^^dinary for him.

I cannot tell what use the Duchess had for this money, it being b^yond my
knowledge, but if I m^^ be allowed to judge of it by the Circumstances that
followed the Present, I will say, that it mu^^ have been very great. For as
soo^ as she saw the Advocate arrive wit^ a Purse, she embraced him wit^ all the
appearances of a great te^derness, and the Advocate being thereby provoked to
things, which surpassed, it seems, his natural forc^ endeavored not to let
slip an o^casion, which was not every day presented to him, and against which
the Duchess made no manner o^ resistance.

In fine, whether the Dutches^ had forgotten the rule of living* which the
Surgeon had ordered her, or whether she imagined, that she had between her
Arms some ^^dy more agreeable than the Ad^^cate, she accorded him the last
^^vour for his money. As the Ad^^cate was not very importunate, (...) contented
himself with one sin^^ Testimony of the Dutchesses (...)mity, without desiring
any more. (...) went home the most satisfied ^^n in the world, and musing ^^ly
upon the Greatness, where^^to he was called, he became yet ^ore silly, and more
vain than be^^re.

In the mean time, being very ^^reful of his health, and having ^^^rd it said,
that excess of every ^^ing was hurtful, he staid three or ^^ur days without
returning to the Dutchesses, at the end of which, (...) began to find himself
unex^ectedly ill. He could hardly be^^^ve at first what he saw, but at ^^gth
knowing that the most in^^dulous had believed, when they ^^d seen, he began to
be convinced, that he ailed something, and to the more assured of it, he had
Council of Physicians, who told h^^ that he was not deceived. In t^^ mean time
it cannot be said, whither this accident filled him mo^^ with spite, or with
joy. For (...) one side, if he thought that t^^ Duchess had done ill by him,
(...) treating him so scurvily the fi^^^ time, on the other side he con^^dered,
that she was still a Dutc^ess, and Vanity having a gre^^ power over him, he
concluded wi^^ himself, that the Favors of suc^ Persons, be they what they
wi^^ were never to be despised. H^ joined also another consideration to this
reflection, to wit, that th^^ accident being spread abroad in the world would
re-establish his Reputation among all Women, wh^ having until then taken him
for ^ Kinsman of the Marquis de Lang^^^ that is to say, for a man who mu^^ have
been divorced, if he had ha^^ Wise, would now be obliged to (...)nfess
themselves sometimes mi^^aken.

It was for that reason also, that ^e had so publicly kept Louison
(...)'Arquien, of whom the Duchess ^ad upbraided him, as is above re(...)ed;
but they had no better o(...)inion for all that of his perfor^ance, and there
was still want^^g this last circumstance to unde^eive all the World. Instead
there^^re of concealing himself, as ano^^er would have done, he went pub^^ckly
into a course of Physic, and ^is intimate acquaintance doubting ^is Disease,
he confirmed them in ^^eir suspicion, and made a Gal^^try of it, as any vain
young ^^llow would have done.

In the mean time this circum^^^nce, which he believed so ad^antageous to his
Reputation, (...)s more hurtful to his Fortune (...) he was a war. For being
ei^^^r ill ordered in the beginning, or perhaps being of a temper diff^cult to
be cured, he was oblig(...) to undergo a Flux. Moreove^ the Great Alcander,
having hear(...) of his disorder, lost the little estee^ he might have had of
him, an^ denied him the Office of May(...) of the City of Paris, which he
w(...) inclined to give him upon the (...) commendation of Monsieur de P(...)
pone his Brother in Law, who w(...) one of his Ministers.

Monsieur the Advocates adve^ture, which all the world fail(...) not to impute
to the Duchess (...) la Ferte, gave the Mareschale^ de la Motte her Mother
very gre(...) vexation; neither was she bett(...) contented with the Duchess
Vantadour, who accused her Hu^band of having given her a Cla(...) but who under
the pretense, the he was debauched, gave her s^ up entirely to Monsieur de
Til^^det, Monsieur de Louvoy's Con(...) German. The Duke of Vantad(...) was a
little man, very false and dissembling, yet wanted no Cou^age. He, having had
some hint ^f his Wives Intrigue, resolved to ^o watch her so narrowly, as to
^ake her in the Fact. For this purpose he permitted her to make a ^ourney with
the Duchess D'Au^^nt his Sister, reasonably gues^ing, that if there were any
truth (...) what was told him, the Gallant ^ould not fail to meet her upon ^er
way. In the mean time he took ^orse to observe their motions, and arrived every
Evening incog(...)o in the same Inn, where his Wife lodged. He had not held
this ^ourse above five or six days, when (...) saw Monsieur de Tilladet ar^ive
Post, who was in such have (...) see Madam de Vantadour, that (...) did not
give himself time so ^uch as to take off his Boots, or ^^en to brush off the
dust. He ^^etended to the Duke D'Aumont, ^^at he was also upon a Journey, and
that chance had brought him into the Inn. But the Duke o^ Vantadour, who knew
very well what to think of it, not giving them leisure to enter into a long
conversation, went up staiers immediately with his Sword in hand and he
surprised the whole Company, who little dreamed of him and thought that he had
been fa^ enough off from thence.

The Duke D' Aumont, who a^ his first Marriage, had taken t^ Wife Monsieur de
Louvoy's Sister Monsieur Tilladets Cousin German took his part against the Duke
o^ Vantadour his Brother in Law alleging for a reason, that the Duke had so
little consideration for him, as to come even to b^ Chamber, to assault a man,
wh^ had never given him any cause (...) be his Enemy; so with the he(...) of
his Servants, he prevented a^ mischief, and having understoo^ that there was
jealousy in t(...) case, he advised the Duchess of Vantadour, to beware going
with her Husband, who would carry her away by force, which advice she
punctually followed.

Madam de Vantadour's denial put her Husband into an absolute fu^y, and he
being very quarrelsome, challenged the Duke D'Aumont to fight, and gave him
mighty abusive Language; but the Duke D'Aumont did not think himself obliged to
take any notice of it, because it proceeded from a man, who had no great esteem
in the world.

In the mean time, the Duke of Vantadour having been forced to depart without
his Wife, complained to the Great Alcander, that the Duke D'Aumont had kept her
from him, the Greatest men of the Court concerned themselves in this quarrel,
and the Prince of Conde, who was the Duke of Vantadour's Kinsmad, said very
bitter things to the Mareschaless de la Motte, who, pretending to excuse her
Daughter an^ the Duke D'Aumont, endeavoure^ to dishonor the Duke of Vantadour.
The Great Alcander did forbid fighting on either side, and having taken
cognizance of the business, he laid all the blame upon the Duke, and he
permitted his Wife either to return to him or to retire into a Religious House*
as it should seem good unto her.

Neither of these two conditions did very well please the Duchess, who had
rather have had a third, had it been in her choice, which was to remain with
the Duchess D'Aumont her Sister, where she might have every day seen Monsieur
de Tilladet; but the Great Alcander having pronounced the Sentence, it was her
part to submit to his Judgment, which she did, by retiring into a small Convent
in the Suburb of St. Mar^eau. Monsieur de Tilladet saw her there twice or
thrice incogni^o, by the Superiors consent.

In a little time after, the Exiles, whom I have some while since mentioned,
returned to Court, and were obliged to behave themselves more discreetly. The
Duke de la Ferte found his Wife recovered, but the Advocate's Cure was not yet
perfected, and although he at first comforted himself with the hopes of having
(as I have already said) a better Reputation; yet it cost him so dear, that he
heartily wished, he had long ago renounced all the Vanities of the world, and
left the filth wherein he wallowed. At length his Surgeon having finished
the Cure, he soon forgot the sickness he had ailed, and having heard the
business of the Duke D'Aumont and the Duke of Vantadour talked of, and his way
being to procure reconciliations, he told them both, that he was very much
troubled at his not having been in health at that time, otherwis^ he would have
rendered them tha^ Service.

In the mean time he having the color of one already dead, every body asked
him, if he were no^ returned out of the other world he was at first much
perplexed t^ give it an answer, but being a^ length hardened to these kind (...)
questions, he himself would begi^ laughing at them with the others which put an
end to all the rai^lery that was made about him. On^ day the Duchess de la
Ferte ha^ing a mind to be pleasant upon him he being naturally very brutish,
answered her -- Zwouns, Madam, it ill becomes you to laugh at that condition,
which you your self did put me in, believe me, this was the first, and shall be
the last time while I live, that I will have to do with you, and though I have
kept Company with Louyson D'Arquien a whole year, which I now will freely
confess unto you: I never have had the least reason to complain of her, when as
I have been with you hardly a minute, and yet I shall have reason to repent of
it, during my whole life.

The Duchess could not suffer these reproaches from the Advocate without
entering into a dreadful passion. She took up the Tongs, and struck him with it
with all her strength, and making ill Language succeed her blows, she said,
that things were come to a fine pass indeed, when a pitiful Citizen, such as he
was, durst presume to make himself so familiar with a Woman of her Quality,
that, allowing what he had said to be true, yet the Honor was too great for
him. She bid him get out of her House, otherwise she would make him leap out at
the Windows, and she pusht him toward the Door with the end of the Tongs.
Monsieur the Advocate, who saw that there was no jesting with her, threw
himself at her Feet, and begged her pardon, he owned that he had wronged her,
but to excuse himself, h^ said, that it was out of impatience to see her insult
over him, imagining that she did it only out of contempt, that that was the
reason of his complaints, though indeed there was no fault to be found with her
niceness, and that if she had been present at his torments she should have seen
him endure them with so great a Resignation that she would have confessed him to
have been a true Martyr o^ Love.

All these reasons did not soften the Dutchesses Spirit, which was haughty and
disdainful; and having made him depart her Chamber, she forbid him ever to come
again into her sight, unless he would expose himself to a much more rude
entertainment. The Advocate went away with a very heavy heart, fetching deep
sighs, and ha^ing a very great mind to cry, but being to pass the Court of de
la Ferte's House, which is very ^arge, and fearing to meet some body, he kept
back his tears until he was in his Coach.

As soon as he was in it, there came one of the Marshall de la Ferte's People,
to tell him, that his Master would speak with him before he went away, which
caused him to endeavor still to restrain them, and after having adjusted his
Perruque and his Band, which were in a little disorder, he went up into the
Mareschal's Appartment, where he found a very handsome Lady with some
Gentlemen, who were all there for a quarrel which they had together. The
Marshall told him that he had given him the trouble of coming up, to see if
there were any means to compound a difference between these People, without
obliging them to come before a general Assembly of the Mareschals of France,
and there being already some proceedings had on either side, and those
regarding him (for the Great Alcander had granted the hearing o^ all things of
this nature to the Advocate) he would be glad to know his opinion of it.

Monsieur the Advocate asked, what the matter was, and the Marshall having
told him that he must needs have seen the Informations, the Master of Requests
answered, that his Secretary had not yet laid them before him, which served for
a good excuse. The Marshall knowing that it was an established Custom with him,
to let his Secretary do all the business, told him, that the Lady, whom he saw
there before him, complained, that a Gentleman who was also there present, had
dishonored her by scandalous Stories* for which she demanded satisfaction;
that though there were no Witnesses, yet the thing was a verred by the
Gentleman's own confession, who maintained, that, far from having injured the
Lady, he was very much in the right; that to justify that, he reported, how
that he had passionately loved her, and had sought after all opportunities of
serving her; that he had rendered her so consideable a service as to furnish her
at one time with 200 Pistols, but that in recompense she had given him nothing
but a Disease, which had kept him three entire Months in his Bed; that he,
believing he had reason to complain of it, had published, that this Lady was not
cruel, but yet that he would have no more of her Favors at that price.

Monsieur the Advocate hearing a Story that had so great a relation with his
own, believed that his Intrigue was discovered, and that some body must have
hearkened at the Dutchesses Door; being therefore quite out of countenance, he
blushed and grew pale again, and wrapping himself up in his Cloak, he told the
Marshall that he jeered him, and took his way toward the Door, without saying
any thing more. The Marshall, who was in his Bed, not being able to run after
him, called him back; but seeing that he would not return, he commanded the
Captain of his Guards, not to suffer him to go away so, because he had need of
him to compound that business. Monsieur the Advocate made a difficulty of
turning back, telling the Captain that Monsieur the Marshall only rallied with
him: But the Captain having told him, that there was no jesting in the case,
and that what the Marshall did, was because he desired to do those Persons
service; he re-entred the Chamber, and the Marshall asked him since when he
had given over making composition between Gentlemen, a reproach which he made
him, because he knew, that under pretense of such business, he neglected other
Affairs which did appertain to the Duty of the Office, which he had in the
Great Alcanders Council.

After that Monsieur the Advocate had excused himself as well as he could, they
began to handle the matter in question, and without waiting for a deduction of
all the Particulars, he decreed, that the Gentleman should be sent to Prison,
from whence he should not be set free, until he had asked the Lady's pardon,
who to thank him for his favorable Decree, made him a very low reverence. The
Advocates Sentence was punctually followed by the Marshall, and the Gentleman
was sent into Prison. In the mean time Monsieur the Advocate being retired
home, he called for Pen, Ink and Paper and writ a Billet to the Dutche(...) de
la Ferte, whereof here is a Copy.

The Advocates Letter to the Duchess de la Ferte.
I Could not make you a greater satisfaction for my fault, than that which I
have done in going from your Chamber. A Gentleman, who had the same quarrel
with a Lady as I have with you, has been sent to Prison, and besides I have
condemned him to recant all that he hath-said, though possibly he might have
told nothing but the truth, as well as my self. If the same reparation may
satisfy you; Order me only into what Prison you will have me go, and, I will
punctually obey you, having resolved to be for my life your Prisoner of Love.


The Duchess de la Ferte found he Advocates Character in this Letter, which
was, to say the siliest things in the world, when ^e thought to say the finest.
She had a mind to make him a very sharp answer, but judging that it would argue
more of resentment, than of disdain, she continued silent, which did extremely
afflict Monsieur the Advocate. Who besides the pleasure which he took in being
great with a Duchess, saw himself thereby deprived of dining with her, which
was very commodious for him, and which he often did, he himself being no
Hous-keeper, and the Duchess lodging near him. At length seeing that his
disgrace did still continue, he addicted himself entirely to the Duke of
Vantadour, whom he advised to be reconciled to his Wife. He was the secret
Mediator of the Reconciliation, and finding there, what he had lost in the
other place, that is to say, as much quality at least as with the Dutche(...)
de la Ferte, a fine Woman, and good Table, he stuck close to the Table, and
endeavored to gai^ the Woman, who, being more reserved in her Pleasures than
her Sister, did reject the Advocate, the ver^ first time he would have spoken
t^ her, in such a manner that he du(...) not expose himself to a second denial*

In the mean time the Duke and the Duchess de la Ferte* held o^ the same
course of life as they had begun. The Duchess had the Abbot of Lignerac for a
Gallant and his money was to him instead of merit. As for the Duke, h^ stoptat
nothing, and being a man that neither minded or esteemed perfect love, he found
Mistresses as often, and as many as he pleased, in the public places, and his
passion being soon satisfied, he did frequently beat them, after having
embraced them, and thus he made blows succeed his Caresses, as some^^mes his
Embraces succeeded ^lows. One day that he made a ^ebauch in one of those places
with ^he Duke* de Foix, Camardon, and ^ome others, Camardon told him, that he
wondered, that he who lo^ed to relish Pleasures in their pure nature, had not
once caused his Wife to come and lie with him sometimes, at Louyson D'Arquin's,
(...) at Madelon du Pre's, that he would have found there a thousand times more
satisfaction than at home, and that if he would make a trial of it, ^e would
without doubt be of the same opinion.

Though the Duke de la Ferte was not over curious upon his Wives score; yet he
found fault with what Camardon had said, of bringing her into a place of
Debauchery, and the Duke of Foix, who was Camardon's Brother in Law, approved
of what Monsieur de la Ferte said, adding, that the Duchess de la Ferte was
not a Woman come into those kind of places. C^mardon answered him, that she w^
one that might come thither well as any other, as also his Wi(...) who was yet
more scrupulous th(...) the Duchess de la Ferte. The if they would only lay a
Wag^ with him of an hundred Pistol he would undertake to bring the both
thither, when he pleased, a^ being earnest in affirming the matter, he made the
whole Comp^ny laugh, who knew him to b^ man infinitely agreeable, and of (...)
excellent Wit. He in the mean ti(...) retracted nothing from what I had
proposed, but framing a res^lution of letting them see the e^fect of what he
told them, he de^trously changed the discourse, that there was no farther
reflect on made upon what he had said

Within five or six days afterward, Camardon was to visit h(...) Sister the
Duchess de Foix, an^ told her that he had made a match ^ith the Duchess de la
Ferte to (...) into St. Germains Fair, and that (...) she would go along, he
would (...)rry them both thither some morn^ng; but that she must not tell her
Husband of it; that the Duchess ^e la Ferte would also conceal it (...)om
hers, and that there were cer^ain reasons, why they should know nothing of it,
until they were ar^ived in the Fair. The Duchess ^e Foix assented to it
without informing her self farther of those reasons. The Match being made, and
the day appointed to be the (...)morrow, he then took her in his Coach, and
went to fetch the Duchess de la Ferte, to whom he had said as much.

As they were upon the way, some part of the Coach broak all on the sudden,
and the two Ladies being frightened with the danger of being over-turned, cried
out to the Coachman to hold, who immediately obeyed the^ All this was but a
trick designe^ by Camardon, in order to make demonstration to their Husband^
that he had told them nothing b(...) what he was sure of performing In the mean
time having helped out the Ladies, he very hastil^ asked his Coachman, what
wa^ the matter, and quarrelled wit^ him very much in appearance, because he had
not seen whether the Coach was in order, before his coming* out. Then he told
the Ladies that there was no staying for them in the Street, that he was well
acquainted with a Citizen hard by, to whose house they had best go, and repose
themselves, while the Coach was refitting.

These Ladies, having no other choice to make, willingly assented to it, and
being come to a house they were there received by a Woman, who showed them a
great deal of Civility. She brought them in(...) a very handsome Chamber, and
(...)tertained them very well, while (...)mardon was in another Room writing
two Notes to the Duke (...) Foix, and de la Ferte, by which ^e desired them to
come speedily (...) him at Madelon du Pre's, which ^as the very place whither
he (...)d brought their Wives.

The Dukes de Foix, and de (...) Ferte, having received these ^otes, hastened
to the place ap^ointed. Camardon ran to meet (...)em, and desired them not to
be (...)oubled at the pains that they had (...)ken; that he would show them
(...)o of the finest Women in Town, whom du Pre had lately discove^ed; and
immediately opening to (...)em the Chamber Door, wherein (...)e Dutchesses de
la Ferte and de (...)ix were, he presented the Ladies (...) them, desiring them
both to use (...)em so well, as not to let them ^o away in discontent. It Is
easy to judge of the astomishment th(...) these two Dukes were in, but th(...)
of the Dutchesses was much greate^ who knowing where they were had a mind to be
seriously angr^ with Camard^n: But he rallyin^ them all four, obliged them to
laug^ at it along with him, and havin^ bespoke a Dinner, they all fi(...) dined
together in that honest plac^ though the Women made a show as if they would not
stay there an^ longer.

Nevertheless when they percei^ed, that it was their Husband pleasure, they
were persuaded t^ stay; and to pass away the time while they expected Dinner,
they desired du Pre to give them a figh^ of her Nuns; which she did, because,
imagining that they were all of the same Sisterhood, she would not disoblige
those, who well deserved to be Abbesses of the Convent.

In the mean time, the Advo^ates disgrace still continued; but misfortune
having at that time ^appened to the Chevalier de Lig^erac (the Abbot de
Lignerac's Bro^her) who had been sent into Pri^on at the request of an infinite
num^er of People, whom he had cheat^d, the Duchess de la Ferte sent ^o enquire
for him, and told him, that she would pardon him, pro^ided he could get the
Chevalier ^e Lignerac out of Prison. Mon^^eur the Advocate, who knew of ^he
Intrigue between the Abbot and her self, thought it very hard, that he must be
employed for his ^ivals Brother, and that his Pardon ^ould be obtained at no
other Price: ^ut she having heretofore punish^d him for telling truth, he durst
^ot then gainsay her, and he pro^ised her, that if the Chevalier de ^ignerac
were not freed from his ^mprisonment, it should not be ^or want of his
employing all his ^redit in order to it.

Monsieur the Advocate found (...) obstacle in his undertakings, (...) the
Chevalier de Lignerac's C(...)tors were perpetually crying in t(...) Judges
Ears, and having made appear that he had once alread Mortgaged his Estate, and
that (...) afterward had borrowed two hundred thousand Crowns upon it, (...)
Judges let Monsieur the Advocate know, that it was impossib(...) for them to
set him free, and th(...) was all the account he could gi(...) the Duchess.

He very much apprehended, th(...) she would not be satisfied with the denial;
but the Duchess who loved a multitude, and who w(...) sometimes vexed for not
seeing him told him, that she was obliged (...) the pains which he had taken
and that he might return to h^ House, as often as he had a min^ to it. Monsieur
the Advocate thre^ himself at her Feet to thank he^ He embraced her Knees, and
pr^testing to her an eternal fidelity, ^e told her, that her Sister the
Duchess of Vantadour, had not ^alf her Merit; that should he live (...)
thousand years, he would not ^e able to love her one quarter (...) an hour;
that she would cer^ainly say, that he had no great Wit, because he never could
speak ^ne single word to her, but he did ^ot care what Reputation he had with
her; provided she would con^ider, that so great an indifference ^or so amiable
a Person, could not proceed but from the love which ^e had for her.

As he ended these words, one of the Duchess of Vantadour's Footmen came in,
and having presen^ed her with a Note from her ^ister, she took it and read what
^ollows.

The Duchess of Vantadour's Le^ter to the Duchess de la Ferte.
ONE of my very good Frien^ has a b(...)ness depending before Monsieur the
Advocate, and (...) believes it so delicate, that he e^deavours to get it
recommended (...) him, by all those who have any Cr^dit with him: If I had
foreseen the accident, I should willingly ha(...) harkened to a great deal of
No^sense, which he would have said (...) to me; but not having the gift (...)
Divination, and besides, loathing (...) sottish a conversation, I desired hi^
something roughly not to continue (...) any longer. This makes me believ^ that
he has no great good will for me I have therefore recourse to yo^ intercession
to recommend my Frien^ business to him, which I pray y(...) to do, as you would
your own, an^ you will oblige a Sister, who is entirely Yours.


The Duchess de la Ferte, to whom Monsieur the Advocate had ^ost then
protested, that he could ^ever express the least love to the Duchess of
Vantadour, seeing the ^ontrary in this Letter, had more ^han once a desire of
showing it ^o him, to divert her self; but ^earing least it might be a
preju^ice to the Gentleman, whom her Sister recommended, she put the Letter
into her Pocket, and sent ^way the Footman, whom she com^anded to tell her
Sister, that she would do what she desired. The footman being gone, Monsieur
^he Advocate, who was the most ^urious man in the world, would ^in have known
what the Letter ^ontained, and not being satisfied with what the Duchess told
him, who endeavored to put the change upon him, he took an opportunity to put
his hand into her Pocket, (...)d having snatched it thence, he told her, that
he would immediately see all their secrets.

The Duchess, who for the ^bove mentioned reasons wou(...) gladly have
prevented him fr(...) seeing it, endeavored to tear from him, but not having
be able to do it, she told him, th(...) he would extremely disoblige he unless
he would restore the Lette^ that very moment. But Monsie^ the Advocate
believing that the more she endeavored to have (...) again, it was of the
greater consequence, withdrew a little asid^ to read it. The Duchess was
n(...) able to hinder him, and he wa^ excessively surprised, to find therei^
such unexpected matters.

Then he told the Duchess, tha^ Madam de Vantadour said what wa^ not true,
that he had never spoken to her of any thing, and that t^ let her see, that he
never had any esteem for her, he would cause he Friend to lose his business.
The Duchess de la Ferte told him, tha^ he must not do it for her sake; (...)at
it was no longer her Sisters (...)siness, but her own, that there^^re it was
not with the Dutch^ss of Vantadour, that he was a^out to quarrel, but with the
^utchess de la Ferte. Madam de (...) Ferte found much difficulty to (...)ain
this point upon him, but ha^ing told him, that she did not be^^eve any thing of
what Madam ^e Vantadour had writ unto her, ^ho had a fault common to all (...)e
Women, to wit, to take the ^east glance for a declaration of love, she thereby
gave him occa^ion to justify himself to her. Mosieur the Advocate alleging.
that ^he Duchess of Vantadour must then ^ave interpreted to her own advantage
some innocent regards, the Duchess endeavored to confirm him more and more in
that opinion, and so insensibly brought him again into a good humor, and he
afterward promised to do all, for the Gentleman, that she could desire.

While all this past, Madam too a Maid of Honor, whose Beaut^ created desires
in all the Cou^tiers, and Jealousy in all her Companions. She was of a most
ravishing shape, so that detractic^ that is used to catch at every thing was
here at a loss, all confessing that they had never seen any thing so
accomplished, as this amiable Person. The Great Alcander, who (...) that time
loved Madam de Mo^tespan rather out of an habit, tha^ out of passion, had no
sooner see her, but he was charmed with he^ But he being unwilling to ma(...)
love any more like a young man but like a great King, employe^ a third Person
to discourse it wit^ her; and to the end that his pro^fers of Service might be
the be^ter received, he accompanied ther^ with a Pearl Necklace, and a pa(...)
of Diamond Pendants of great v^lue.

In the mean time Madam de Montespan was in a mortal fear, lest this young
Beauty should rob her of the Prince's Heart, with whom she had very lately had
a filling out some few days before. For pretending that he ought to treat her
still as he had done in the beginning, the taxed him for having no greater
complaisance for her, and because the Great Alcander made answer, that they had
been too long acquainted to observe so much Ceremony, she was so transported
with passion, as to say very disobliging things unto him. She began with
reproaching him of all that she had done for him; that she had forsaken her
House, her Children, her Husband, and even her Honor for him; that there was
no manner of Complaisance that she did not continually express to engage him;
but that he was of late become very cold and indifferent; that if years had
brought upon her any imperfections, he ought not to attribute them to her, but
to time, that destroys all things; however that she did not yet perceive
(thanks be to God) that there was so great an alteration in her Person; but
that for him she could say, nevertheless without having any design to anger
him, that though he had great cause to be thankful to nature, yet that he was
not exempted of all manner of faults; that he had one great one among the rest,
which he perhaps never perceived; but that she had been very sensible of it,
without ever making any complaint, because she believed that none ought to take
such particular notice of those they loved.

The Great Alcander, whom no body durst ever upbraid before, was extremely
moved to hear Madam de Montespan say these things, for whom he had done no less
than she had done for him; for if she had forsaken her House, Children, and
Husband to stick to him, he had abandoned for her the care of his Reputation,
which was very much blemished, for having loved a Wom^n, who had so great
reasons to be more discreet. However, since we are more sensible of the
injuries which we receive from those that we love, than we are of those which
we receive from Persons indifferent to us, he suffered not this reproach to
fall thus to the ground, but demanding of Madam de Montespan, what his faults
then were, he provoked her to declare them, by informing her of her own; at
which Madam de Montespan was so concerned, that she replied unto him, that if
she had those imperfections whereof he did accuse her, yet that she had not in
the least any offensive smells about her.

This being as much as to say, that the Great Alcander was not without them, it
is impossible to express how ill he took this reproach. He told Madam de
Montespan such things, as were enough to have touched her home, and to have
made her recollect her self if she had any sense of Virtue yet remaining. But
having entirely given her self over to her passions, she was no more moderate
in the answer, which she gave him, than she had been in the beginning of this
Conversation.

While they quarrelled thus vehemently with each other, the Prince de
Marsilliac came to the Closet Door wherein they were, and the Great Alcander
having given him power to enter any where, without demanding leave, he had his
Foot already within the Door, when he understood by the sound of the Prince's
voice, that he was in anger; this made him stop short, and being desirous to
know, whether he might enter, he began to call out aloud Doorkeeper,
Doorkeeper; and there being none in the way, he called out louder yet, who is
here, that will give me an answer. The Great Alcander, who gave ear to every
thing that he said, truly guesed, after having given him such permission, that
he did so out of discretion, and being glad to have an opportunity to break up
so disagreeable a conversation, he told the Prince of Marsilliac, that he might
come in; which was the reason that Madam de Montespan endeavored to constrain
her self, for fear that the report of her disgrace, which she was willing to
conceal, should spread over the whole Court.

She departed in a moment afterward, and left the Great Alcander at liberty to
open his heart to the Prince of Marsilliac, who had a great share of his
confidence, and to whom he had given in less than one year, above one hundred
thousand Livres in places, for immediately after Monsieur de Lausun's disgrace
he forced him to take the Government of Berry, which that Favorite had
possessed, and which he was unwilling to accept of, because, having never been
his Friend, he was afraid, least the world should say, that he had provoked the
Great Alcander to cause him to be imprisoned, in order to benefit himself of
his spoils.

The Great Alcander looked upon this delicacy to be so much the more excellent,
as it was rare amongst Courtiers, and since it could proceed only from a great
heart, he had yet a greater esteem for him. Sometime after he again gave him
the place of great Master of the Wardrobe, void by the Death of the Marquis de
Saintry, who was killed at the passage of the Rhine, but he gave it him after
so obliging a manner, that the Present was less considerable for its greatness
alone, than for the goodness which the Great Alcander expressed toward him, when
he made it. For he told him, that he gave him that place only to accommodate
his Affairs, and not to ^ncommode them; that if it were more profitable for him
to sell it, than to keep it, he himself would find out a Chapman, and make him
give a Million for it.

Thus the Great Alcander still continued to give marks of his amity to the
Prince of Marsilliac, and the other Courtiers looked upon him as a kind of
Favorite, but also as one much more worthy to possess that place, than
Monsieur de Lausun, who despised all the world, as if there had been no man
worthy to approach him. In the mean time this Favor, which failed not to
create a jealousy in all the rest, increased yet the more, by reason of the
cold indifferency, wherein the Great Alcander was fallen for Madam de
Montespan, and of the new passion, which he resented for Madam de Fontanges,
who was that Maid of Honor to Madam, th(...) I have before mentioned. For the
Great Alcander having communicated both the one and the other t^ the Prince of
Marsilliac, he w(...) willing that he should be the manager of that Maiden's
good Graces in which he was likely to find n(...) great difficulty, she being
come t(...) Court with a design only to pleas(...) the Great Alcander.

In effect, her Kindred seeing he^ so fair and well shaped, and having a
greater passion for their own Fortune, than care for her Honor, they made a
Purse among themselves to enable her to come to Court, and to maintain there an
expense honorable and conformable to the Post, wherein she was entered, and
they having given her proper instructions, she put them in practice from the
very moment that the Prince of Marsilliac had spoken to her in the Great
Alcanders behalf. She therefore told him, that she received with joy the
Declaration which he just then had made unto her: That the Great Alcander had
such charming Qualities to make himself be beloved, that she must of necessity
be very illhumoured not to be charmed with his passion: But that however, she
could place no great confidence in it, as long as Madam de Montespan possessed
his Favor as she did; that she was nice, and could not believe any thing of
what she had then heard out of his mouth; that if she had been capable of
kindling any fires in his heart, they were only fires that would be almost as
soon quenched as they were kindled, for the Great Alcander would no sooner have
satisfied his desire, but he would return to Madam de Montespan.

The Prince of Marsilliac, who desired to succeed the first time in his
Embassy, replied to that, that if the future may be guest at by things, that
are passed, there was no great appearance, that the Great Alcander, who was
displeased with Madam de Montespan, would ever return to her; that he was
constant when he once gave himself up to any one, and that if he had forsaken
Madam de la Valiere, it was, because she her self had contributed very much
unto it, by an unequality of Spirit, that did not please the Prince. That she
might have heard, how that Madam de la Valiere before her entering into a
Convent for good and all, had gone into one contrary to the Great Alcanders
pleasure, who was obliged to fetch her out, after which time she did nothing
but discourse to him of the remorse of her Conscience, which by little and
little weaned him from her, the Great Alcander being unwilling to oppose her
Salvation: That then he loved Madam de Montespan, and would it may be have
loved her still, if she had not behaved her self toward him after a manner,
that might possibly have befitted a private man's Mistress, but not the Mistress
of so power* a Prince, as was the Great Alcander, toward whom she ought to
have shown a more submissive and complaisant humor; that he would instruct her
how to carry her self, as occasion should require, but that for the present,
she need only tell him something that might set the King's mind at rest. Then
he advised her as a good Friend not to let slip so fair an opportunity, saying,
that if she lost it through her own fault, she would repent of it for all her
life.

Then he related to her the quarrel that the Great Alcander had had with Madam
de Montespan, that Lady's Insolence, and the King's Resentment. This last
Circumstance having convinced her more than all his reasons, she sent the Great
Alcander word, that if she had been obliged to him for the Present which he had
made, and which I have already mentioned, she was much more so, for what he had
ordered the Prince of Marsilliac to tell her, and that she was ready to give
her self up to him, provided she might have him entirely to her self.

In the mean time Madam de Montespan, who mistrusted this Intrigue, employed
all her Friends, in order to regain the Great Alcander's confidence. Monsieur
de Louvoy, who was one of them, and even the most affectionate among them,
advised her to seek out an opportunity of speaking with him in private. But the
Great Alcander retaining still his anger, and carefully avoiding all occasions
of being alone with her, it was hard for her to find such an opportunity; until
Monsieur de Louvoy told her, to be at a convenient hour in the place, where the
Great Alcander was ac^ustomed to meet his Council, and ^otake her time when he
was come ^hither, ^o reconcile her self with ^im.

Madam de Montespan, having approved of this advice, failed not ^o be at the
designed place. The Great Alcander being come thither, was very much surprised
to meet her there, instead of the Ministers. In the mean time Monsieur de
Louvoy, who was willing to give Madam de Montespan time to do her business,
went into a Room ad^^ning to the Chamber where they then were, and seeing there
seven or eight Gentlemen of the Court, who were used to come thither to show
themselves, when the Great Alcander went either in or out, he took a Candle off
of a Stand, pretending to search for a Diamond, which he said he had lost,
rightly guessing, that some of the Servants belonging to the Chamber would come
to assist him in his search, and one being come to that purpose, he softly
whispered him, as he gave him the light that he should cause all those, who
were in the Room to depart, and that he should tell the Doorkeeper not to let
any body enter, no no^ even those, who were summoned to the Council.

Thus without its being perceived that it proceeded from him, he rid himself of
all the importunate; and instead of a Council there was held that day a long
Conference between the Great Alcander, and Madam de Montespan In the mean time,
all knowing that Monsieur de Louvoy staid in the Chamber, they believed him to
be shut up with the Prince, and the other Ministers, who were sent back without
being suffered to enter grew jealous of it, not knowing to what to attribute
this long conversation, which occasioned that there was no Council held that
day, which never happened before, the Great Alcander being usually very
punctual in all his actions.

Though this Conference seemed to have re accommodated all matters, the Great
Alcander returning according to his custom to Madam de Montespan's Lodgings,
yet the Prince ceased not to pursue his Amorous enterprise. He saw Madam de
Fontange in private, he gave her marks of affection, and received the same
from her, which could not be so secret, but that it was soon known to the whole
Court.

The Great Alcander was so well satisfied with this new Conquest, that he gave
the Prince of Marsilliac, the place of Chief Hunts man, for a reward of his
having procured (...) for him. In the mean time the Great Alcander, who had the
luck to find fruitful Mistresses, having understood that Madam de Fontange was
big with Child, he prepared a House for her; and this Lady, being much unlike
Madam d^ Montespan, whose avarice reached even to baseness, was generous even to
prodigality; he therefore gave her a man to restrain this liberal humor; and
to take care that she might subsist upon an hundred thousand Crowns a Month,
which he gave her. This Superintendant was the Duke of Nouallies, at which
every body was extremely surprised, his Devotion seeming incompatible with an
Employment that made him look into several little reckonings which he might
have well past over: But since every one was resolved to think in the first
place on their own Fortune, and in the second place upon God. The Duke of
Nouallies, very far from refusing this Employment, gave the Great Alcander
thanks for having bestowed it upon him before many other Pretenders, and
divided his time between the Great Alcander, Heaven, and Madam de Fontanges. In
the mean time, Madam de Montespan endeavored to support ^er self the best she
could. She en^eated the Great Alcander, to be ^eased to come at least to her
^odgings as he was used to do, and she endeavored to insinuate ^o all the
world, that her Credit ^as yet greater than was imagined; that the Great
Alcander's love for Madam de Fontanges was only a ^ansitory love, of which he
would ^on be weary; and that at last, ^e would return to her more A^orous, than
he had ever been before. Those of her Party endea^oured also to give some
Credit (...) these false reports; but when (...) was seen, that the Prince did
(...)dict himself entirely to his new ^assion, every one Courted Madam (...)
Fontanges's Favor, who pro^^red good Places for some of her ^riends, and for
the greater part ^f her Family.

Madam de Montespan, seeing th(...) the Great Alcander weaned him self from her
every day more an^ more, conceived so great a rage (...) it, that she began
publicly (...) speak ill of Madam de Fontang^ She told every body, that the
Gre^^ Alcander could not be very cu^ous to love a Girl, who had had I^trigues
in her own Country, wh^ had neither Wit nor Breeding, an^ who, at best, was but
a Fair pie^^ of Painting. She said a thousan^ other things concerning her, much
more vexatious than these, which far from bringing back the Gre^^ Alcander, as
she expected, turne^ him the more from her.

Madam de Fontange was broug^^ to Bed in a little time after, an^ they made use
of that opport^nity, as it was believed, to Poys^^ her, which was attributed to
Madam de Montespan; either for the it was imagined, that one in the vexation
which she was in, must (...) necessity be induced to commit so great a Crime,
or because it was believed, that a Lady in Madam de Fontange's Post, could die
no other than a violent death. But be it what it will, she fell into a
languishing condition presently after her lying in, by reason of a continual
Flux of Blood, that, still remaining, hindered the Great Alcander to ly any
more with her. However he did often Visit her, expressing to her, how sorrowful
he was for the condition, whereunto he saw her reduced. But Madam de Fontanges,
who perceived her self every day a dying, entreated him to suffer her to retire
from Court, adding with tears, that the Malice of her Enemies was the cause,
that she now had nothing else to think (...), but another World.

The Great Alcander, who was very glad that she took order with the Affairs of
her Salvation, and who also was sensibly concerned to be present at her
sufferings, granted her what she desired, and she retired into a Convent in the
Su^burbs of St. James, whither (...) daily sent to enquire news of her The Duke
de la Feuillade went also thither twice or thrice a Wee^ to Visit her from him,
but he always brought back ill news: For this poor Lady having all her noble
Parts spoiled, either by the Poison, or by something else, saw he^ self decline
daily, and the Duke (...) la Feuillade one day, told the Gre^^ Alcander, that
she was past all hope^ of recovery. In effect, she died i^ a few days after,
leaving after h^^ death a greater suspicion of her having been Poisoned, than
there h^^ been during her sickness; for h^ving been opened, there were fo(...)
within her some little black spe(...) fastened to her noble Parts, wh(...) are,
as is pretended, signs of Poiso^

The Great Alcander expressed a public sorrow for the loss of her, and being
willing to show, that ^he esteem which he had for her, ^ontinued even after her
Death, he ^ave an Abbey to one of her Bro^hers, Married one of her Sisters ^ery
advantageously, and did ma^y other things in Favor of her ^amily. In the mean
time Ma^am de Montespan did believe, that ^he King would now return to her; ^ut
she was quite amazed to see Madam de Maintenon have all his ^onfidence, which
put her into a ^espair, for it being her self, that ^ad raised Madam de
Maintenon (...) what she was, she could not bear (...), that her own creature
should be (...) instrument to destroy her.

That which tormented her yet (...)e more, was, that she did not be^^eve, that
there was any wanton^ess in their Correspondence, which ^onsequently ought to
be of a lon^er continuance; since it did not depend on a wandering love, that
begins and often ends all in a day^ In effect, the Confidence which the Great
Alcander has with Madam de Maintenon, is observed to continue still even to
this day, notwithstanding all that Madam de Montespan could do to destrov it;
and on the contrary, he expresses for her only a kind of decent respect, which
is nothing else but the leavings of the love of a man of Honor, who uses his
Mistress so, rather for his own Reputations sake, than out of any sentiments of
tenderness.

It seemed that the Great Alcander having renounced Love, every body ought to
have renounced it likewise, and that the Ladies after Madam de Montespan's
example, who now pretends to Chastity, should also become chaste; but, their
temper and inclination transporting them beyond all reason, they still remain
in the same course of ^^fe. The Duchess de la Ferte is more immoderate than
ever in her Pleasures, neither is the Duchess of Vantadour her Sister less
wanton, though she manages her business with a little more discretion and
conduct. As for the Mareschaless de la Ferte, she is at any man's service that
will give most, and is endued with so great Humility after certain misfortunes,
which have happened to her, resembling those that I have related of her Daughter
in Law, that she has made a vow never to refuse any body, provided that they
have but money.

As for what concerns Mademoiselle d'Orleans Monpensier; after having grieved
during ten whole years for the Imprisonment of Monsieur de Lausun, she at
length found a way to obtain his Liberty. For considering, that all the Riches
in the world are nothing in comparison of ones own content, she has appeased
the Great Alcander's anger with the Principality of Dombe^ and the County of
d'Eu, which she has assured to the Duke of Maine his natural Son. By this
means Monsieur de Lausun is returned, not indeed to Court, but to Paris, where
he is obliged to live as a private Man. For the Great Alcander would not permit
his Marriage to be declared; but he is so often at the Princesses House, that
it is all one as if he lodged there. In the mean time, this Princess is so
jealous of him, that he wishes with all his heart he had never thought on her:
She has set Spies all about him, and he cannot make a step, that she is not
advertised of; so that going out of one Prison, he is entered into another,
which appears to him no less cruel. She has given him some Land by the Great
Alcander's consent; but it is all that she has done for him, for she could not
give him one penny of ready money, having lost all her Credit by this Marriage.
For no man is willing to lend her any money, least it should be hereafter said,
that being in a Husband's power, she could not lawfully borrow. This is the
occasion that there are four or five years past, since she began to build her
House at Choisi, without having yet finished it; for the expense of it must be
taken out of her yearly Revenue. But she would be comforted still for all these
things, if Monsieur de Lausun were the same that he has been heretofore. I
would say, if he still possessed the same quality toward Ladies, that he once
did: But it is reported, that he is now so pitiful a Fellow that way, that it
is hard to believe, he had formerly been so brave. However, it is an
imperfection that is common to several others; for it is known by experience,
that every thing must have an end, and it is for that reason likewise, that the
Princess at this day says, that he impudently lied who first said, that a good
Horse never grows a Jade.

FINIS.

