THE EVIDENCE Of things not SEEN, OR, Diverse Scriptural, AND Philosophical
Discourses; Concerning the State of Good and Holy men after Death:

In Answer to these following Questions,

1. Whether the Soul after death, be endued with perception, or sleeps* without
exercising any of its Faculties, until the day of Judgment?

2. What is the place of the Souls abode Immediately after death, and what is
then the measure of the happiness of the Faithful?

3. What will be the Condition of the Soul and Body, at the Resurrection; when
they shall be Joining, and Re-joyned together?

4. What will be the Nature of a good Man's Happiness in Eternal Glory, after
the Resurrection?

By that Eminently Learned Divine MOSES AMYRALDUS.

Translated out of the French Tongue, By a Minister of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill at the Sign of the Three Legs, in the
Poultry.

THE TRANSLATOR TO HIS Dearest CONSORT.
My Dear,
THE Excellent Author of the following Discourses, wrote them for the only use
of his Dear Wife, without any intention of Printing them; but some Friends
(obtaining a sight of them in Manuscript) were so delighted with them, and so
satisfied with the Philosophy and Reason of them; together with the Scriptural
evidences here made use of, (which do clearly reveal and plainly Manifest very
much of the nature of man's future State and Condition) as that they did not
only judge them worthy of the Public view, but making it their earnest request
to him, did (by the Mediation of so prevalent a person as his nearest Relation)
gain his consent (as he tells us) for the publishing of them.

Dear Heart, I did, sometimes since, Translate them also for your use, and now
at your desire, I do suffer them to pass the Press; you have Communicated them
to some of your Relations: who think that they may be of great advantage to
devout and pious Souls. I do therefore, willingly commit them to your and their
Disposal; and if they may promote, and increase a love to, and a faith in that
blessed future State, which is the Subject of them; I shall most Heartily
Rejoice therein.

I very well know that such subjects are very congruous, suitable, and pleasant
to your Soul; and it was the knowledge thereof, that did engage me at some
Vacant hours to Translate them. You have Experienced much good already by them;
and I doubt not, but they will tend yet further to increase a passion in you
for God and Heaven.

It may be also, that God may bless them to produce the same Effects, upon many
others, that shall peruse them.

But as the Author inscribed them to no other Name than Hers, for whose sake he
Wrote them: So I, having made them English for your Use in a Especial manner;
do now make the Dedication of them only to your self; always praying, that God
would so bless them to the profit of all that shall Read them, that they
(together with us) may be made Partakers of that blessed Inheritance; a clear
Map whereof, is herewith so lively Delineated, and so plainly Exhibited, to
our, and their Eyes.

Now the God of peace fill thee (my Dear) with all joy through Believing, which
is the Daily Prayer of, thine,

G. J.

Concerning the STATE Of the FAITHFUL After Death.
ALthough the Apostle St. Paul writing to the Thessalonians, exhorts them to
derive their Comforts in the loss of their Friends from the hopes of a happy
Resurrection, and tho the full Revelation of our happiness be reserved indeed
till the day when that shall be. Nevertheless we do not cease to Comfort those
to whom such accidents arrive by this Consideration, that as soon as the Soul is
separate from the body, it is received into a place of refreshment and repose,
where expecting this Resurrection it enjoys a Contentment greater than can be
expressed. We have been accustomed to give this hope to the diseased, that we
see in danger of death, that if they be removed from this life, it will be to
enter into a better, where they shall forthwith possess joy and happiness,
which we essay to describe in the most Illustrious manner that we are able. But
the thing it self must infinitely surpass all that we can in our words say
concerning it. And forasmuch as it is apparent that naturally things a far off
touch us little; whereas those that are near, and such as we think under our
hand, give to our Spirits motions and perceptions far more lively; this
Consolation has (I know not how) more of efficacy both to sweeten the trouble
of those that live, and to abate the regret of those that die, than the
expectation of the reestablishment of this Body, which according to all
appearance of things seems to be differred to a time sufficiently long: Now as
it is suitable to the Christian Religion, and to the Office of those that are to
Publish it, to fill the minds of men with generous hopes, and to make them
feel, the most lively Consolations; so it is worthy of its Excellence, that
these hopes and Consolations be true and certain, and that those that do
receive them have a full persuasion of it. For the efficacy of such things
depends on the evidence and solidity of their truth, and in what degree a man
doubts the truth of what is promised, or whereof he receives assurance, in the
same degree, the content that he receives from it, does weaken and diminish.
Forasmuch then as there is nothing, the use whereof, returns more frequently in
the life of man, and that, there is not a Family among Christians, that does
not sometimes need such Consolations, and that the infirmity of the flesh finds
always much of difficulty to impress on us aforehand the belief of these
things, and that even among Christians themselves some have doubted of the
Estate of Souls after death, and that it cannot be avoided but that in the
particular Intercourse and Conversation, of men they will happen on the
discourse of this matter. I do believe that it will not be altogether without
reason, to bestow some hours on the attentive Consideration of this Subject. If
my thoughts about it be of no use to the Edification of the Public, at least
my near Allies may derive with me some particular utility from them, in the
Afflictions of this sort wherewith God has visited us. I propound to my self,
therefore to examine by the word of God (for it is from thence only that we can
fetch such light as may satisfy us in these matters) principally four things.
First what is the Estate of the faithful Soul after death. Whether it be
endowed with perception, or whether it remain asleep without any use of its
faculties until the day of Judgment. Secondly (it being supposed, which we
shall make appear, that it exercises them with much joy and satisfaction) what
is the place where it is received, and what is the measure of the joy and
happiness that it does enjoy. Thirdly what will be its State at the
Resurrection, and what the condition of the Body to which it shall be rejoined.
Lastly, what will be the quality of its happiness, then when it shall be
received into Heaven, with its Body there to live an eternal and glorious Life.

Whether the SOUL OF A BELIEVER, Be endued With Perception after Death.
The First Discourse.
THat I may come to the Resolution of the first of these Questions, whether the
Soul of a believer be endued with perception after death, I desire that I may
be pardoned, if at first I enter upon considerations a little Philosophical,
which nevertheless I shall endeavor to explain as briefly, and intelligibly as
I am able. I lay down therefore as a foundation, a thing which remains
indisputable among Christians, viz. that the Soul and Body are two substances
in their natures marvelously differing, and in like manner endowed with
faculties altogether various, for the Body is in its nature material, and taken
from the Earth and the other Elements, the Soul is a spiritual substance almost
of the same kind with those intelligences separate from Matter, which we
usually call by the name of Angels. The Body has indeed certain Organs (as
they are called) by the mediation whereof it is capable of receiving the Images
of sensible things, and to judge of their qualities, the Hearing, the Seeing,
the Smelling, and those other things which we name Senses, are without doubt
Corporeal powers in us, and appointed to judge of Colors sounds odours, and
other qualities which attend and accompany material objects; nevertheless it is
the Soul that Comunicates to the Body the power of using its own Organs, and
employing its self in the use of those Senses, and this appears manifestly,
because as soon as the Soul is separate from it, all the powers of these Organs
are extinct and there remains not the least shadow of their Operations,
moreover the body seems likewise to be the seat of certain appetites, and
passions. For Choler and lust do very much affect and trouble it when they are
moved, and the part that the temperament of the Body has in their motions, is
a proof sufficiently certain, that they also are powers naturally bound and
fastened with it: the Choleric would not be naturally subject to anger, the
Sanguin of good humor and mercy, the Melancholic sour and sad, the Phlegmatic
slow and little affected on the accurance of troublesome objects, if this
mixture of humors out of which the temper of the Body arises, had not a
marvelous power to give the bias, and inclinations, to the motions of the
Soul. But so it is that these passions, are not moved but by means of some
external object; that touches the Phantasy, and by the Phantasy moves the
affections. For it is offense which awakens Choler, and it is the occurence of
objects pleasant and agreeable, which makes the bud of joy, that lies latent in
the blood, to put forth bloom: now it is the Soul that gives assistance to the
Phantasy to receive the Images as external things, which either offend, or
charm our passions, variously according to the difference of our humors, and
that which is more it is the Soul that reasons with understanding upon those
things, that are presented to it by the interposition of the bodily Senses, and
which bestirs it self either to embrace, or reject that whereof it has
endeavored to know the nature and qualities by its reasonings, in such sort
that although objects have a great Connection with our humors, and our humors a
great power to give a tendency to our motions, the Soul nevertheless ought to
be the Mistress of them, and to put bounds to the efficacy of objects, and to
the motion of our humors and passions. And that which I have already said of
the Senses, viz. that the Body destitute of the Soul, utterly loses them,
experience obliges me to say also, of all those passions which Philosophers
comprehend, under those two general names of the Irascible and Concupiscible,
that the separation of the Soul does equally abolish them. Whereof the
discourses of reason do easily discover the Cause: For be the Constitution of
the Organs of the Body what it will, be it for the use of the external senses
upon the qualities of things sensible, be it for the Operation of the internal
senses (as is the imagination) so it is, that seeing they cannot Act any
further than the Soul moves them, (as when the main spring in a Watch foiles,
all the other movements stand in a moment) it must necessarily be, that when
the Soul withdraws, all the actions of the Organs cease; so that both reason
and experience, with one consent teach us, what we ought to think of the
faculties of our bodies. Touching the Soul we have no experiences visible, and
ordinary, of what it does or does not after death, and if we consult the
discourses of our reason concerning it, we find there difficulties great beyond
comparison. For first of all every one makes here this consideration, which
appears to them of no small consideration. And it is this, though the Body and
Soul be two substances very different, nevertheless they are so united in man,
that they make but one subject: so that neither Body apart nor Soul apart, do
constitute (as they say) any perfect Being, or any complete Nature neither the
Body makes the Man, nor the Soul, but both together go to his Composition, and
when they are separated, the Body holds no place, among the particular kinds of
Beings, that exist absolutely, without dependence on each other, nor the Soul
neither. Of the one we say it is the body of a man, and of the other it is in
like manner his Soul, of both, if they come to be united, we say, and that
properly it is the man, to whom they have this respective Relation. Now it seems
that imperfect natures produce no operations. Every thing that you observe in
nature, be they such as have Souls, forms which do inform and animate their
matter as are Plants and Animals; be they such as have only a form, which in
some sort supplies to them, the place of a Soul, as are Minerals and Metals, if
you imagine that after their dissolution the Form subsist a while; so as the
Matter do not exercise the functions of the whole Composition, nor will the
Form exercise them neither. That is to say, as the body of a dead Horse has no
motion, his Soul if you imagine it to subsist some time after its separation,
will be as great a stranger to Horse-like actions and operations: moreover as
it is true that as long as the Soul of a man is in his Body, it gives activity
to his Senses, so on the other hand it seems that it has absolutely need of
its presence, and the mediation of its Organs, for the forming of its own
discourses and ratiocinations it is the Soul, that gives unto the Body the
virtue of Seeing, Tasting, and Smelling, and generally of knowing by the
operation of the Senses, those things that nature has endued with qualities,
that fall under their observation, but in like sort if the Body do neither see,
nor taste, nor smell, nor in a word apprehend any thing that is sensible.
Without doubt the Intellect of the Soul will remain without motion, and
languish without action, by default of matter whereon to apply, and exercise
its thoughts: and as a Lute cannot sound unless there be some person to touch
it, nor a humane body move, if there be no Soul to give it Action. So it seems
at first, that as the Lutenist cannot perform the Office of his Art, without a
Lute furnished with its strings, the Soul cannot reason without a well
tempered, and well disposed Body; in short it it appears that as long as the
Soul is in the Body, it reasons on the Images of things, which occur to it from
Corporeal things which are formed in the Phantasy, and there depurated, and
subtilised, and made so thin, small, and luminous, that they are capable of
applying themselves to the Intellect, to the end that it may compound, divide,
and compare them one with the other, and there make such reflections, as are
necessary for its ratiocinations in such sort, that when the Soul is separate
from the Body, having no longer any Corporeal Senses; to receive sensible
things, nor any faculty of imagination, (which is a Corporeal power) to polish
these Images, and make them capable of being presented to the Intellect, it
seems that it has lost the use of that understanding, by which it is naturally
adapted to contemplate on all such objects.

Nevertheless if we attentively examine these Reasons, we shall find that they
are by no means concluding: For touching the first, that which makes that among
things without understanding (such as are generally all Animals except men)
incomplete natures, perform no Actions, is not properly, and precisely because
they are incomplete, but because they have no faculties for them, the form
being reduced to nothing, when it is separated from the matter, (as does the
Soul of a Horse when it dies) it loses its faculties necessarily with its
being, it being impossible that what is not, should have any power of Action.
As to the matter it is true it subsists after the form, the body of the Horse
remains after he is dead, but simply under the notion of Matter it has no
power to perform any operations, all the power that it had before, came
necessarily from its Form, it is the Soul of the Horse, that gives action and
motion to his body; the matter therefore having not the form, which it had
before cannot act as it was wont to do. And if it comes to be assisted, or
reinvested, or informed with some new form, (as if Wasps or any other insects
be engendered out of the body of the Horse) as it will have its faculties from
thence, its operations also will be conformable, to the new Being that it shall
receive from its new Soul, to that instead of marching and doing like a Horse
as before, the matter whereof it was formed will (it may be) fly, or creep, and
crawl after the manner of Caterpillars and Worms. In man the case is not at all
thus. For the Body loses indeed its Actions, because they depended upon the
Soul, which is no more there but the Soul is presupposed, to retain those
faculties, which were truly proper and natural to it, so that nothing remains
but to enquire, whether it use them at that time yea or no. I say then for a
second Reason, that although we should suppose, (that which neither is nor can
be) that the Soul of a Horse, subsists after its separation from the body; the
reason why it will not be able to exercise its actions, will not be at all
agreeable to that of a Man. For it is without doubt very true, that the Soul
furnishes motion to the body of the Horse: but so it is, that this motion is
Corporeal, and cannot be found in any Being, which is not Corporeal and
Material, they are the Legs of the Horse, which are moved, and all the parts of
his body which are turned, and wheeled according to the inclinations of him
that Rides, and governs him according to his will. So that if his Soul were
some Thing so distinct from the body, that it were not at all Corporeal it
self, it were impossible that it should exercise such actions apart, and by it
self alone: but as to the actions of the Soul of man, whereof we speak at this
time, they are altogether of another kind, and are found in Beings never
joined, or united to any bodies. For to understand, and will, and to receive
pleasure or discontent from things that are understood willed or refused, is a
thing that is found in the nature of Angels.

Although then it be true that the Soul, as long as it is in the body, makes no
use of its reasonable faculties, but with the aid, and by the mediation of
Corporal Organs; So it is, that these Actions are not themselves Corporeal,
seeing they are found in Beings, that have no Alliance, or Communication with
Body, so that though it be very certain, that the Soul of a Horse, cannot all
alone do the part of a Horse, although it should subsist after the body. And
although the Soul of a man, do not use any of his powers without the Organs of
the Body, whilst it is lodged there it will in no wise therefore follow that it
has unavoidable need of them, to exercise those powers when it is lodged there
no more. And by the same method of discourse, it may be proved, that the
comparison of the Lute, and the Lutenist do not at all accord to this matter:
for it is very true that the Lute cannot sound without the Lutenist, nor the
Lutenist play without his Lute, because to play is to cause by the occurrence
of the fingers, and the strings of the Lute a certain harmonious sound, which
as it is Corporeal, so it cannot proceed otherwise than from something
Corporeal. But as the Player on the Lute, (though he can produce no sound
effectively because he has no instrument proper for it) does not cease the
ability of reasoning in his mind, upon the measures, the accords and
diversities of sounds of which the harmony is made when he plays, and in like
manner on the structure of the Lute, and composition of its parts; so the Soul
although it actually exercise not bodily actions, because it is no longer
there, it is not disabled from discoursing and making speculations on the
nature of the humane Body, upon the use of its faculties, and on all other
objects, which offer themselves to its consideration. It cannot then cause the
Body to be nourished, or that it move from place to place, or that it use its
Senses, but from thence it will not follow, that it cannot make pleasant
Contemplations, upon the manner of perceiving the Images of things in the
Senses upon the marvelous activity of those springs in the Body, that serve for
the local motion of its members, and on the incomparable disposition that
nature has established among the parts, which are to digest, distribute,
receive, and appropriate, that which is necessary for their nourishment.

To conclude, the last reason has no more force than the precedent. For seeing
Angels (which are as I have said) Beings totally separate from Matter or Body,
have nevertheless certain means, (which in truth we cannot easily comprehend,
but yet certainly believe) of knowing things sensible and Corporeal, and
forming excellent discourses upon them, whereof the Scripture furnishes us with
indubitable proofs, wherefore (the Soul being a substance well nigh like that
of Angels) should it not be capable of the same operations; let us imagine, that
by the power of God, an Angel should be incarnate, in such manner that he
become the form of a humane Body, and that he animate it after the manner of a
reasonable Soul, without doubt whiles he lodges there he will see, and perceive
things Corporeal by the Organs of sense and reason, upon the Images which are
brought from and perfected in the Phantasy, as we now do. And if actually he
become the Soul of this body, it will be as much subject to the use of its
Organs for the exercise of his understanding, as our Soul is at this time for
the exercise of its most excellent faculties: but if after this, it should
please God to disintangle it from the bonds of of the Body, will it lose the
use of those powers wherewith he served himself, so advantageously without the
use of Organs before it was made to serve there? But there is something more,
it is a constant truth, and all the World assent to it, that there is nothing in
the understanding which was not in some manner first in the sense, but this
which is so indubitable to speak generally, is not without difficulty when it
comes to be explained; because it may be taken in this sense, (viz.) that
universally we can have no other Idea's of things in our minds, than such as
have proceeded from things material, and which our eyes, or our ears, or our
other senses have been capable of receiving; and again it may be so explained,
that although these be in our mind Idea's purely intellectual, and which retain
nothing of the nature of Body, yet so it is that they are not formed, but by
occasion of the Images of Corporeal things, which are received in the Phantasy,
upon which the Intellect makes its first Reflections. And I think that if a man
make but little use of his reason, he shall find that it is in this second
manner, but the aforesaid truth must be understood. For to say nothing of our
passing from Physics, or natural Philosophy to that of Metaphysics, or which
is above nature by the means of certain obstructions, which conduct the Spirit
of a man from the Contemplation of Bodies to that of Spirits, and things
Immaterial, I think Religion puts the thing out of all controversy and doubt.
For it is indeed, by the interposition of our Senses, that we see the Heavens,
and the Earth, and that we hear the word of God Preached, and it is upon the
Idea's, which the exercise of our senses introduce upon our Phantasy; that we
put our selves upon reasoning concerning the Deity. But it is a thing known by
our proper experience, that when we have sometimes seriously applied our selves
thereunto, from the consideration of things sensible, which have given us the
first notions or knowledge thereof, we ascend to speculations concerning the
nature of God, and his properties which are entirely and absolutely separated,
from the qualities and matter of Bodies. Although then our minds produce no
operations, whereof things Corporeal have not presented them the occasions, as
Saint Paul says Romans 1. that from the workmanship of the World, we come to the
knowledge, of the eternal power, and goodness of the Divinity or Godhead,
nevertheless there are some actions of our minds which are purely Spiritual,
and which in no wise depend on Bodies, any further than that Corporeal objects,
do furnish us with occasions to produce them by discourse, now if there be any
of the actions of our minds, which to speak properly have nothing in common
with Bodies, even during the time that they inhabit there, and are in some kind
fastened and bound to their instruments; why should they not be capable of
producing them without the service of the Senses, then when they are altogether
losened from the bonds that have joined and united them? if then we can have
any proofs from the Scripture, that Souls use their faculties after the death
of the Body: that Divine Revelation ought not only to have sufficient
Authority, to impress this belief upon our minds, notwithstanding the
contradiction of the pretended discourses of our reason, but these difficulties
which some persons think to be in the thing it self, ought not to leave in our
minds, the least hesitation, or suspicion. Let us see then what the word of God
does teach concerning it.

Those Divines which have attempted to derive a proof of this verity, from the
Parable of the wicked Dives and Lazarus have received this contradiction, on
the part of those who believe that the Soul loses the use of its faculties in
death; (viz.) that what our Savior says there, is no History but only a
Parable, and that it is an impertinence to endeavor to make such discourses
pass for narrations of things effectively accomplished. And thereupon there is
much and great Contestation; because on one hand there is no other Parable in
the Scripture, where the persons that are there introduced are designed by
their names, and represented exactly by many circumstances, as Lazarus is
described in that place or Paragraph; and on the other hand, the discourse
which our Savior reports that Abraham, and the Rich man had, the one with the
other, or cross the great Gulf, or Abyss, has no appearance, or likeness of
an Historical narration, to commend it to acceptance as a real truth. Wherefore
seeing it may be in part an History, and in part a Parable, let us examine it
briefly, under this last Consideration in all the Parables which our Savior
makes use of in the Gospel; we must have regard to the end whereunto it tends,
and also to what he says that he may come to it; as to what concerns the end of
this Parable, it is sufficiently apparent by its Conclusion, that our Lord had
in design to show, that the obstinacy of man's mind in opposition to things
proposed unto him on the part of God, is so great that neither Revelations made
by the word of God, nor Miracle laid open before our eyes, is capable of moving
or affecting us. In such sort, that although the dead themselves should rise,
we should give no more credit to their Testimony, than we do to the writings of
Moses and the Prophets, if God touch us not inwardly by his Spirit.

All the rest of this discourse is employed to come to this Conclusion, as we
set shadows and leaves round about Pictures, which serve for nothing but to
fill up the void space, and give some little Ornament to the Table; so there is
something in this discourse of our Lord, the use whereof consists wholly in
making the Parable more full, bright, and luminous. It Is therefore to be
Considered, whether it were the common opinion of the Jews, that the Souls of
unbelievers are tormented, immediately after death or that being deprived of
all perception, and use of their faculties, they remain as if they were in a
profound sleep: if it were the last of these, our Lord did not (it seems) a
thing worthy of his wisdom to establish his Parable upon an Hypothesis,
contrary to the common belief of the Jews. For if a parable be not taken from a
truth really and indeed accomplished at least it ought not to contradict the
common conceptions of men. And our Lord never proposed any, in which we might
not easily see much reason, and appearance of possibility; and by how much the
more of difficulty there is to comprehend, for these two persons could reason
together, there being too great a gulf between them, by so much the rest of
the Parable, ought to be accommodated to the sense, and apprehension of the
Auditors to the end that they may not accuse him that speaks, of giving them
instructions, built upon false and extravagant opinions. If it were the common
opinion of the Jews, that Souls enjoy perception after death, our Lord
sufficiently confirms it, not only in that he makes no opposition to it; but
moreover in that he builds thereupon instructions excellent, and full of
wisdom. I make no doubt therefore, but that he gives us to understand in this
Emblem, that the Souls of the wicked are tormented from the time they go out of
this life, and that the Souls of the faithful do receive Consolation which
cannot be without some notable sense or perception, nor can there be so notable
a sense, if they have not their faculties active, and awake.

When the Apostle St. Paul tells us, he was caught up into Paradise where he
heard things that could not be uttered, it is true he tells us, that he knew not
whether'twas in the body, or out of the body. So that although it be not
without probability, that it was rather out of the body, yet it would be great
boldness positively to determine concerning it; since he himself would not do
it. But it is clear that he supposes that it might be done out of the body, and
by consequent that Souls can make use of their faculties, when they are
separated from it; for in that estate in which he supposes his Soul was, or
might be they could not hear things unspeakable soon after, without some use of
their understanding: moreover it must be an excellent use thereof, as well
because of the greatness of the object, which without doubt could not be
comprehended unless by an understanding very active, as because it so
vehemently applied it self unto it, and it received such deep impressions from
it, that after it was rejoined to its body, and again offered unto its Organs
as before, it nevertheless retains the memory thereof. Now it is enough that
St. Paul supposes that it might be to rescue our minds from all difficulty and
doubt in this matter.

The Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews, representing in a stately manner,
the condition whereunto Christians are called, says that it is to the Heavenly
Jerusalem, to thousands of Angels, to the assembly of the first born who are
enrolled, or whose names are written in Heaven, and to the Spirits of just men
sanctified. I will not stay to search out what is signified, by those words
enrolled in the Heavens, although it seems to be a manner of speech, taken from
public Registers, and Rolls wherein are written, the names of such Citizens
which ought to have the right of Freemen, and to partake in the privileges of
the Corporation. Which will signify that these first born are already received
into the Heavens, a place of abode not at all proper for a sleep so profound,
and void of all perception, as is that to which some condemn Souls till the day
of the Resurrection. I will only say that this word the Spirits does signify
without doubt Souls separated from their Bodies, and that the word which we
Translate, Sanctified, signifies properly perfect, or accomplished. A Title
that in the New Testament is not given unless it be to those which (be it in
knowledge or holiness) have obtained that degree of perfection whereunto before
they did aspire, and whereunto those that they have left behind them are not
yet arrived. Thus we are said to be perfect, in comparison with the Jews, who
lived under the dispensation of the Law, but imperfect in comparison with them
that have obtained that knowledge whereunto we cannot come in this life; so that
these just men made perfect, concerning the Spirit of whom he speaks in this
Text, are those that have obtained a degree of perfection which we have not as
yet: which cannot be obtained without an excellent use of those faculties,
which are called Understanding and Will.

In the Book of the Revelation, Chap. 14. Verse. 13. It is said that the Spirit
declares those happy which are dead in the Lord, now happiness, and the
privation of the use of all their faculties are inconsistent; Aristotle himself
says, that happiness cannot properly be attributed, unless it be to such who
are actually in the exercise of the most excellent operations of their noblest,
and most excellent powers, and vacant in the contemplation, and love of the
bravest and sublimest Objects: and to the end, that we may not think, that they
are called happy, because they are appointed to the enjoyment of the happiness,
which is to be revealed at the last day, as the same Philosopher says, we call
little Children happy, by a kind of hope, when there is much of probability,
that one day they will obtain it. It Is said that they rest from their labors,
and their works follow them. Now it is true indeed that we call sleep by the
name of rest, in opposition to the labors and troubles of the day; but
nevertheless if speaking of a person that is returned into his Country, after
great and memorable battles, fought in Foreign Lands, we should say, that
henceforth he rests from his labors. I do not think that any one would
understand thereby, that he had slept for a long time, but that he enjoyed in
peace and tranquillity, the fruit of his former pains and labors, and indeed
these words [and their works follow them] do mean they enjoy their reward.

For because the work, and the reward are inseparable by the appointment of the
good will of God, and the holy Spirit being willing to inform us, that
believers shall not lose their labors in the good works that they do here
below, and that they shall obtain the reward that is promised them above by a
manner of speech frequent in the Scripture, where that which goes before is put
for that which follows, he makes no scruple to name one for the other. Now the
gratuitous reward of good works, consists not in a privation of all perception,
but in the possession of Contentment, and glory.

In the same Book, the Souls of those that had been Martyred for the word of
God, are represented crying; how long Lord just, and true, will thou not judge
and avenge our blood on those that dwell on the earth? which is a proof that
there is in them memory, and apprehension. And it cannot be said here, that
this cry is attributed to them, as in the eighth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans, sighs, and groans, and desires are ascribed to the whole frame of
Heaven, and Earth, or as the cry of vengeance is attributed to the blood of
Abel, by a kind of Prosopopeia, or ficttion of personality: because it being
notorious that the Heavens, and the Earth, and the blood of a man have no
knowledge or preception, there is no danger that such manner of figurative
expressions should beget erroneous opinions in the mind of any one: the nature
of the thing gives sufficient notice, that necessarily there must be some
figure, in the enunciation, or discourse, but where it is said of the Souls of
men, which we see (during the time that they are in the body) endued with
lively, and excellent perception, (supposing that they were extinct, or at
least wholly asleep after death) who can hinder himself by Reading these words
from drawing opinions, of a quite contrary nature. Now to the end, that no man
may doubt of the meaning of this Text, it is appointed them to rest, and expect
a little while. Now although by a kind of Prosopopeia, or fiction of person we
may attribute such voices, to things void of all perception, who ever saw God
introduced making answer to them, or any one for him forming a Dialogue in the
manner with things, without all understanding? To conclude, there is given unto
them white garments which can signify nothing less than some great light of
knowledge, and some great purity of holiness, or perfection of sanctification.
Now neither the one nor the other can subsist, without a perfect use of the
understanding faculty, and all the affections of the Soul. And although these
white Robes should signify either the grace of justification, or the hope of
happiness and glory, (because sometimes white Robes were the marks of those
that aspired to the most eminent Offices in the Roman Common Wealth) yet that
cannot be without some perception, and affection. For if it be the first, in as
much as these Souls are represented in a place, whether they could have had no
admission, if they had not been justified and their sins pardoned, it is not
properly justification (which they have already) which is given to them, it is
the Taste and Sense of it, whereof the fullness is bestowed on them, whereas
here below we have nothing but the foretasts of it, in the peace and joy of our
Souls; and if it be the second that can represent nothing, but the desire of
their full and perfect glorification, accompanied with assurance, and by
consequence with incredible contentment, which cannot be reconciled with the
sleep of the Soul, and the extinction of all its powers.

The Apostle writing to the Philippians says that he was balanced, or in a
strait between two thoughts: whether he ought to desire death, or to continue a
longer time in the World. Because if he had regard to the Edification, that his
Ministry might give to the Church, and the profit that it might draw from
hence, he ought much rather to choose a longer life, but if he had regard to his
own particular good, death was more desirable to him than life. I pray, if he
had believed that all the powers of his Soul, as well as those of the body had
remained at death benumbed for so long a time; would he have thought that death
would have been more advantageous to him? I do acknowledge that he had endured
many evils, for the confirmation of the truth that he Preached from which a
death (such as those against whom I dispute do represent it) drousie and void
of all understanding would have secured him, but so it is, that the knowledge he
had of our Lord Jesus whilst alive, the mavelous Revelations that had been
made unto him the Joy, and Consolation that came unto him from the sense of the
love, and peace of God, and the exercise of so many excellent Virtues,
wherewithal he was endued, were in my opinion things of such importance, that
they should rather cause him to prefer life, in which he retained the
possession of them, though accompanied with many afflictions, than to embrace
death which (what ever it might be otherwise) deprived him of the enjoyment of
them. But the reason that he adds, wherefore he ought to choose death, if he had
no regard but to his own person that it is much better to be with Christ, cuts
off all occasion of doubting, concerning the mind of St. Paul in this matter.
For those without doubt are not with Christ, which sleep without perception,
and without any knowledge of their felicity, though they were received into the
most holy, and most illustrious place of his glory. Otherwise those might be
said to live, and dwell with Kings which are interred in the Chapels of their
Palaces, whether the least ray of the glory, that compasses them about cannot
enter.

That other passage seems not to me less express, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3. where the
Apostle explains himself in these words: we know, that if the earthly house of
this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens, wherefore we groan desiring earnestly to be
clothed with our house that is from Heaven. For is there any probability, that
he should desire with so much vehemence to be stripped of this Tabernacle of
earth, to be clothed with that which is from Heaven, if he not only got nothing
new, but lost all the knowledge of things that he had in this life totally and
altogether. Now that he intends to speak there of the change that was to betide
him before the Resurrection, is a thing clear and manifest by the whole issue
of the discourse: it is true he had said before, that he knew that he that
raised up the Lord Jesus, would raise us up also by Jesus, and cause us to
appear in his presence, and it is for that reason that he testifies, that he
fainted not in his Tribulations, and adds that though our outward man grew into
decay, nevertheless the inward man was renewed day by day, going on from
strength to strength: and if we are exposed to several afflictions, he says,
that our light affliction that is but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding, and eternal weight of glory. Which shows sufficiently that he has
some respect, to the day of the full Revelation of our Salvation; but that
which follows of the destruction of this earthly Tabernacle can it be
understood otherwise than of the dissolution of the body? That which he writes
immediately afterward, that as long as we are lodged in this body, we are
absent, and as it were, strangers from our Lord, but that through the assurance
that we have of our Salvation, we desire rather to be strangers from the body,
and be with the Lord, can it be understood of the blessed Resurrection? Shall
we be then absent and strangers from our bodies, or rather will not our Spirits
have thereon eternal Habitations. I therefore think that the Apostle in that
place, opposes the time in which we are in this life, to that in which we shall
be in it no more, and that he says that as long as we are in this life, we are
absent from the Lord, but when we are dislodged we are present with him. and
because (although this future time consist of two parts, the one wherein we are
stripped of our bodies by death, the other wherein we are reinvested in them by
the Resurrection) it is to that in the one, and the other our condition must
always be the enjoyment of the presence of Jesus Christ, he considers it not
but as one and the same tract of time, in the first part whereof our happiness
begins, and is completed in the second, which excites our desires and
affections to be now stripped of these bodies, that we may enter on the
possession of those happy beginnings, till the time of full and complete
perfection shall come. Now this is marvellously far from the opinion of those,
that take from the Souls of believers, all sense, and perception whatsoever,
even that of their proper faculties and essence.

St. Luke reports that St. Stephen being about to die, recommended his Spirit
to our Lord Christ saying, Lord Jesus into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and
our Lord himself commended his to his Father on the Cross. To what purpose was
this then? It was not without doubt to secure it from perishing, and being
reduced to nothing. For the substance of the Soul contains nothing of matter,
nor of the mixture of the Elements; it is of its nature incorruptible, and
imperishable, as are the Angels. Was it then to be protected from the
Temptations, and assaults of the Devil, or to be put into the fruition of
happiness and glory? As to the first, it can have no place, if the Spirits of
the faithful remain swallowed of a sleep so deep, that they absolutely lose all
use of their understandings. For the Temptations of the Devil consist, either
in an Artificial external presenting to our senses such objects as are proper
to move our desires and appetites: or in this, that internally he forms in our
Phantasy, such Images of things as may stir and provoke us, and in favoring
with his efficacy such as are already there; or in moving our humors, and by
our humors soliciting the appetites, and passions of our Souls: what can these
attempts do upon substances, which are not at all subject to the motion of
humors, which in death have lost the faculty of imagination, which have no
Corporeal senses, seeing they are not Bodies, and all whose Spiritual
capacities are so fettered in the exercise of their powers, that neither
exterior objects* can by any means touch them, nor visions from within be get
the least thought there? As to the second there is neither felicity nor glory
can happen to Spirits, without the exercise of their understanding and will.
There is not a person to whom we say that the Spirits of the faithful gone
hence are happy and glorious, which does not immediately conceive, that they
are so far from being swallowed up in a profound drousiness or sleep, that on
the contrary they have a very lively and notable sense of their happiness and
glory.

I am much of the opinion of those that think that in the words of our Savior,
John 11. 26. and John 5. 24. he that believes in me shall never see death* He
is passed from death to life. There is a particular Emphasis which makes much
to our present purpose. I very well know that in diverse places it seems
probable, that what interprets these words by that promise, I will raise him up
at the last day.

Nevertheless, if since the time wherein he spoke those words, believers that
are departed hence, have slept unto this day, and must yet sleep till the
consummation of Ages, without any bodily or mental sense of their condition, or
essence; I am not able to comprehend, how the hopes of the Resurrection, can
perfectly satisfy and complete the sense, and magnificence of the words.
Although the body sleep after that manner, if the principal part of man, and
that whereof the Scriptures sometimes speaks as if it were the man, and the
body nothing but its Habitation, live and be awake and perceive and exercise
with content and joy, such operations as are worthy the dignity of his nature;
death is not properly death, nor does it seem to deserve a name so terrible and
odious. It Is much rather a sleep, as the Scripture sometimes speaks, wherein
man entertains himself with visions very pleasant and delightful. But if the
perception of the Soul, and body both, be equally extinct, and that not only
for a little time, but for, I know not how many Ages, how comes it to pass that
it is not called death but a passing from death to life. And it will appear yet
much more strange, if we apply it to the Fathers, and Patriarchs that lived in
the first Ages: Such as were Adam, Noah, Seth, and Abraham. For since the
Apostle, Heb. 11. Attributes unto them one and the same faith with us, although
the things which faith embraces were not so plainly revealed to them as to us,
yet they ought to produce one and the same effect, with respect to them and us,
Jesus Christ being the same, yesterday and to day and for ever. Are those then
passed from death to life, who from before the deluge and soon after, were as
to their bodies reduced to dust, and as to their Souls carried in a profound
sleep and total insensibility? Truly it seems manifest that they had other
hopes and expectations. When Jacob after too many afflictions and irksom and
troubleous Pilgrimages, comforted himself with this, that he hoped for the
Salvation of God, Genesis 49. 18. If he had no hope but that of losing the sense
of all good, and evil for so long a succession of Ages, he would have had more
occasion, to be afflicted than to rejoice, to fear death than to draw comfort,
from the near approach and prospect of it, besides it is here very considerable;
that as he was at a greater distance from the day of judgment than we are now,
and as he did not perceive unless it were a far off, in the darkness of what to
come, the manifestation of a Redeemer, so also he did not see so clearly as we
do, the hopes of the Resurrection nor had not such distinct knowledge, of the
glory that attends us in Heavenly places.

I observe, that David as he approached nearer to the time of our Saviors
appearance, did both receive from God, and deliver to his Church, much greater
explanations upon these matters, than did any of his Ancestors, and yet
nevertheless had experience of very different emotions of Spirit, when he saw
himself in danger, or in likelihood of death. Sometimes in the Psalms he gives
evidence that he was much afraid of death, and desires of God with great
earnestness, that by his good providence, and the power of his hand he would
hinder his falling under it, and these motions of his so frequently reported,
and repeated in his Writings, accompanied with vows so ardent, and praises so
vivid and full of Devotion, when God had rescued him from his dangers, do
sufficiently show that this object, when it presented it self unto him,
occasioned terrible agitations to his mind. And nevertheless when he was to
die, he disposed himself to it with great Tranquillity, and gave no Testimony
of fear, or any the least alteration. If you enquire of those that think the
perceptions of the Soul perish, and die with those of the body, why David
feared death so very much they will say, that he himself gives the reason of
it: It Is because in death he makes no mention of the name of God, nor sings
unto him any Songs of praise, Psalm. 6. which proves according to their opinion,
that death takes away at once, both from Soul and Body, the knowledge of all
things. But if this were the only reason, why did he not fear death as much
when he was old? Will it hinder the loss of all sense, and memory of objects to
die old? Or would it be a greater affliction, to David when in the flower of
his age, to lose by losing life, the means, and opportunity of singing the
praises of God, than to be deprived of this pleasure, and content by dying in a
good old age? It is therefore much more reasonable to say, that David and other
Saints of times past, did think that God sent them into the world for two ends:
the one (which respects his glory) was to advance and celebrate it as much as
they were able: the other was to enjoy therein for a long time the Testimonies
of his Faviour in those Temporal blessings, the promises whereof he had given
unto them. When therefore any danger of death did threaten them before the
time, which nature seems to have appointed for it, (viz.) seventy or eighty
years, or if there were in the time of David any other natural and ordinary
term of life; They were extraordinarily moved and troubled, because it seemed
that death before full age, was a Testimony of the anger and curse of God. So
that to prevail with God to protect them from it, after having begged the
pardon of their sins, they allege this reason, that otherwise he himself will
in some sort be deprived of the end to which he had respect, when he sent them
into the world. For it is as if some young plant should complain to the
Gardener, or Master of the plants, that having put him in the rank with others,
to bear some quantity of fruits, he would nevertheless cut it off at the root,
when it began to bud and to give some good hopes thereof: But concerning that
great tranquillity of Spirit, wherewith they received death, when it came in
such time, wherein the untimeliness of it, was no mark of the anger of God, it
came without doubt from hence that it was accompanied with the peace of God,
and some hope of happiness for their Souls. Otherwise, by the confession of
those with whom I now discourse, the being deprived of praising God after
death, and of perceiving any taste of his love toward them, should have given
them great fears, and inconceivable aversions. Some of the Pagans (as Socrates)
have sometimes supported themselves, by this meditation against the fears of
death, that either it did, or it did not take from them all sense and
perception of things. If it did not, those that die ought (if they be honest
men) to hope for Contentments after death, in the Conversation of those persons
that had gone hence before them; the company of Cepheus, Museus, Homer, Hesiod,
Ulysses, and Agamemnon without doubt as they imagined, would give them
incomparable satisfaction: if it did, there was no reason to fear death, since
it reduced men to a state of utter insensibility, but these persons never
tasted any thing, of the sweetness of the peace of God, nor of the Contentment
that arises from the assurance of his paternal love. Having therefore no
experience of any other good things, than such as this world affords, they
might well depart from life, as they themselves do express it, as from a
banquet, after they had been satisfied therewith, without much complaint that
they are obliged to leave the fruition, and use of it to those that were to
come after: but as for David, and other servants of God, to whom he had given
the beginnings, and foretasts of his glory, with what grief ought they to
receive the news of death, whenever it should be, if they had been not only
reeling, and staggering as were the Pagans, between the hope of seeing Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; and the fear of losing all kind of sense and perception; but
deeply and fully persuaded that in stead of being put into the full fruition,
of what they had had some foretasts here below, death would utterly ravish from
them even the total memory of it.

This same David testifies in many places, a very sensible and deep regret, and
trouble for being separated from the Ark of God, because 'twas there that God
gave demonstrations of his presence in an extraordinary manner. Nevertheless in
Caves and Deserts, and the wildest Forests, he might entertain himself with
God, and derive from the Fountains of his own Meditations as it appears he
often did, abundance of pleasant consolations to allay the trouble, which was
occasioned by his estrangment and separation from it. I pray you therefore if
he had believed that death would have taken from him all knowledge, and memory
of God for so many ages, what Lamentations would he have made? Or could he have
found words sufficient to express the anguish of his Soul on this occasion?
Ever and anon he enquires with some kind of impatience when shall I see the
face of my God? If by these words he understands the Ark, how much more ought
he to desire to see the face of God after his death: and with what unquietness
must he be filled, when he considers that death takes from him, not only the
pleasure of seeing the face of God, but even the memory of ever having seen him
or learned any thing of him, either in the Tabernacle or in the World? If he
understands by seeing the face of God, seeing him as he is seen in Heaven, how
could David make this wish or holy aspiration, if he were of this opinion that
sleep should lock up the eyes of his understanding for so long a time?
Certainly this was not the opinion of David, nor any of the faithful of that
time or age; their common opinion was that which is plainly expressed in the
Book of Ecclesiastes. That when man dies the body returns to the dust from
whence 'twas taken, and the Soul returns to God that gave it. Now to believe
that the Spirits of the faithful can be with God, without having any knowledge
of his presence, or enjoying one beam of his happiness, is a thing altogether
without reason or probability. At such times as God promises some particular
assistance to his faithful ones, he says I will be with you. And it is also
their common and ordinary wish for those to whom they wish grace and
benediction, the Lord be with you. If God then cannot be with any person,
without giving him some taste of his favors how can our spirits be with God
without enjoying some gracious effect of his presence?

Certainly though we had no other proof of the state of the faithful after
death, than those words of our Savior to the Thief that was Converted upon the
Cross, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, they would be sufficient
(unless we were willingly blind) to assure us that they are at rest; but it is
such a rest, as is accompanied with much content and joy: For that the word to
day ought to be taken in the ordinary and common sense, to signify the time
that was immediately to follow the death of our Lord, whilst his Soul remained
separate from his body, is a thing that cannot be doubted unless by those that
out of jocundness of humors abuse their reason. In what place of the New
Testament does our Savior, or any one else use it in any other sense? And
although the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews having met with it in Psalm.
95. 7, 8. to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts:
Understands it of the time of the Preaching of the Gospel of Salvation, is
there any probability that in imitation of him we should expound those words of
Jesus Christ after this manner? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, that in the
day of the Resurrection, I will receive thee to a participation of my own glory
in Paradise. If such comments be allowed, will there be any thing certain
either in the word of God, or Language of men? Does it not plainly appear that
our Lord seeing this Thief in anguish of Spirit, through the fear of the
judgment of God, the execution whereof he expected according to the common
sense, and apprehension of Conscience, immediately after death, was willing to
comfort him by the assurance of the pardon of his sins, and hope of happiness
which his Soul should enjoy as soon as it was separated from his Body? Either
the Spirit of Christ being dislodged from the body, ascended into Paradise or
not. If it did not ascend thither, our Lord promised nothing but that the Soul
of this person should on that very day be present with his Deity in Heaven. Now
though our Lord were God blessed for ever, there is no probability that he had
any regard to his Deity in the speaking of those words: For besides that his
Divinity was not then so clearly Revealed, as that from thence he should begin,
to give knowledge of what he was to that man, who can doubt but that seeing both
their Bodies, in one and the same condemnation, he was willing to raise the
hope of this Wretch, who in the midst of his anguish discovered some faith and
expectation from him, by the assurance that he gave him that within a few
moments, their spirits should be well near in the same Condition, in a place of
bliss and happiness? But let it be granted that he understands his Divinity: So
it is in my opinion that it cannot come into a sound mind, that Christ should
promise to the Soul of this person, to give it from that same hour the
enjoyment of Paradise, and yet notwithstanding it should have no knowledge of
the glory thereof, or the happiness that does attend it. Moreover it had been
much more to the purpose, to have been content to have consented to be mindful
of him, when he came into his Kingdom as he desired; then by great words to
give him occasion to hope for content and happiness near at hand, and
afterward fill this Soul, which he had made so desirous of happiness, with
nothing but darkness and forgetfulness. If the spirit of our Lord ascended into
Paradise, doubtless it was not to sleep there, for the little time of its
separation from the body, but to receive inexpressible Consolations in the
bosom of his Father. Otherwise to what purpose was it to transport it on high?
Had it not been more to the purpose to leave it buried in the same Tomb with
the Body, to the end that it might be there united again when the time should
come. Now if the Soul of Christ, could be sensible of some Contentments after
death, ours may be sensible of them also. And no inconsistance will be found
between their separation from the Organs of their Bodies, and the use of their
Powers and Capacities.

But what need is there of so many Texts, and of so much discourse in a case so
plain, that nature it self seems to have taught it us. For certainly, it is not
more generally believed among men, that their Souls are immortal and subsist
after the Body, than it is generally acknowledged that they subsist with
knowledge and sense either of some felicity, for those that lived in the
practice of Piety and Virtue; or of some punishment for those that have given
up themselves to Impiety and Vice. From thence comes the hopes of the Elysian
fields among the Pagans, and the fear of the Torments of Hell. From thence is
preserved among the Jews the expectation of Paradise, and the fear of the
bottomless Pit. Thence is produced among the Turks the opinion of their
Paradise and the fear of an infernal state, and that without attending the
Resurrection immediately after the dissolution of the Body, and the separation
of the Soul. Lastly, thence comes among Christians, to some a belief of
Purgatory, to others a hope of a better life than this, and to others dreadful
frights concerning what will betide them after death, when they are not in
their Consciences assured of the forgiveness of their sins. I say that nature
it self teaches it; Because things that are so universal, and concerning which
there is no controversy among Nations, whose inclinations are diverse, whose
professions are different, and whose Religions in all other things are directly
opposite, must have without doubt some common Foundation, and it cannot be
common in such sort as it is, unless it be established even in the very nature
of things: So that although it be not possible clearly, and distinctly to
explicate the reasons of it, yet they may be sufficiently seen darkly and in
gross, to impress upon the mind an indelible persuasion of it. For there are
multitudes of persons, that would find themselves much perplexed, if you should
oblige them to discourse particularly the reasons that have persuaded them,
that there is a natural difference between Vice and Virtue, the most able among
the Philosophers, have found some difficulty in freeing themselves from the
natural reasons, that do either prove, or deny the immortality of our Souls.
And among Christians there are none but Spirits much exercised in discourse,
which are fit by natural reason, to dispute for the Being and Providence of a
God against Atheists, and yet nevertheless, these things prove themselves so
smartly to our understandings, that the ignorant and vulgar themselves have an
abhorrence for those that make any doubt of them. Certainly the holy Scripture,
as I said in the beginning, is the only place from whence we may draw lights
sufficiently clear, to persuade our selves of this truth, by a persuasion that
will deserve the name of faith, and may be capable of giving, any sound
Consolation to our Consciences: But nevertheless I shall not scruple to say,
that if the holy Scripture had not spoken it so clearly, the belief of the
immortality of our Souls would have been sufficient to have satisfied our
reason, that they make use of their faculties, though the body should supply no
Organs unto them. For it is easy to conceive that there is in man, whilst he is
compounded of Soul and Body, an understanding faculty, which for some space of
time does not exercise its own proper Operations. Since this conjunction is
made in such sort, that the Organs of the one must serve to the Operation of
the faculties of the other; and that they do Operate either always, or for the
most part, by their Mediation, when the Organs come to be disordered or
hindered, it is necessary that the Operations of the mind do cease of themselves.
But that there is a substance that does actually exist separate from the Body,
which is endued with an understanding faculty, and nevertheless cannot use it
because it has no Body, is a thing in my apprehension absolutely
inconceivable: For it cannot actually exist unless it live, nor can we conceive
any sort of life in it, which does not include in the same thought, the use of
its faculties. You may easily conceive that the Body lives, though the man do
neither see nor discourse: Because life may subsist in a man without seeing or
discoursing* But you cannot imagine that the Body of a man lives, but you must
likewise imagine that it is nourished, and that his heart beats, or at least,
that the Spirits have some heat, and motion in the seat of life. So that the
faculty wherein life consists, will move and Act, though all the rest should be
laid to sleep; in the reasonable Soul then when it is separated from the Body,
what power will act if it have no use of that of the understanding? For there is
in them no power vital, animal, or natural like to those of our Bodies; and as
to that which we call the Locomotive, that is to say, the power by which we
move from place to place, if it have no use of its understanding there is no
reason to imagine that it will have any power of removing it self from one place
to another: a thing whereunto nature it self will furnish us with a Testimony,
sufficiently evident and authentic, in as much as it has not given to any
living Creature this power of moving it self, unless it be to Animals endued
with Phantasy, and certain appetites, which do necessarily require the removal
of the Body for their satisfaction, in such manner, that if there be in the
Soul, neither understanding nor appetite, it will be against all reason to
imagine in it any use of the Locomotive faculty. So that it will be the same
thing to say that the Soul dies with the Body, and will rise again with it, as
to say that it lives* and yet nevertheless performs none of the actions of life.

But this is not all, in this power of understanding that we here possess, are
imprinted certain habits which without doubt, have nothing common with the
Organs of the Body, unless it be as I have said above, that they have given
occasion to the intellect to exercise Contemplations and to form those
ratiocinations, and discourses by which these habits are obtained: Such is for
Example, the habit which in Philosophy we call by the name of wisdom, which
consists in a clear and certain understanding of the first principles of
things, and in the knowledge of Conclusions that depend thereon, in objects the
most Excellent and Noble that can be presented to the mind of Man. For that
this is an habit purely intellectual, reason teaches us, and experience
consents unto it. Because on the one side, it performs its Operations on
objects that have nothing of the nature of Bodies; and on the other side it is
not found in any subject, of the nature of those that have no powers but
Corporeal. For there was never found neither Horse, nor Elephant, nor any other
Animals devoid of Reason, in whom appeared the least ray of that which we call
wisdom: Either then these kind of habits, are wholly razed out by death, or
they remain in the Soul; now there is no good reason why we should say they are
obliterate: For though I willingly grant, that in some sort they intered the
intellect by the means of the Body, and that the Organs of the Body have
contributed something to those reasonings by which they are formed,
nevertheless they are in themselves totally intellectual, and have their proper
seat in the reason it self, as on the contrary although it be by the conduct of
the intellect, that the body learns to accustom it self to certain motions
directed by measure and art, as is for example the habit of Fencing well, or
Riding the great Horse, the habit is nevertheless Corporeal. So then when the
reasonable Soul comes to be separated from the Body, if the body by the
presence of the sensitive Soul alone, can subsist alive without it, there is
nothing can hinder, but that it may preserve some of those habits which it
obtained by the direction of the understanding, as they say there are some
Horses so well trained, that they will of themselves move regularly, though
there be no Rider to govern them. It Is much more likely that the Soul remaining
alive, and subsisting after the Body* the habits which are so perfectly proper
to it, should also remain, and subsist with it. If then they do subsist, as
it is altogether apparent, how will it be possible, that a Being effectively
living endued with faculties so excellent, and those faculties adorned with
habits so comely, should remain so many ages, without being awakened in any
manner to discover them by some Operations? Is it not the property of habits to
incline the faculties to action, to facilitate the action to which they do
incline them, yea, and in some manner to spur them thereunto? And since that
man is a being naturally active, and that it is the Soul that gives him this
activity, and since that which makes the Soul incline it self more to one
thing, than another in its actions, is because its habits give him a tendency
that way: Why is it that the Soul cannot preserve in it self, when separated,
the activity that it Communicated to the Body, and that its proper habits
should not have the power they had before to bend it in its actions that way to
which they themselves are inclined.

But let us not fasten our selves on the teaching, and institutions of nature.
Let us consult the Analogy of Religion: Certainly all believers have Communion
with Christ. And this Communion on their parts consists in faith, whereby they
receive him and on his part, in the Communication of his Spirit, by which he
comforts and sanctifies them. Now this Communion is so strict, and close that
it never suffers any separation. And as the death of the body in our Savior
did not hinder in him, the personal union of the Divine nature with the humane,
so that the saying of the Ancient Church is true, that what Christ once takes,
in that regard he never leaves; so the death of our Bodies hinders not the
mysterious union of our Savior with us. In such manner, that those that he
has once taken for his members cannot but always remain so. Therefore, even
after death, the Communication of his Spirit of holiness, and Consolation
abides with us. Now what is this Spirit of holiness, and Consolation which does
never comfort, or sanctify us? Or what is this holiness and comfort, if it
gives us no sense of it self or us. When any member of the body becomes
mortified, it is not reputed a member of it, because it is not esteemed a
member, but by reason of its Communion in the same life, and with the same Soul
which is the principle both of life and action. If then the Soul do not partake
in the Spirit of Christ, who alone animates the whole mysterious body composed
of himself, and the faithful that he has redeemed, how can it be his member?
And how can it partake of him if it have no use of any of its faculties? For
the participation of the Spirit consists either in those actions to which it
moves, and excites us, or in the habits which it impresses upon the faculties
of our minds. Now there is no action where the faculties are deeply asleep: for
it is the property of sleep, to arrest and intercept the action of our
faculties; and as to habits, it is neither reasonable, nor imaginable that they
should be preserved, so many ages in a subject, where they never discover
themselves by any Operations; the body may certainly in a sense, retain the
quality of a member of Christ* in the dust of the grave, although it feel no
effect of the Communication of this Spirit, because though it have immediately
and by it self no connection with the head, it may have it at least by the
mediation of the Soul, which is the other part of the whole which both together
they do compound. For the Soul by the relation that it has to it in that
respect, always considers it as a dependence, or appendix of his essence, in as
much as without it, it cannot constitute any subject, and as an essence on
which it self in some sort depends: For as much as without it, it cannot
constitute a complete man. So that the Soul having an effective, and immediate
Communion with Christ by the participation of his Spirit, the Body also retains
some connection with the head, at least mediately, and by virtue of the
interposition of the Soul: But if all connection between Christ and the Soul
comes to be broken, which will certainly happen, if the Spirit do not
Communicate to it, neither in habits nor actions, the Soul will by it self
cease to be a member of Christ; and the body cannot be so by its intervention.
I conclude then touching this first point, that the Soul separate from the body
has understanding and perception, and by consequence, that the Souls of the
faithful departed hence, do enjoy some degrees of felicity and glory. Let us
see whither it may proceed or what may be the degrees thereof, as far as the
word of God, and the Analogy of faith will inform us.

What is the happiness of faithful Souls, after their separation from the Body;
and what is the place where they are gathered together, or assembled.
The Second Discourse.
BEcause the place whereinto the Souls of the faithful are assembled, at the
time of their separation does contribute without doubt, very much to their
contentment, and when we shall have decided where it is, it will be much more
easy to speak of the nature of happiness it self; before we proceed to enquire
into the degrees of the happiness of good men, it seems necessary to search and
examine what is the place which is appointed for their abode and residence. To
the end therefore that I may there begin my discourse, it must be known that
many have been of this opinion, that the Souls of the Patriarchs, and Fathers
that lived under the Old Testament were not received into Heaven till the
manifestation of the New, and that by the ascension of Christ on high,
admission thither was granted to them. And the principal foundation that they
have for this opinion, is that passage in the ninth Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, where it is said, Verse. 8. that the way into the holiest of all
was not yet made manifest under the time of legal dispensation, whilst the
first Tabernacle was standing. Having therefore banished Souls from the
habitation of Heaven, for all the time that ran by till the ascension of our
Savior: and it being necessary to provide for them, some certain habitation to
the end they might not remain wanderers, and vagabonds, because they did not
believe any place more proper to mark out for them, than the bosom of Abraham,
of which our Savior speaks in the Gospel, they have made no difficulty to
determine, that is, there they have made their abode all this long tract of
time, only they have found themselves much perplexed, when they have been to
determine precisely in what part of the World, the bosom of Abraham should be.
For some have placed it in the near neighborhood of Hell, although our Lord
put a great deep between them, others have made it the Porch or Antichamber of
Heaven; to conclude, others not knowing well what to hold or affirm, have left
the Question undecided.

Now as to what concerns the bosom of Abraham: as when our Lord says, Mat. 8.
11. that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. He never intended to design, or determine the place
where these Patriarchs are together, so that if the place where they are, may
be gathered from this Text, it is from those words [in the Kingdom of Heaven.]
And not from those, [and shall sit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;] So there is
no appearance that he intended to determine any certain place by those words in
Abraham's bosom: Because in his time there were two manners of eating together,
the one by sitting round a Table as we now do; the other by lying on beds, in
such fashion that their heads were near each other, and one did repose himself
as it were in the bosom of his neighbor: in the one of those Texts, the Lord
has respect to one of these customs; and in the other to the other, to signify
one and the same thing, (viz.) that they shall eat with Abraham. And because to
eat together after this manner is a Testimony of a Familiar Conversation, and
of a Society full of friendship, to signify that Lazarus had this strict
familiarity with Abraham, he says that he was in his bosom: as to signify that
others shall enjoy the same sweet society with him, he says they shall be with
him at Table. Which shows without doubt that they must be in the same place,
but does in no manner determine, whether this place be above the Heavens, or
beneath the earth.

As to the meaning of the other Text, surely those that make use of it, to
exclude the Spirits of the Fathers from entering into Heaven, before the
Ascension of Christ, are deceived in the interpretation of it. The Apostle
means nothing thereby, but that by the Ceremony of the High Priests entering
once a year into the Holy of Holies, with Blood for the expiation of Sins, the
holy Spirit did give them sufficiently to understand, that the true High Priest
was not as yet entered into the Sanctuary of Heaven, and that the means by which
that was to be accomplished, was not yet made evident or revealed; and indeed
it could not be made evident, but by the coming of the Thing it Self: now the
Thing it Self, and the Ceremony could not subsist at the same time; for the one
had the place of a Figure, the other of Reality and Truth: and the Figure and
Truth are appointed for diverse times, and differing dispensations: the Truth
therefore existing, the Figure necessarily ceases; And therefore as long as the
Figure did by the appointment of God subsist, the Truth could not be presumed
actually exhibited: But be the interpretation that they have given to this
Text, What it will, it will be of no great importance, whether they be deceived
in it, yea or no, since that which the most part of them hold is a constant
truth, and the whole World are at an agreement with them in it: And it is, that
since our Lord Jesus is ascended on high, the entrance into the Heavens has
been open, not only to the faithful that have departed since him, but also
generally to all those that have lived under the dispensation of the times
passed, as well since, as before the publication of the Law upon the mountain.
For what does it concern me that Abraham and the other Patriarchs, Fathers,
Believers, and good men that lived in former times, had not the advantage of
entering into Heaven, till our Savior ascended thither, since I my self, shall
enter there at death, and meet them all there to partake with them in the same
joy. I say, what does it import me that God has at other times taken the Souls
of Believers, (as Elias speaks of his own) and has lodged them apart in some
place at a distance from him until the ascension of our Savior, since that
when he takes mine, he will place it in his Sanctuary? But because all
Christians are not of this Opinion and that some have thought, that although
the faithful after death, do enter into a deep Repose, accompanied with
Consolation, and joy marvellously sensible: nevertheless, they will not be
permitted to enter into the presence of God in the Heavens, nor to enjoy the
Vision of him, until the Resurrection; I think my self obliged briefly to
examine the Texts and Reasons upon which they do, establish their Persuasion.

They say therefore, that the holy Scripture does ordinarily remit us to the
Resurrection for the accomplishment of our hopes, and that it is on that day
alone, that our Lord does promise to give Rewards to those that believe in him,
as may be seen Joh. 6. and in many other places of like nature: even some have
made no scruple to allege to this purpose, that Text of St. Peter, where he
says that Christ was quickened in the Spirit, by which also he went and
preached unto the Spirits in Prison: because although he there speaks of the
Spirits of those that lived long before the Revelation of the new Covenant,
nevertheless according to their opinions, there is a likeness of Reason, and
that we ought to make the same judgment of Believers now, and those of times
past in this matter; and behold well near how they explain themselves: There is
none, say they, that is either rewarded or punished with those Rewards or
Punishments that are appointed by the Laws until the Sentence be given, and
pronounced judicially: now the Judgment that must pass judicially upon us, is
differred till the last day; so that it will be contrary to all ordinary forms
of Administering Justice, that the Spirits of Believers should be admitted to
the Vision of God, before our Lord shall have pronounced: Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning of the World,
for I was an hungry, etc. Therefore as Criminals were kept in Prison (and
that is it which is signified by the word Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19.) until the
pronunciation of Judgment; and as they are not brought forth in public to be
punished, till after Judgment is pronounced; so it is reasonable, that some
place be appointed for the Reception of those which shall be absolved at the
Coming of Christ, which is different from the place wherein they shall receive
their Reward; but as those that are in Prison are racked, and tormented in
their Consciences by the fear of Judgment, and the punishment that does attend
them, (which is properly in their opinion the pain that the damned at this time
endure) so it is reasonable, that those that expect their Reward in the place
of Repose, should enjoy Consolation in the assurance of their future absolution
and hopes of Glory; Now if this Consideration be valid for the Fathers of the
most ancient times, without doubt it will be as good for the faithful of the
new Covenant, as for those of the old.

As to this Text of Scripture, I observe that it is understood after diverse
manners, whereof among others, there are two worthy of Consideration: for some
have thought that by the Spirit of Christ is meant his Soul: by his preaching,
the knowledge that he gave to the Souls of the ancient Believers, of the
propitiation that he made upon the Cross: by the word which we translate
Prison, a kind of Watchtower, wherein these Souls expected the Redemption
hoped for, according to the promises that had been given them concerning it;
they suppose then the Souls of the ancient Believers in condition something
like those that are set in Sentinel, on some high place in a besieged City, to
discover afar off, from whence, and when succor will appear unto them, only
they put this difference, that the hopes of succor in a place besieged is
always mixed with doubts, because of the uncertainty of all human Counsels and
Events, and this doubt is not without fear, nor fear without unquietness, nor
by consequent without anxiety and perturbation, whereas the Souls of the holy
Persons of passed ages, never having any doubt concerning the promise of God,
have possessed a hope altogether assured, and by consequent a tranquillity very
profound, and a contentment without any mixture of afflictions: others have
thought that by the Spirit of Christ, must be meant his Divine Nature, by his
preaching, the invitation to Repentance, that he caused to be made, in the days
of Noah; And by the Spirits that are in Prison, (for they believe that to
accommodate this Hebrew phrase to our Language, it is necessary to supply these
words, which are, or which are now) the Souls of those which would not hearken
to this invitation, and who by reason of their obstinacy, have been put under
chains of darkness, in those horrible Prisons, where they expect their final
punishment; Now to make here a small Digression, and to return again after a
little while, to the preceding Question: I say, that whether of these two
interpretations we do embrace, it will evidently conclude, that Souls are not
destitute of all knowledge after death, for if we fasten on the first, the
Souls of the faithful expect with great longing, the revelation of the
Redemption of Jesus Christ: and if we follow the second, Offenders do not use
always to sleep in their holes, the worm of their Conscience, and the fear of
what is to come, will awaken them. Besides, if the Souls of the wicked lose all
sense, at their going out of the Body, there will be no need of assigning to
them, one certain and common Prison, they will be sufficiently well disposed of
for the expectation of Judgment, in whatsoever part of the World they shall be
found. But let us return to the Question in hand. I think this second
Interpretation much the better, and most agreeable both to the intention, and
words of the Apostle: and if I should hold my self to that, I should have
nothing to answer, but that although the Prison, and place of punishment, be
different sufficiently often, yet they are not always so; sometimes Offenders
are punished in the Gaols, and Prisons wherein they are kept, expecting the
sentence of the Judge; and in the time that St. Peter wrote, 'twas a thing
sufficiently common, among the Ramans and Greeks, to make use of the same place
first as a Prison, and then as the Theater of punishment: so that this Text
proves not at all, that the Souls of Unbelievers are not now kept in Hell,
although one day they must there be tormented for their Crimes; And by the same
reason it will not follow, that the Souls of Believers are not now assembled in
the Heavens, although that must be one day, the place of their recompense and
their glory; But let us give this honor to those that have proposed this first
interpretation, to see if by receiving it, it can be proved that the Souls of
the faithful have not at present their habitation in the Heavens: Although the
Vision of God, in which consists our supreme happiness, must be chiefly
Communicated in the Heavens, nevertheless the Court of Heaven, and the Vision
of God may be things distinct. I say God may make himself seen out of Heaven,
if he pleases; and if he pleases, he may receive a person to Heaven, who shall
not see God, by that Vision in which consists the top and highest part of
happiness. Let us put the Case, that the Souls of the faithful have in other
ages, or are at present, put in some place as in a Watchtower, those of the
faithful of times past in expectation of the Redemption of the Cross: and those
of the faithful of the time present, in expectation of the appearance of the
same Redeemer: this place may very well be in the Heavens, though the Vision of
the glory of God be not yet Communicated to them: and if we compare this Text
so interpreted with that, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise, there
will be much more reason to believe that the place of this Sentinel is in
Heaven, than any where else: for the Paradise, whither the Soul of our Lord
Ascended is in the Heaven, and there by consequence, are the Souls of those to
whom he will give the knowledge of his satisfaction.

As to what concerns those other Texts, wherein the Scripture sends us to the
day of the blessed Resurrection, for the obtaining of our Reward, it seems not
at all necessary to understand them in such manner, as may persuade us to
exclude faithful Souls from Heaven: There is no term more usual to represent
the glory, which we expect on that very happy day, than that of triumph. Let us
then compare the Condition of them that have formerly Triumphed at Rome, with
the faithful that expect the Reward of Glory: they first of all fought at a
distance from the City in strange Countries, some nearer and some farther off,
according as the emergency of things, and the extent of the Empire did require,
after they had vanquished their Enemies, they were permitted to enter into the
City of Rome as private persons, there to demand the charges of the
Commonwealth, or the honor of Triumph; the Senate first appointed it, and no
man ever triumphed at Rome without consent of the Senate, or by authority of
the People: After a permission of Triumph was obtained, they went out of the
City to return again in some short time, not as private Persons, without any
Attendance or Ornaments, but as victorious Captains, and Conquerors, with
solemn pomp and magnificence; Wherefore then after the Believer has fought
here below, against the Enemies of the glory of God and his Salvation, and is
escaped victorious in all his Combats, may he not be permitted to enter, as a
private person stripped of his body, into the heavenly Jerusalem, not to demand
a Triumph, for that is already determined, but to expect the day on which it
must be Celebrated? in the mean whiles passing its happy time, in the company
of those Saints and Angels, which are in the same expectation. The same thing
is practiced toward Ambassadors, who first enter as private persons into the
capital Cities of those Empires, whither their Embassies are addressed, and
soon after go forth, to return again on another day, in the glory of a great
and courtly Attendance: and at the Entry of Princes, when they return from some
Conquest or some glorious Expedition, the same method of proceeding is
frequently observed; the Pomp and Magnificence is differred to some solemn day,
but in the mean while they live at home with their ordinary Court: To conclude,
the same thing having been used toward our Lord Jesus, it may not be thought
strange if God make use of it toward Believers. For first of all He fought
upon the Cross, and by his courage, became victorious, his Body being laid in
the Grave, his Soul ascended into Paradise, and if I may so say, without any
noise: and afterward being returned, and his Body raised, he was carried up on
high, mounted on the Clouds, and entered in triumph into Heaven, among the
applauses of happy Spirits, and the acclamations of Angels: in the mean time,
it is no wonder if the Scripture speaks something more rarely, of the reception
of Souls into Heaven, than of the glorious day of the blessed Resurrection: for
those beginnings of our happiness, which we enjoy immediately after death, are
indeed very mavelous, if we consider them precisely and in themselves: but
they are obscure, imperfect, and of little or no luster, if we compare them
with the splendour and magnificence, in which we shall see the accomplishment of
it; therefore as the promises of reward made to Jesus Christ, for his obedience
to the death of the Cross, do properly respect his ascension into Heaven, and
his exaltation to the right hand of his Father in glory: so that St. Paul
refers it thither, Phil. 2. that hinders not, but that his Soul might obtain
the right of entering into Paradise, during the time of its separation from the
body, and that he did make use of it; so that although the promises of Reward,
have a particular respect to the Resurrection, that does not infer, that our
Souls are deprived of the liberty, of entering into the heavenly Sanctuary,
there to live in the expectation of it. And if any of us, according to the
manner of the ancient Romans, should adopt any one for his Child, with
resolution to declare this adoption publicly, and according to Law, upon some
certain day, to the end that he may be capable of succeeding to our Estate and
Honors, nothing hinders but that in the mean time, he may lodge in our House,
though perhaps he may keep a little more close, and private till the day
appointed for this public and solemn action or installation.

It Is true there are some that make some scruple of lodging the Souls of those
in Heaven, that God has raised up, with purpose to permit them to live yet a
while in the World, as that of Lazarus and some others. For what likelihood is
there, say they of bringing them back from that place of glory and happiness,
to one so wretched as is that of our Conversation on this Earth? Had it not
been much better, never to have given them any taste of the joys of Heaven,
than to pluck them thence, and return them to live among the infirmities and
inconveniences of the present life? They are therefore willingly inclined to
say: that it would have been more advisable to have assigned them an
Habitation in some place, whereof the deprivation would neither be so sensible
nor so prejudicial. But methinks these men give themselves a great deal of
trouble to no purpose. For if there be any inconvenience therein, is it not
easy for God to appoint some particular Habitation for those, and in the mean
time receive all others into the Heavens, to the end that none may go thence
till on the final Resurrection: A score of Souls it may be, which were to be
reunited to their Bodies, by a particular dispensation must they give Law to so
many Millions of Spirits, as are not at all subject to it; nor must have
experience of any other Resurrection, than that of the general and last day? To
which we may add, that although they should have been received into Heaven,
seeing that in their first Creation they were made for the glory of God, and on
other accounts have so many obligations to him because he has redeemed them,
they will have no reason to complain, if they suffer something extraordinary
for his service. Scipio Africanus after very glorious Triumphs, went to War for
the obtaining of Foreign Conquests, under the Authority of his Brother, and in
the quality of his Lieutenant, for the sole love that he bore to him, and to
assist him in arriving at the highest dignities of the Commonwealth. In which
he suffered some diminution of his own, besides the incommodities which he
received in his own person, and the sensible griefs that he had experience of
by the captivity of his Son. The Angels themselves descend from Heaven, where
they enjoy the vision of God, with unspeakable contentments, to the end that
they Minister to the Protection, and Salvation of believers: To conclude in
whatsoever place those Souls be lodged, which by a particular Resurrection
return again to the Habitation of their bodies, they are delivered from their
infirmities as long as they are separated from them, and it seems probable that
they cannot re-enter there without some disadvantage by that change of
condition. Wherefore since they cannot return into the world without some
abatement to their felicity, it cannot be more troubleous to them to be brought
back from the Heavens, than from the Elementary Region.

If it were reasonable absolutely to decide this Question, touching the place
where the faithful are received after death, by simple reasonings drawn either
from the probability of things, or even from the harmony that the parts of
Theology and Religion have among themselves, there are those that are clear
enough and pregnant enough, to persuade us to believe, that they are received
into the Heavens; for since as St. Paul teaches us, our Conversation is in
Heaven, and we have the honor to be Citizens thereof, for what reasons are we
so long exiled from our Country? What sin remains unpardoned which should
hinder our return to the place whence we are descended? Since we are exhorted
to tend thither and henceforth to think of nothing but Heavenly things, why are
we so long deprived of the fruit of our thoughts and desires? How is it that
the Gospel labors so powerfully to beget in us a desire after it, if it give
us not also the enjoyment of it? Since we are dead to the World and our life is
hid with Christ in God, why do we not go to converse where our life is kept in
reserve for us? Since our head is there, and the Communion that we have with
him is so strict and indissoluble, wherefore does not he assemble his members
about him, although by his wise dispensation some part of them remain yet a
while on Earth? Since he has prayed that where he is we may be also, why is
the fruit of this prayer which without doubt God did hear, differred for so
many ages? Since he has said that he went thither to prepare a place for us,
why should we doubt that he does receive us to the place that he has designed
and marked out for us? To conclude since he shows himself to those that enquire
not after him, why does he depart or withdraw himself so far from those, that
seek and desire him with so great passions, and affections? When Mary cast her
self at his feet to embrace him, he said touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended to my Father. Without doubt because this woman transported with the
pleasure of seeing him raised again, was willing as we say to rejoice and
congratulate with him, in so glorious a Victory, and because she and his other
disciples, had hitherunto had some hope, that the Lord would remain on Earth
with them, to re-establish the Kingdom of Israel, she was ravished with joy, as
if henceforth there were nothing that could hinder, but that she might enjoy
his presence according to her wish, and content there with all the desires of
her Soul. For that reason he repressed this heat and ardour, and tells her that
it is not yet done, it remains as yet that he ascend on high, ere they must see
the accomplishment of their expectations. For according to his admirable
goodness and wisdom, he knew so to dispose his actions, and discourses to his
servants, and to accommodate them for a little time, to the quality of their
knowledge and understanding, but at this time that he is ascended upon high:
wherefore in expectation that he will descend thence to raise our Bodies,
should he not permit our Souls to go cast themselves at his feet, and refresh
themselves with the pleasant enjoyment of his presence; all these
considerations certainly ought to make very great impressions upon our minds,
but that which ought fully to persuade them is, that the holy Scriptures given
us most evident, and indubitable instructions concerning it. Let us therefore
choose some passages very express, and which will render the thing wholly
manifest.

St. Paul in the place that I alleged above says, that if the earthly House
of our Body be dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House eternal in the
Heavens. And we have seen above that he speaks of what happens to the faithful
immediately after death, and not only of what they expect at the last
Resurrection. Will any one say that these words [in the Heavens] do not signify
the place but the condition, that is to say, that Habitation is called
Heavenly, not because it is in the Heavens, but because it is very holy and
happy? Certainly this neither can nor must be. For besides that we may not have
recourse to interpretations which seem a little forced, without an absolute and
invincible necessity, he says it is an house Eternal in the Heavens. Now the
Court of Heaven which is appointed for the faithful, may well be called Eternal
although it be necessary that Souls leave it for a moment at the time of the
Resurrection: Because things that are done for a very little space of time, and
only by dispensation, are not at all considered; and so small an interval
hinders not, but that we say, they have always continued in that same place.
Even as we do not quit our dwelling, by making a voyage into the Country, and
although the Angels come sufficiently often on Earth, yet we do not cease to
name them the Angels of Heaven; but if Souls be in any place out of Heaven,
until the day of the Resurrection, that Habitation being to be abandoned for
ever, it cannot in any wise be said to be Eternal. The same Apostle says, that
he desired to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Forasmuch as it was much
better for him: without doubt Jesus Christ is in the Heavens; and if St. Paul
had not believed that he should go thither when he died, but that he must be
confined in some other place of the world wherever it be, out of the presence
of our Lord, he had not served himself of such expressions; our Lord promised
the Thief, that he should that day be with him in Paradise: now Paradise is in
Heaven, and although our Lord did soon redescend from thence to reunite himself
to his body, the thief without all controversy continued there, having no need
or occasion to return to this Earth. In the Book of the Revel. Chap. 14. Verse.
4. All the faithful departed hence, are represented under the number of an
hundred and forty and four thousand gathered together in the Heavens, in the
company of the Lamb and following him whithersoever he goes. Now there is no
probability that God would represent to his Prophet Visions of this nature for
the confirmation, and consolation of his Children, if they were contrary to the
truth of things. In the Epistle to the Hebrews it is said that we are come to
the assembly, and Church of the first born whose names are written in Heaven:
Now it is not the manner to enrol and make men free of a City, and soon after
exile them for a very long time into the Country: Besides it is apparent that
this word, written or enrolled, signifies in this Text assembled, for here are
no public Rolls or Records in the Heavens, where the names and qualities of
believers are actually written: But because those that are admitted to the
privileges of Freemen in a City, are wont first of all to be Enrolled, after
that manner of speaking, which I have before remarked, where that which goes
before, is put for that which follows, and that which follows, for that which
goes before, the holy Apostle calls those written or enrolled, which are
actually received into the possession of their Heavenly freedom; and truly it
seems to me that there is no reason to doubt of a thing whereof God has been
pleased to give most express assurance in all the periods and parts of the holy
Scriptures. For why think we, did he raise and Translate Enoch before the Law,
Elias under the legal Economy, and Jesus Christ under the Gospel, so
apparently and manifestly that no man could doubt but that they are carried to
Heaven, if it were not to this end that we might raise our desires, thoughts,
and affections thither after them? I very well know that these things have a
particular regard to the hope of the Resurrection; but I do also maintain that
God would not have drawn the hearts of men so visibly to himself, if he had had
any intention to command their Souls separated from their Bodies, to remain I
know not where, very far from the place whereof he had raised in them very
strange and pleasant hopes and expectations. And this good God which has had
so much care by all means to provide for the comfort of our faith, would not
have commanded us to embark with so much Courage and Resolution upon a Sea so
troublesome, and full of darkness and Abysses as is death, if he had not
clearly showed us the Haven, where our Souls must arrive after such troublesome
agitations.

The other point which concerns the quality, and degree of the blessedness of
those Souls that are gathered together in Heaven, will put us to some little
more trouble; whether it be seriously to search what may be said concerning it
from the word of God, which speaks not so plainly of it, or whether it be to
contain our selves modestly within the bounds of what it has revealed, and of
what we can comprehend by the Analogy of Faith, without passing the limits of
it. I shall endeavor notwithstanding to do the one and the other; I must lay
down here for the foundation of our discourse, that the Souls of the faithful
are put by death into a state of perfect sanctification, seeing they enter into
Heaven. For nothing enters there that does pollute, or foul: In short, seeing
that sin either in Bodily affections, such as the Schools call the Irascible
and Concupiscible, or in the habits of the mind it self, and in the evil
dispositions of the understanding and will, death must enfranchise them from
subjection to the one and the other. For first of all the Soul being delivered
from the body, it can be no longer subject to its affections: and that among
others is the reason why we die, that the affections and desires of our members
which have not been perfectly mortified by the grace of God, which we receive
here below, might entirely be extinguished by the destruction and dissolution
of the members themselves, which it is like the Apostle would signify when he
says the body is dead because of sin, that is to say, mortal or subject to
death, to the end that sin might be extinguished. Moreover as to what concerns
the habits of the Spirit, as it was that of God that began to dissipate them
here below, to the end that he might introduce those that are better, so it is
he himself that does altogether cleanse us of them after death, and impress
upon us a perfect and complete sanctity: Now complete Holiness does necessarily
suppose some perfection of knowledge. For we are so framed that the love and
affection of our wills is generated by the light that is in our understandings,
and this Frame or Constitution being essential to our Souls, and by consequence
absolutely inseparable from them, in what place or in whatsoever state they be,
it must be that they be such as well after as before their separation from the
Body; for it cannot be conceived, either that we can love those things that we
do not at all understand; or that we cannot love those which we do know to be
truly lovely, or that we love more or less in proportion to the knowledge we
have of them. In the mean time, the perfection of knowledge depends of two
things; the one is the object which is presented to us, the other is the manner
in which we receive it: the object may have the advantage of being presented to
us after an excellent manner, but if we be not well disposed to receive it, the
effect which it ought to produce in our Souls is not produced at all. And on
the other side, we may be well disposed to receive it, but if it be not
presented to us in good manner, we cannot derive those lights from it which
otherwise we might. Now as to the disposition of the faculties of our Souls, we
do here suppose, that after death they will be perfectly, well constituted,
since they will be delivered from sin by the extinction of the lusts and
desires of the Body, and be rendered incomparably more strong, and luminous
(than naturally they could be) by the presence of the Holy Ghost. It remains
now that we consider what may be the objects that present themselves to the
contemplation of Souls, thus qualified and prepared.

It seems to me, that we may boldly say they are necessarily of three kinds.
The first are such as our Souls may have had some knowledge of whilst we lived,
and whereof we continue to retain the memory. The second contain those works of
God which are presented to their eyes. The third are the persons that will
there be seen, and the Communion which they will have on high, with those other
Spirits, which are found there. Now as touching memory, I think there is no
person, which does not easily conceive that we have two sorts thereof; For
their is one that consists in the retention of things sensible and singular,
with their circumstances and particularities, according to which our memories
received the images of them which we recall in our Fantasy, when occasions are
presented, or our Spirits engage themselves in the search of them, for there is
no person that knows not by experience* what it is to review his memory, there
to recover the Idea's, or Images of diverse sensible things, which are there
laid in reserve: almost as a person passes his eyes over the Books in his
Closet, to find one there that he has present use of: But there is another
also which consists in things more universal, and which have their foundation
in reason and discourse. For there never were men which have not or might not
make this Observation in themselves, that after having as it seemed so
forgotten certain conclusions which at some other times we had known, that at
the first attempt they did not present themselves to our thoughts; but when we
come attentively to consider the principles whereon they depend, immediately we
find the footsteps of our reasonings, and without any great difficulty return
to the consequences that we had drawn from them, in such manner that there is a
like difference between a man that never knew science, and another that has
had knowledge of it, but the discontinuance of Meditating thereon has a little
obscured the Idea's thereof in his mind, as there is between a man which never
was in a Country, and another who after having exactly known it, has been a
stranger to it for some few years; the one finds much difficulty in obtaining
the knowledge of it, and if he wander never so little from the beaten rode,
behold him utterly bewildred, the other immediately recollects himself, and the
least thing which presents it self before his eyes, replaces in his memory the
Situation of the whole Country, and if I may so say repaints in his mind the
Map of a Province. As to what concerns this first sort of memory, it is a
corporeal faculty in us, whereof I desire no other argument but that it is found
among beasts: It Is very true that as the most part of those faculties that we
have in common with beasts, are more excellent in us, our memory without doubt
is more strong, and of larger capacity than theirs, and our imagination more
clear and full of Light; but so it is that Dogs, and Horses, and Elephants, and
Foxes know infinite things by their figures, and colors, and other sensible
marks of that kind, and it is also seen that sometimes they act by simple
memory, although they have no objects before their senses. Therefore seeing
it is a Corporeal faculty, it is to be presumed that death has great power upon
it when it dissolves and universally ruins all the Organs of the Body. So that
I do not doubt* but that our Souls do forget an infinite number of the little
singularities, and particularities of sensible things at their departure hence,
which we easily remember whilst we are living here: But as to the other,
because it is a power of the Soul it self, as endowed with reason, it must most
necessarily remain. So that we may by no means doubt, whether they do remember
that they have here seen a World, and learnt by the Preaching of the Gospel,
that the Sun of God came thither to save sinners. They will Remember that there
is a Church on Earth, and that they were members of it, having believed in this
Redeemer. And generally all the Doctrines of the Gospel, wherein they had been
instructed, for their Consolation and Salvation, will remain most firmly
impressed upon their memories: and that it is so appears by the Book of the
Revelation, where the Holy Spirit attributes unto them, the memory of their
Martyrs, and charity for the Church, and gratitude toward God, and the Lamb
for the benefit of their Redemption, and other things of like kind. Concerning
which I conceive it will be necessary to make two Considerations. The first is,
that if in the ordinary Preaching of the Gospel, or in the study of things that
do concern Religion, the minds of the faithful have received any impressions
less true than might be desired, (as there is none so advanced in the knowledge
of this Divine truth, who is not deceived on diverse occasions) at death they
shall be delivered from those errors: For that which occasions our mistake in
these matters, is that although we very well believe the principal and
fundamental Articles of Religion, and if we know well how to draw our
Conclusions from these principles, we should certainly preserve our selves from
these false impressions, so it is that we commit many faults in the conduct of
our reason, and join together persuasions that do not well agree: Whereof we do
not see the discord and contradiction, for besides that naturally since the
fall, there is some weakness in our discursive faculty, especially when there
is any Question of things that are a little distant from their principles, we
there mingle our passions and our interests, and permit our selves easily to be
carried to that natural obstinacy, which causes us to hold fast the things that
we have once preconceived, even without any appearance of reason. The Souls of
the faithful being therefore delivered, not only from the trouble of the Body,
but also from all sorts of vices and passions, and endued by the presence of
the Holy Spirit with a light totally new, they then find no difficulty to
discern truth from falsehood, and by consequence to deliver themselves from all
false opinions, wherewith they may have been prepossessed. The second
consideration is that although we have been instructed, in the belief of the
fundamental truths of the Gospel, nevertheless we do not as yet comprehend them
perfectly enough, there remains always some darkness in our conceptions, some
remnants of incredulity which shake sometimes this way, and sometimes that way,
the things that the word of God has established in our belief. Whereas
separate Souls see all these truths so clearly, that there remains no darkness
in their knowledge of them: So that they lose their errors if they had any
before, they retain the belief of things certain and veritable, which they had
already received into their minds, and those very objects which they had known
before, they shall perceive by a view incomparably more distinct, more perfect
and more clearly enlightened.

As to what concerns the Works of God which are presented to their
Contemplation, if they were to remain within the compass of this Elementary
World, it were to be presumed, that active and awake as we suppose them, they
would employ themselves in a great measure, in the Contemplation of the most
excellent things of the Universe, to the end they might observe the mavelous
Perfections of their Author; Even as I believe that, it is not to be doubted,
that the Angels that God employs here and there in all parts of the World, have
derived an infinite number of good and excellent knowledge thence. I know not
whether I may dare to say that, as the Apostle teaches us, that the Angels are
present in our Assemblies, for which reason, he commands that women behave
themselves there with humilty, that they may not offend their eyes by any
indecency: Souls may be found there voluntarily present to entertain with us a
holy Communion as far as they can, but we have already said and proved that
they are assembled in Heaven, and even in that Heaven where our Lord Jesus is
in magnificent glory: Now it is not my intention carefully to enquire, how this
Heaven is made, and those that permit themselves, to be transported by the
elevation of their thoughts, do much more deserve the blame of rashness and
presumption, than the praise of subtility or sublimity in their Speculations. I
will only say two things which cannot be accused of too much curiosity; the one
is, that as if ascending from Earth to the more raised parts of the World, we
find that progress is made for the better: The Water being more transparent
than the Earth, the Air more transparent than the Water, the Fire more pure
than the Air, and yet the Heavens more pure and luminous than the Fire, we
should imagine, as it is very reasonable, that things always advance after the
same manner and proportion, certainly the Heaven of Heavens must be
incomparably beautiful and of a structure most excellent. The other is, that
God having built this lower World to be the Habitation of man, nevertheless
made it so beautiful, that on which side soever we turn our eyes, if we be
attentive, we find not only matter of satisfaction, but also of admiration,
surely seeing he has chosen this Heaven for his Habitation, it must be that
the whole Constitution thereof must be infinitely more glorious: whereupon I
make this Consideration. A Pagan Philosopher sometimes entertained this
Meditation, that if some one had been nourished, till the age of five and
twenty years in some Cavern where he had never seen the light, and where he
could learn nothing of the form of the World, nor of the things that are done
there, and that if all of a sudden, he should be taken thence, and the Heavens
and the Earth, the Sun the Moon, the Stars, the Clouds, the force and power of
the Winds, and in general all that is peculiarly worthy of knowledge in all the
parts of nature, be showed unto him, it is indubitable that he would fall into a
very great admiration, and that he would immediately cry out, this is the Work
and Habitation of the Gods themselves. And there is no Person that Considers
the thing as it ought, which does not easily apprehend that this Philosopher
had reason: For although the custom of seeing all these mavelous Objects,
diminishes the admiration of them, it is nevertheless from thence, that all
Nations have first learned that there is an infinite Being, that by the wisdom
of his understanding, and power of his hand has given being to all these
things. What may we then think of the ravishments that the Souls of the
Faithful have experience of, then when being delivered from the chains of the
body, and carried on high between the hands of Angels, after having passed all
the extent of the Air, and gone through the vast and immense spaces of the
Celestial Orbs, and considered near at hand the vast and prodigious greatness,
the mavelous splendor of the Sun, and other Stars, they come to enter that
stately Palace, where God and our Lord Jesus dwell in glory? When Jacob saw a
Ladder which reached from Earth to Heaven, and the Angels that ascended and
descended from above, he cried out, this is the House of God, or at least, it
is certainly the Gate of Heaven, and testified that this place so venerable,
filled his Soul with fear and wonder both together. David placed among his most
earnest desires, that of entering into the Tabernacle of God, and of seeing on
all sides the marvels that shined there. And truly I do not doubt, but that
Spectacle was capable of overwhelming the Spirit, with unspeakable content: the
matter it self was illustrious and amazing, but the work and design much
exceeded the matter; But what is all that in comparison of what we may presume
concerning the Heavens, and the wonders that on all sides shine and sparkle
there? When we view the palaces of Kings, the costliness of their Houses, the
stateliness of their seylings, the variety of their Pictures, the richness of
their Tapestry, the rarity of their Statues, the lofty grandeur of their
Pillars and Arches; give a pleasure marvellously sensible, and affecting to all
men that have eyes, and have not their internal senses marvellously stupid and
blockish: those that are knowing in Arts, and well understand Building,
Painting, Carving, Embroidery, and other things of that nature, do there take
much more content than others, because they discover all the beauties that are
in those Objects, the most curious strokes, and the most delicate devices
cannot escape them. Whereas the generality observe nothing there, but the
various sparkling of Colors, some order and general harmony, and proportion,
which the most gross cannot be ignorant in, and in such or such a Picture, some
likeness to persons that at some time they have seen: If there be either
Histories or Emblems, Riddles, or Devices in the Tapestries or Pictures, those
which are conversant in good Learning, and pride themselves either in quickness
of wit, or the knowledge of Histories and Fables, do there receive yet more
satisfaction if they can lay open what is wrapped up there, and go to the bottom
of what others see nothing but the bark. And if with so many other things, the
Spirit of Prophecy had given to David some understanding of the Mysteries which
were veiled under the Types and Allegories of the Old Testament: I do believe
that in the contemplation of the Tabernacle, neither the price of the matter
whereof it was composed, nor the Divine industry that Bezaleel and Aholiab
employed there, did never so much content either his senses or his
understanding, as he felt of ravishment in the mavelous wisdom, wherewith God
directed the design of all these things, to represent by them others
incomparably more excellent, which were yet hid in the darkness of time to
come. Imagine you therefore a Soul, first of all ready instructed in the truths
of Christianity, and purified from all false impressions which may have been
mingled with them, then afterward extraordinarily illuminated by the Spirit of
God, and by that means made capable of all that the most sublime intelligences
are capable of, to be introduced into this place so full of Magnificence and
splendour, and there finding the substance of that, whereof the Sanctuary of the
Tabernacle was heretofore but a shadow; If you do so I assure my self that you
will fall so short of being able to conceive all the contentment that it will
find there, that you cannot attentively affix your Spirit thereon, but it will
remain swallowed up, and fall and faint under the admiration of the knowledge,
that it will obtain there, although you be not able to comprehend it. There
remains the third of these objects, which is the presence of our Lord Jesus,
and our Communion with happy Spirits and Holy Angels.

To begin there, as I believe that there is no reason to doubt, but that Angels
can communicate among themselves: So I hold for certain that happy spirits can
do the same, and that Angels and Souls can mutually entertain each other. What
is the manner of this communication, is a thing as difficult to explain, as is
the nature of Angels themselves, and the substance of Spirits. For such as is
the nature of things, such is the manner and quality of their Operations, and
no man will ever well explain the one, if he have not first of all perfectly
comprehended what may be understood of the other. But although we do not well
understand the manner, nevertheless we do not fail to be fully assured of the
thing it self. Every understanding Being, is inclined to society, as on the
other side, no Beings have any society among themselves but those that are
endued with understanding. It Is for that reason that among Animals man alone is
Politic and Sociable, as therefore with an understanding, but which is
enclosed in a Body, God has given us speech, which is a Corporeal means of
mutual Conversation; so to substances separate from Body, but nevertheless
endued with understanding, he has given some power to entertain society and
converse, although it be not Corporeal. And those that imagine, that neither
Angels, nor Souls can move themselves, unless it be by the means of a Body, nor
discover their thoughts and sentiments to each other, unless it be by some
Corporeal medium, to say no more, pretend to know what they do not at all
understand: For seeing they dare to determine the nature of the faculties of
Spirits, and the manner of their Operations, they must be presumed to have an
exact, and perfect knowledge of the nature of substances purely Spiritual:
Therefore where the Book of the Revelation attributes to Angels and Spirits
that are assembled in Heaven, a voice that says without ceasing, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God Almighty, and Lord thou art worthy to receive honor and power
for thou have created all things, and by thy will they are, and were Created:
and again, thou were slain and have Redeemed us to God out of every Tribe, and
Language, and People, and Nation; and have made us Kings, and Priests to our
God. There are two things distinct; the one is the voice it self, which St.
John represents as if it might be heard by the ears of the Body; the other is
the thing signified by the voice: Forasmuch as it is that which presents it self
to the understanding. Now as to what concerns the attributing a voice unto
them, it is a thing Symbolical accommodated to the manner of Prophetical
Visions, which must not necessarily be so taken, as if really and indeed the
Angels and blessed Spirits had so cried. The Angels are indeed represented in
the Holy Scripture, sometimes as speaking to men, and as forming sounds in the
air, so as it happened in the publishing of the Law upon the mountain: and it
is certain they have sufficient power and force upon the Elementary Bodies, to
impress Images, and sounds there when it is convenient, and to articulate them
in such manner, that our ears shall be capable of receiving them, and
presenting them intelligibly to our minds: But there is great probability that
all the things that St. John reports are Visions, the Idea's whereof had no
subsistence any farther, than the Spirit of God did impress them upon his
imagination, and not things so really existing that they could be perceived
even by his Bodily senses: as to what concerns that which is pronounced by the
voice, there appears a manifest consent in celebrating the nature, virtues, and
Operations of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. Now all consent of that kind,
necessarily infers that those among whom it is found, have knowledge of the minds
and affections of each other. The Soul therefore is not content to employ it
self alone, in the contemplation, and admiration of those objects which are
offered to it, it communicates with those of its own kind, and they all with
the Holy Angels conspire on this occasion, to give unto God the praises, and
blessings that are due unto him.: St. Paul says that in his ravishment into the
third Heaven he heard words and things that could not be uttered, that is to
say, he would not report them to us. Nor was it permitted to him that heard
them, to come from thence either to astonish the Spirits, or entertain the
curiosity of men. For without doubt if he had once given himself the liberty to
tell them News from on high, they would have forgotten the mystery of the
Cross, and have so wasted their Spirits in enquiring how Paradise was made,
that they would have neglected the knowledge of the means by which they might
ascend thither. Because therefore he did not tell us what it is, and he himself
has concealed from whose mouth he understood these marvels, it is neither
lawful for us to enquire, nor possible to obtain more knowledge than he has
given us concerning it. I will only infer this, that although God has had a
mavelous care to instruct his Church here below, and to this end has given
to his Prophets, and Apostles incomparable illuminations, and which infinitely
exceed the sublimest thoughts that ever entered into humane understanding,
nevertheless he intends things yet more ravishing in the Heavens, seeing St.
Paul who has explained to us so clearly the Mysteries of Religion, keeps these
other secrets hidden as far surpassing our present condition, and the capacity
of our understanding. As to what concerns the presence of our Lord, as we do
not willingly behold the Sun it self directly: Forasmuch as the luster of its
light, does dazzle our eyes, therefore we rather behold its image in the water,
where its splendor is much less illustrious, so I shall not dare to fix my
mind, on the contemplation of the Idea's of his body, such as we imagine it to
be now on high. I believe it will be better to search out some representation
of it elsewhere, where its glory will give less darkness and confusion to my
thoughts, the Evangelists report that he was once transfigured upon the
mountain, in the presence of St. Peter, James and John, and that his face
became shining as the Sun, and his garments white and glittering as the light.
Which was nevertheless but an essay of his glory, as we make sometimes an image
of the Sun in the night, by some kind of Art, and notwithstanding St. Peter
remained so ravished in the admiration of it, that although he did not
altogether sink, it appears plain enough by his words, that his mind staggered
under it, and that he was not able to bear the weight of a Spectacle so
glorious. How will it be then with a mind, perfectly purified from the
infirmities of nature and the Body, when it comes to contemplate the Lord Jesus
in the Heavens amidst the glory wherewithal he glitters there: there is no one
among us that reading the History of the Gospel, and there observing the
discourses of our Lord, the sweetness and wisdom of his conversation, his
wondrous actions, the report of his miracles, and all that Divine conduct,
whereof we have the description in the New Testament, who does not esteem them
very happy who had the honor, not only to converse familiarly with him as his
disciples did, but even to touch his garments and see that countenance so full
of incomparable sweetness, and great Majesty both together: Notwithstanding
that then he was encompassed with infirmity, and always carried with him the
presages of his Cross, and ignominious passion. How will it be then with a
blessed Soul, when it comes to present it self before him, and shall see him in
that estate that becomes him that is sat down on the right hand of God in
infinite Power and Glory? And if we that have eyes so weak, and understandings
so dark, do not happen on those words where it is said that he is the
brightness of his Fathers glory, and the Table which bears a deep and indelible
impression of his Power and Authority, But the luster of these expressions and
the glory of the thoughts that they produce in our minds, do cause within us
very extraordinary emotions. What must be the vision of this glorious object
then when the separate Soul shall apply it self to contemplate him with an
understanding full of light? There it will remember indubitably what the Holy
Gospel learnt it here below, there it will enter into these discourses, if at
least the attempts that we make upon it, are capable of representing any of its
thoughts. This is he, will it say, which has put on our nature with its
infirmities, but by his Resurrection and ascension upon high, has changed his
infirmities into glory: This is he that conversed here below in mean condition
among men, and behold him raised above the magnificence of all the Angels: This
is he that suffered the contradiction of sinners, but receives now the applause
and veneration of all the Inhabitants of Heaven: This is he that ignominiously
hung upon the Cross, but now all Creatures behold him with reverence and
trembling: This is he that here below suffered death* but who now holds in his
hand the life of all things, and the subsistence of the universe: This is he
that was seen laid in a dark Tomb, in comparison of whom now the splendour of
the Sun is but as a shadow: This is he that was thought unworthy that the Earth
should bear him, who now walks upon the Heavens, and under whose feet the whole
Fabric of the World does Tremble: This is he in whom sometimes I believed
indeed, but with a faith always imperfect, always spotted with some darkness,
always mingled with some remainders of incredulity, whom I now see fully and
manifestly, and to whom I have liberty to approach without fear, and behold him
face to face.

After having in some sort represented, what is the excellence of the knowledge,
which the believing Soul obtains when it is received into Heaven, there is no
need that I should stay long to examine what is the measure of the happiness*
that it there enjoys. For happiness consists as well in the absence of evils,
as in the fruition of good which are inconsistent or agreeable to the nature of
those Beings which we call by the name of happy. As for evils there are none
that enter the Kingdom of Heaven, which is a mavelous happiness to a nature
sensible as ours is: As for good things what may they be which are suitable to
a reasonable Soul, notwithstanding it is separate from the Body: Certainly as
the happiness of the eye consists in seeing agreeable things, and as the
happiness of the ear in hearing pleasant and harmonious sounds; and generally
the happiness of all the other senses, in exercising themselves upon those
Objects whereunto nature has appointed them, with pleasure and content, the
happiness of the separate Soul consists in a suitable exercise of its faculties
upon the most excellent Objects which can be presented to it, and in the joy
that is consequent thereunto. Its understanding therefore being both perfectly
purified in it self, and filled with the presence of Objects so admirable, its
happiness in this respect is proportionable to the excellency of its Operation,
and those contemplations in which it is perpetually employed. If those
therefore that have any spark of generosity, and any thing brave in their
Souls, do esteem those happy that have obtained any skill in those Sciences, to
which men ordinarily apply themselves, and yet nevertheless an excellent
Philosopher had reason to say, that one drop of the knowledge of the nature of
Celestial Bodies, is more to be desired by reason of the nobleness of their
essence, and the advantage of their utility, than all the Sciences that men
have formed upon the other Beings of the World; how happy must that Soul be
that perfectly knows those things, whose excellency as far surmounts the Sun
and other the Stars of Heaven, as they are to be esteemed more worthy than all
the other Bodies of these Elementary Regions? And if none of our faculties do
employ themselves in their Operations in a suitable manner upon those subjects
that are proportionable unto them, without receiving some sensible pleasure,
what may be the satisfaction, that a faithful Soul receives in being
incessantly exercised in such mavelous Operations? Certainly the pleasure of
the eyes and ears is great, when they are filled with such Objects, whose
color, or figure, or harmony, and justness of proportion is capable,
reasonably as satisfying the hunger that uncorrupted nature has placed in
those Senses. For pleasure properly consists in this, that now when the Objects
that are without do occur unto our faculties, and apply themselves to the
desires or capacities that are there, with so much proportion, and equality,
that the motions that they make there be neither too languishing nor too
violent, but in an agreeable measure. The pleasure of the mind, when it employs
it self with success, in the contemplation of things intellectual, is much more
great than that of the eyes or ears, because it is a more noble faculty, and
things Spiritual are more excellent than Bodies, and by consequence Operations
more exquisite and curious do arise from the occurrence of them. From whence it
follows necessarily that when the faculties of the Soul are come to that point
of perfection, in which they do as it were as much surpass themselves, when
they were in a state of nature, as in this state of nature, they did surpass
the eyes and ears; and that when the Objects that are presented to them have as
many, or more degrees of excellency above those things intellectual which we
ordinarily apprehend, as they have above sensible and Corporeal Objects; it is
indubitable that the joy and content, that does accompany Operations so Divine,
must infinitely excel, that which can be Ministered by the knowledge of the most
perfect and sublime Sciences. The understanding being filled with such
excellent knowledge, it must necessarily be, that the will be full of love
marvellously ardent toward those Objects from whence it does derive: For
things that are excellent do draw our affections for their own sake, and
deserve our love by the sole respect of their beauty. And the content that we
take in the knowledge of them, is a cause that we love them also for our own
sake, because we love our selves, it cannot be that in that respect we should
not love those things that Minister to our satisfaction. Besides we are so
naturally disposed, that we do not only love those Objects from whence such
excellent knowledge derives, but we singularly esteem the means by which we do
enjoy it, and it is for that reason that some have said that we have our eyes
above our other Bodily Senses, because they discover to our knowledge a far
greater multitude of things than our others, and under greater variety. And
experience teaches us, that of all visible Objects light seems to be most
beautiful and pleasant, which comes to pass not only from its natural
constitution, in that it seems to be the Object which has the most proportion
with the faculty of seeing, but also because it is that which renders other
things visible, and which if I may so say, does color even colors themselves,
and give the form and figure to the forms and figures of Bodies. So that we may
not doubt, but that blessed Souls are wholly inflamed with the love of the
persons and things which on high are perpetually presented to the eyes of their
understandings. Now love is of it self a thing full of contentment and joy,
when we enjoy the thing we love, and know that we are beloved thereof. The
believing Soul therefore ardently loves the happy Spirits which are received on
high, and likewise the Holy Angels, and being likewise reciprocally loved by
them, and loving our Lord Jesus with an affection far above what it bears to
Angels and Spirits, and being much assured that it is yet much more beloved of
him: and to conclude, seeing in its Habitation in the Heavens, in the aspect of
the mavelous things, that are there, in the company of Holy Spirits, in the
Society of Angels, in the presence and Communion of Jesus Christ, so many and
such irrefragable Testimonies of the love of God toward it, it plunges and
drowns and totally swallows it self in the love that it bears to him, and finds
in all these motions a sensible and sublime taste of unspeakable felicity.

What it is that the Resurrection will add to the blessedness of the believing
Soul.
The Third Discourse.
THis which I have said hitherunto very imperfectly, concerning the happiness
of the believing Soul, after it is separate from the Body, may enable us to
conceive something of its grandeur, as by the lightning that passes before our
eyes, we do in some manner judge of the quantity of fire that is wrapped up in
the dark clouds. But although there be attractives enough in what we understand
of it, to excite the desire and admiration of it in our hearts, yet it falls
far short of its perfection, as long as man remains deprived of the other half
of his essence. For the believer of whose happiness we are now discoursing, may
be considered after three manners. First in himself, then as the world has
some Relation to, and Connection with him: And lastly as he has some Relation
to the Church, as a member has Relation to his Body. Now to consider him in
himself, seeing he is composed of a Soul and a Body, to whatsoever perfection
the Soul be advanced, so it is, that whilst the Body remains under the power of
death, its happiness is not complete. To consider it in the Relation that it,
and the World have between each other, forasmuch as the World was made for-man,
and has been made subject to vanity, by reason of him, when man shall be
placed all entire in perfect happiness, as far as precisely concerns himself,
nevertheless he cannot be said to be absolutely and entirely happy, as long as
the World remains subject to misery by reason of him, and by occasion of him,
bears the marks of the cruse of God.

Lastly, to consider him after the third manner: Forasmuch as he is a part of
that whereof the Church is the whole, although he should behold himself
perfectly happy in himself, and although he should see the World delivered from
the curse that it incurred for his sake, nevertheless he cannot be said to
enjoy a full felicity, until the whole Church on its part partake in the
enjoyment of it. If Esther esteemed her self miserable, although she were
advanced to the glory of a great Empire, whilst she beheld her Nation in danger
of desolation, the Believer may not account it self happy, whilst some of his
brethren are fighting upon Earth, and others with respect to their Bodies are
under the power of death and rotting in their graves. Forasmuch then, as the
Soul in that beatitude that it enjoys in the Heavens, has sufficient knowledge
of all these Relations, it is impossible that it should not desire the
Resurrection of its Body to the end that it may be united with it; and the
deliverance of the World out of its misery and vanity, so that it may no longer
be subject to corruption for its sake; and the glorification of the Church in a
perfect felicity, so that the state of that wherewith it has such inviolable
ties, may not divide its thoughts betwixt grief and and joy. Now he is not
happy perfectly that does desire, and has yet reason and subject to desire
something. It Is very true, the desire of the Soul in all these regards, is
without inquietude and anxiety; for these passions are generated either from
the impatience of our spirits, or the uncertainty of the event of what we
desire, or from hence that although the event that we expect is sure, yet the
condition that we are in in the mean while, is troublesome in it self, and
uneasy to be born. As to what concerns impatience, there is not the least
string or fiber thereof in the Souls that are on high, they are endued with
all sorts of Virtues, principally they are all swallowed up in a profound
respect to the providence of God. And as to the assurance of their hope they
are more than most assured that it will never fail them, since God has
promised it, and the power that he has to execute his Counsels, finds no where
either difficulty or impossibility to arrest or hinder it; to conclude, as to
what respects their condition, the little which I have above reported of it,
represents it capable of swallowing up in the sweetness of its contents, all
resentments they may have, for the length of their expectations. When the Holy
Ghost in the Revelation causes us to hear them cry, how long Lord will thou
not avenge our blood, we may not take that for any mark of inquietude of mind,
any more than for an inordinate desire of vengeance Forasmuch as in this place,
they consider their enemies as reprobated, and adjudged by God to the suffering
of punishment, and are no longer obliged to have any charity for them.

Our charity having none for its object, but such as may have some access to
the mercy of our Heavenly Father; Is the gate then closed upon any one? Yea, as
it has been from the beginning upon Devils, or on those that have sinned
against the Holy Ghost, or on those against whom God has pronounced an
irrevocable sentence of death and condemnation; our charity remains utterly
extinct in respect of them. And to desire the Execution of this condemnation as
the Souls of the faithful do, is nothing but a conformity to the Divine Justice
and will. So that the words [how long] are purely and simply a Holy breathing
of Zeal which they have to see the glory of God shining in the Execution of his
judgments which does not pass the bounds of respect which they owe to the
conduct of his wisdom. Nevertheless although they be without inquietude, so it
is as I have said, they are not without out desire. Now he which desires gives
evidence, that something is wanting to his condition, and by consequent is not
accomplished in all things. And it is for this reason that we must see what will
be the happiness of believers in these three respects at the last day.

For the first, it seems that there are principally two things to be
considered: that is to say what will be the quality and condition of the body,
when it shall be raised again, and then what will be the estate of the Soul,
when it shall be rejoined unto it. Touching the Body, it is beyond comparison
more easy to tell what it will not be, then what it will be: For we see very
clearly what things it must necessarily be delivered from, but we do not see in
the same manner the things wherewithal it must be endued, on that very happy
day. There are in us two sorts of infirmities, whereof the one are so very
natural, that we should have been subject to them, though we had continued in
the state of our integrity: The others are so far natural, that we are subject
to them from the womb and from the first principles of our being and yet
notwithstanding they have come upon us, since the constitution of our nature,
and had never come into the world but in consequence of sin; with regard to
these last, such as is the deformity of members, the ugliness of the visage,
the want or weakness of any sense, maladies, wounds, ill proportion of stature,
and to conclude, liableness to death, since they have no other cause nor
original but sin, it must necessarily be that sin being entirely and absolutely
abolished, all these infirmities will necessarily cease of themselves. So that
though we had nothing else to expect from the Resurrection, it must however
replace us in a condition not less excellent in what appertains to the
constitution of the Body, than was the condition of Adam at the hour of his
Creation. For it is neither agreeable to the wisdom or mercy, nor it may be, to
the justice of God, that having absolved our whole and entire persons from all
kind of sin by justification, and having delivered our Souls from all evil
habits by Sanctification, he should notwithstanding leave on our Bodies some
trace of those infirmities, which had never come there but for the punishment
of sin, or which are necessary and indubitable dependances of it. Imagine you
then, the most beautiful man upon earth, and the most perfectly composed,
endued with the most lively, and vigorous, and exquisite senses that can be
imagined, free him from the danger of all kinds of incommodities in his health,
make his vigor always equal and flourishing, and suppose you that no
consequence of years can ever alter or change him, and to conclude, give him
assurance that he shall continue so everlastingly, and you will after a sort
have conceived the first beginnings of the perfection which we expect in the
happy Resurrection. Touching the first sort of infirmities which are absolutely
natural, they consist in the desire of meat drink and sleep, and in all those
things which are either in some manner like unto them, or depend upon them. For
without doubt Adam desired all this, and this desire in a State so Holy and
Perfect as was his, is an indubitable argument of need, and need a necessary
consequence of the estate of nature in which he was placed, and which the Holy
Scripture expresses by this manner of speech, he was made a living Soul, that
is to say, that in this respect he was like to other Animals, in which the
living Soul (which the Scripture also attributes unto them) derives all these
things in consequence to his being. Now we ought also to be delivered from
these kind of infirmities. For the Heavens whither we aspire, are not an
Habitation agreeable to these things, although it be said that we shall be there
at the Table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; that we shall there be satisfied
with the fatness of the House of God, and moistened with the Rivers of his
pleasures, that does not mean nevertheless that we must make feasts there, or
to take it according to the Letter, that Rivers of pleasure do actually run
there. But because as long as we are here below we conceive nothing almost but
under the Images of things, which we see the Scripture accommodating it self
unto us, as we do to Children, does as it were cover the Heavenly pleasure
under the shadow of those that are earthly. And as to what concerns generation:
For as much as it was not instituted in nature, unless first of all for the
multiplication of single persons, for the peopling of the universe, and
afterward for the preservation of the species, when death removed the
individuals, the necessity of these two causes then ceasing, it is no wonder
that our Savior has told us, that in that respect we shall be like the
Angels. Now it is no disadvantage to be deprived of these things when we have no
need of them.

But to subsist in our being, and to exercise perfectly the Operations which
are agreeable to our most noble faculties, and nevertheless to be delivered
from that condition that makes all these base and wretched Actions of our
Bodies absolutely necessary, is (without lying) an Estate that ought to be
judged very advantageous, by those that are compounded more of Spirit than
Body, and have a Soul a little roused and generous, if therefore you add this
to those other perfections of which I have made mention, you will yet much
advance the excellence of that Estate whereof I have formed the Idea. In the
mean time all these infirmities have their root in us in that we have a Body
compounded of the Elements in the same manner as are the Bodies of all other
Animals, and in that we are endued with a Soul sensitive and vegetative, as
they speak, which has faculties altogether like to the faculties of the Souls
of beasts, unless peradventure we be above them in some higher degree of
perfection, and this composition of the Elements, and of a Soul vegetative, and
sensitive in the constitution of our essence, is a cause that although the
providence of God should hinder, as it did in our integrity, our being sick or
wounded, so it is that our Bodies in themselves would be capable of the
impression of the causes of all these alterations, and that although God should
perpetually preserve us from death, nevertheless the constitution of our Body
in it self, would be perishable and mortal, for that the first man had been
exempt from all these evil accidents, and immortal, if he had persevered in his
innocence, would have proceeded from the care of the Divine Providence, and not
from the temperature of his Body. It Is therefore necessary that although our
Bodies be raised again, and remade of the same matter of which they are now
compounded, the constitution of them must nevertheless be so changed, that
nothing must remain of all its natural qualities, or of that Animal life, which
we have in common with Creatures endued with sense and destitute of Reason. Let
us therefore oppose a little those things that depend on this natural
complexion of our Bodies, to those qualities that are contrary unto them, and
so let us Endeavor to come to some knowledge of the perfection of the Estate
that we expect our Bodies are now in their nature, capable of all sorts of evil
accidents and impressions, which cause incommodity and grief unto them; then
they shall be so no more. They are at this time corruptible and mortal; then
they shall be incorruptible and immortal: They are now heavy by reason of the
Earth that does predominate in them, there they shall be agile beyond all
imagination, they are at this time capable of being wearied, there they shall
be indefatigable: they are at this time dark, then they shall be bright and
shining, to that degree that the Holy Scripture compares them to the Sun, they
are at this time perpetually subject to repletion and excretion, then they
shall be in a Constitution perpetually uniform; they are at this time defective
in their conformation many ways, then the proportion of their parts shall
surpass all the measures of nature and art. Here they are troubled with the ill
taste of their pleasures, there their contentments being perfectly pure, they
will have always a Savor exquisite and eternally agreeable. They are now a
burden and hinderance to our minds, then they will assist to the vigor and
quickness of their Operations. In a word, they are at this time marvellously
earthly, then they shall be altogether Heavenly.

As to what concerns the Operations of the senses, and the motions of the
affections, which as we have said above have their seat in the Body, forasmuch
as it respects rather the Estate of the Soul when it shall at some time be
reunited there, and does not respect the qualities of the body it self; I shall
speak but one word of it here; and it is this; the objects that are perfectly
well proportioned to them, do indeed delight them, but others do offend them,
so that light it self, which in its own nature, is so lovely and agreeable,
offends the eyes, if it be but a little too lively and sparkling. Instead
whereof then the constitution of our senses will be such, that they will be
impassible and unalterable by grief, whatever be the nature of the Objects that
do occur unto them, and that is it that the Apostle would teach us when he
says, there is a natural and there is a Spiritual Body. For by Spiritual he
does not understand that which is entirely separate from matter, otherwise
since he calls it matter, his words would imply a contradiction, but he
understands that which although it be matter, has notwithstanding those
qualities that follow the nature of Spirits, such as are to be immortal,
incorruptible, and impassible. When the wife of Lot, became a Pillar of Salt,
if this change were made by degrees, and by little and little, she was
marvellously astonished, to see all the color of her skin, and all the
substance of her body change; and yet more, when she perceived all her members
to grow stiff, in that manner that at last the obduration proceeded even to her
very bowels: If a while after she had seen her natural constitution to return
little by little, her Body to become soft and supple, her skin return to its
former color, and her members retake their precident pliableness, in
proportion to the horror that she had of her self in her change, in the same
proportion will she have experience of ravishment and joy. But if immediately
after she had seen her self re-established in her first Estate, she had begun
to perceive an extraordinary strength in her person, an Angelical beauty in all
her Fabric and Composition, a vigor unknown before in all the Organs of her
senses, a nimbleness more agile than that of Birds, in all her motions, and
that Majestic aspect that we suppose to have been in the female Hero's of time
past, implanted in all the comportment of her Body, and on all the lines and
strokes of her countenance, neither the word joy nor that of ravishment are
capable of representing the emotions, that she would have thereupon in her
Soul. Now the change that happens in our Bodies by death, is much worse than a
Transformation into a pillar of Salt, and the condition into which they will be
re-established, in the Resurrection incomparably more Excellent, than all that
at this time can be imagined concerning it. From whence it is easy to conjecture
in some manner what a spectacle so mavelous will produce in us.

Concerning the Soul, and the condition wherein it will be found, then when it
shall be reunited to the Body, if from these goodly lights wherewithal it is
filled, and encompassed in the Heavens, it should be brought back into a Body,
incommodated with the trouble, and confusion that is found in the affections
and Organs of ours at present, without doubt it would receive much disadvantage
thereby; this would be well nigh, as if you should recall an excellent
Philosopher from the top of an high Mountain, where he did contemplate the
Heavens, and the Stars which are there, and saw the Clouds and Fogs under his
feet: and make him descend to the bottom of it, where he can contemplate
nothing but through the darkness of the Clouds. But the thing that happens to
the Body, will place it in such a condition, as will in no wise incommodate the
actions and Operations of the Soul. Let the nature thereof be what it will,
it is necessary that besides the Operations of understanding and reason, that it
now attend to the Conservation of the three faculties which we have in common
with beasts; The vital, the natural, and the animal: As to the vital faculty,
our Soul will then so animate our Body, that it will no longer hold it fast
unto it self by the bond of that Celestial heat, and those Spirits that
continually beat in our hearts, it will be there even as light is in the Body
of the Sun, and will not keep it self there by any other bonds than it self,
the Body such as we now have, is too far removed from the nature of Spiritual
substances, to be capable of being joined with them so closely, unless it be by
the means of something more subtle and less Earthy: but the qualities
wherewithal it will be reclothed by the Resurrection, will purify and
subtilize it in such manner, that it will be further removed then from the
gross qualities which we observe therein, than now are those little Bodies
which we call by the name of Spirits, which serve as a bond and medium between
our Bodies and Souls. As to the natural faculty, our Soul will be neither
employed in the Concoction as they call it, nor in the assimilation of
nourishment as now it is obliged to do, to preserve unto the parts of the Body
their just vigor and stature. For in the frame wherein the power of God shall
place them at first, they shall remain for ever without any need of reparation,
in their substance or in their powers. Such well near as is the nature of the
Stars according to the Peripateticks, whose matter is so pure, or form so
perfect, or the bond that joins the matter to the form, so strict and
indissoluble that they can never suffer any alteration, according to the
opinion of those Philosophers. As to the Animal faculty, which displays it self
chiefly in the Operations of sense, and motion. I know not at all, what will be
then the constitution of our Organs, nor what will be the nature of the
Operation of our Soul upon them, nor how the species of sensible things will be
received by them. And what is more I am not afraid to be esteemed an ignorant
on this account, at least for certain I shall have many Companions to partake
with me in the blame thereof: For I do not believe there is a man upon Earth
that knows it. But so it is that I very well know, all will be otherwise than
now it is, the constitution of such Organs as now we have, and the dispensation
of Spirits whereupon depends all their Operations, being a certain consequence
of the passible, and corruptible state of nature. Now that which is natural
will be swallowed up with that which is supernatural, as that which is sensual
by that which is Spiritual, and that which is mortal by immortality and life.
And although we do not know the manner, after which the Soul will be then
joined to the Body for its Operations, they will not be for that either the
less certain, or the less decorous: If the measure of our knowledge were the
measure of the Existence of things; the greatest part of the objects of our
faculties, and their Operations would suffer very notable diminutions in the
qualities of their Being, yea some would be even absolutely expelled out of
nature. And I do not know whether we have used any of our senses as we ought.
That is to say, whether of any of them we have very exactly and distinctly
comprehended, what it is that the Soul does in their Operations; what is the
agency and activity of the Spirits. And lastly, what it is that the Organ it
self contributes thereunto, how ever it be the Organ, after what manner so ever
it be constituted, the Soul after whatsoever manner it operate there, will
exercise so admirably each one what is proper to it self, that they will do it
without offense, impediment error or weariness, with a vigor and clearness,
with an exactness and perfection wholly beyond imagination. In conclusion, to
say something also of the appetites which have properly their seat in the Body,
and which as I have said, are included under desire and anger, these are
passions which forasmuch as they are Corporeal, will be so extinguished by
death, that they will return no more to life by the Resurrection. And if it be
true, that there be virtues which have their seat in these passions, as it is
apparent that Philosophy has there placed those that they call properly moral,
either they will be no longer necessary, because there will be no objects upon
which they may be exercised, or they consist not in the moderation of those
appetites, but in an excellent and invariable temper of the mind and will,
which will then be irrevocably fastened to all sorts of excellent objects, by
the light of the understanding. All these impidements being removed, if there
were nothing else, the reasonings of the Soul must be supreamly excellent: For,
a good part of the failures which happen to us, come either by the error of
our senses, in the report that they make to us concerning sensible things, or
from the fumes of our passions which blind our understandings, or from this
that the aliments being not well concocted, the Spirits which are formed out of
part of their substance, do retain something of their grossness, and impurity,
wherewithal they infect the Organs, which serve for the use of discourse, or
from this, that from their first conformation there was some fault in their
natural temper and construction: But the same change which will put all the
other parts of the Body into so excellent a constitution, will put also those
into the same condition, wherein the intellective power of the Soul has its
seat and where it will form its ratiocinations. This will be done the rather,
because all the other parts of the Body are not to be restored, unless it be
for their own proper felicity, these are to serve the Operations of the Soul,
on which depends the happiness of the whole entire man, and all the parts of
him: the Soul therefore being otherwise full of the illuminations of the Divine
Spirit, and strengthened by his presence far above the natural vigor of its
faculties, and coming to be lodged in a Body, all whose power will be admirably
perfect, and bringing thither the impression of much excellent knowledge, which
it had already gained during the time of its residence in the Heavens, it
cannot effect any thing, but productions worthy of its mavelous essence. And
as if during the time of a long separation, the husband and wife had equally
increased in beauty and virtue, and all other advantages, they would receive
incredible contentment if they might return to each other, to enjoy long one
and the same common felicity. The Soul will rejoice in its reunion to the Body,
and the Body will rejoice in the presence of the Soul, and both together
composing one only essence, will be equally ravished with the happiness of
their condition, and with the assurance that they will have that it will be
Eternal.

The second respect according to which man has a Connection, and Relation to
the World, will deserve very attentive Consideration; many things do manifestly
show that the world was created for man. The dignity of his nature which raised
him infinitely above all other Creatures, if he had remained in his integrity,
would not have permitted that he should have held any other place than that of
an end, to the use whereof other things were appointed. The Empire that God
gave him over all Plants and Animals at the beginning, when he placed him in
the Terrestrial Pardadise, confirms it evidently. For God would not have so
ordained it, if it had not been agreeable to the nature of the things
themselves. But nothing Teaches it unto us more expressly than the misery
whereunto the world is subject on the occasion of man's sin. For that is it which
the Apostle means, when he says, that the Creature is made subject to vanity,
not of it self but by reason of him which has subjected it, Romans 8. 20. And if
it be lawful to illustrate this by a Comparison taken from things Pagan, the
World was in regard of God, as the statue of Minerva in regard of Phidias, and
man which is the image of God in the middle of the world, as the image of
Phidias in the middle of her Shield. So that all the parts of the Statue were
so aptly placed by their Jointures and Colligations, that they met all together
in the image of the workman, in such manner that if it were plucked from
thence, all the work would fall in pieces: all the parts of the World do so
Abutt on this image of God, that it cannot be corrupted by sin, but the whole
compages of the universe must fall into a dreadful ruin. So that if it had
pleased God in his just severity, to have forsaken man in his accursed State,
the entire destruction of the World had unavoidably followed thereupon: For as
when a subject has committed Felony, or Treason against his Sovereign; we are
not content only to punish his person, we cut down his woods, pull down his
Houses, and in a word, we make all things that have any necessary dependence on
him, bear some marks of the indignation of his Prince; so it was convenient
that the world that was made for man, and consequently depended on him as its
end, should follow his condition, and as it were, pass with him under the same
condemnation, but also since it has pleased God to show mercy to man, and to
promise Redemption to him, and to decree to gather his Church out of his
Posterity. It is agreeable both to the wisdom and mercy of God, to use the same
conduct toward the World. For first of all he ought to sustain it, that it may
be the Habitation of his Church, during the time that it sojourns here below.
Even as after a Prince is reconciled to his subject; he is not content to
testify that he has received his person into his favor he permits him to
restore his Houses to their former State, yea he furnishes him out of his
bounty wherewithal to make them more bountiful and magnificent. Not only to the
end that he may obliterate all footsteps of his indignation, but also that all
things may bear the undoubted marks of his Clemency and Favor: and it is this
that has caused the subsistence of the World hitherunto, and will yet cause
that at the last day it shall not only be delivered from the disorders which
are here seen, but honored with a Communication of the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God, after which St. Paul says it has groaned and travailed for so
many ages. Therefore one part of our happiness, will consist in the
contentments of seeing the breaches which the order, and beauty of the world
has suffered for our sakes, magnificently repaired, and the resplendent glory
that we expect for our selves, spread universally over all the parts thereof.

I very well understand, that there have been some that have held an opinon
quite contrary; and have believed that as the World was produced of nothing it
shall be reduced to nothing, to the end that the maxim of the Philosophers, as
nothing is made of nothing, so nothing can be reduced to nothing; may remain
totally confounded. For they think it is a maxim prejudicial to the glory of the
Divine power, and that the event of things must necessarily confute it: But
it is an opinion that has no firm foundation either in Scripture or Reason.
Touching Scripture all that it says is that the Heavens and the earth, shall
pass away but the word of God shall never pass away: that the Heavens and the
Earth shall pass away, but God remains Eternally the same, which easily
receives two answers. The one, that the meaning is, that although the Heaven
and the Earth should pass away; Nevertheless the word of God would remain
immutable; and of such manners of speech or affirmation, which seeming strict
and absolute which must be interpreted by a simple supposition, examples are
found elsewhere: as Psalm. 45. the Earth is removed, and the Mountains are
carried into the midst of the Sea, the Waters thereof roar and are troubled,
the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof; the streams of the River shall
make glad the City of God. For so the words are read in the Original, and yet
we Translate them, although the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea,
and the waters thereof Roar and be troubled, and the rest in the same manner.
And the nature of the thing, and design of the Author of this Divine Song, do
demonstrate clear as the day, that so it ought to be understood. The other
Answer is that things pass away after two Fashions: That is to say, by a
perfect abolition of their essence, or by so great and considerable a change in
their qualities, that there appears no trace or footstep of what they were
before. For when things suffer so great a change that we know them no more at
all, we may certainly very well say in some sort that they are passed away. Now
without doubt these Texts may be understood in this manner, and it is plainly
said, Psalm. 110. that the Heavens shall be changed, which shows that the Holy
Spirit understands no otherwise, that they shall pass away, but by suffering a
change marvellously considerable. To conclude St. Peter who describes so
gloriously the ruin of the world at the last day, adds immediately after that
according to the promise of God, we expect a new Heaven, and a new Earth, in
which righteousness shall dwell. Which foretells a change of things into a
better State, not an utter abolition of their essence: Touching reason there is
no appearance of it in saying, that because the world proceeded from nothing,
that therefore it must return to nothing again: If that pass in such manner,
very strange consequence will follow, concerning the Church and the humane
nature of Jesus Christ, which reason does not so much reject, as Piety and
Conscience does abhor, God has given proofs sufficiently certain of his
infinite power, in creating the World as he has done, without any need of
giving Testimony of it, by an entire and universal abolition of its essence.
And those miserable Philosophers, if they have believed that Creation from
nothing, and the abolition of things to nothing does surpass the power of God,
will be sufficiently convinced, and punished for their error although God do
not destroy, and abolish his own work for their confutation. To conclude, the
glory of his power will not remain so illustrious if he reduce it to nothing,
as that of his goodness and mercy will remain darkened and dishonored, if after
having given Being to the World, and had such particular consideration of man,
as to punish it only for his sake, he should soon after totally ruin it,
although he received man to favor who alone was guilty of those things which
drew all this curse upon the World.

It remains therefore that we see, what will be the constitution of the World:
by this great and memorable change, that will happen to it at the last day.
Upon which I shall make some general considerations following the method of our
preceding discourses. The first is that all things that appear to have come
into the world in consequence of sin, and not being of the first institution of
the Creation, must undoubtedly be abolished. For since they have no subsistence
but in vice, or the depravation of sin. Sin being in all regards obliterated,
there remains no place for the fruits and consequences of it. If then there be
any evil influence in the Stars, or any pestilential exhalation in the air; if
there be any Curse on the Earth, or disorder in the Sea: If there be any
irregularity in the other Elements or fault in their mixture, for the
constitution of things; if there be any venom in plants, or ferocity in
Animals, which may bring damage to mankind, in a word if there be any disorder
in the Laws of nature, and in their Conduct if the world receive no other
advantage, it is necessary that it be freed from all that, and that it be
restored to that Constitution, in which it was placed in its first Creation.
Imagine therefore a little the world new clad in an instant; from East to West,
and from North to South, of that air so gay and flourishing, and in manner so
smiling and full of assurances of the goodness of its Creator as that it had
at the beginning. Imagine that the Heavens has no Stars which do not send
down, even to the envy of each other benign influences, and favorable aspects;
that in the clouds there are no Lightnings, Thunders, or Poisonous Exhalations,
which threaten by their open violence or secret venom; that in the Earth all
seeds of hurtful plants are utterly extinguished, and that it furnishes all
sorts of pleasant and agreeable fruits for the nourishment of man; that the Sea
has no Tempests nor other agitations, but those of its reflux, no winds any
farther than is necessary to prevent the languishing of Ships at Anchor, and to
favor Navigation, that the Rivers never overflow their banks, that the Fire
never commit any spoil, that the heat and cold and other qualities of the
Elements, keep universally a very regular temper, and such as does no hurt
neither by its excesses or defects. That the Fishes and Birds, and the most
Savage beasts of the Earth have laid aside their savage humor, and all their
ferocity, that they may be familiar with man and ready to all his Commands. In
a word, form in your mind the most lively and perfect image that you are able,
of that admirable Paradise, where God placed the first man, and as much as it is
possible to your thoughts, plant this first Eden in all the World; and you will
conceive the beginning of that lovely State, after which St. Paul says that the
whole Creation ardently groans, with restlessness and loud sighings, which give
Testimony to its impatience.

The second Consideration is that since the World follows the Condition of man,
and that God has been so good toward him, that he is not content, only to
restore him to the Estate of his Original Integrity, but will raise him to a
supernatural State, it is agreeable to the same goodness of God, that he not
only restore the World, to its own natural constitution, but that he raise the
quality of its being, to a degree more glorious, In such manner that by how
much the Bodies of believers at the Resurrection, must be more Excellent then
that of Adam at the time of his Creation (and we have seen above that the
difference is very great) by so much the quality of the new World, must excel
that of the Old, how ever perfect it might be in the integrity of its nature.
Therefore all those alterations, and continual vicissitudes according to which
nature moves continually, in the generation and corruption of things, that are
produced out of the composition of Elements will then cease, and whatever be
the things that are found in the world they will have a permanent and
invariable Being.

Finally, to proceed to the third consideration: as I have said above
concerning the future condition of our Bodies, that it is much more easy to say
what they shall not be, than what they shall be, so is it much more easy to
define, what qualities and what conditions, will not then be found in the
World, than to determine those wherewithal it will be adorned. And for that
reason, it is not less rash to say boldly, what the World will be in its
restoration, whether the days and the nights will be made by the revolution of
the Sun, or whether the Sun will remain fixed in the one or other Hemisphere,
whether the Sea shall have its flux and reflux, and the earth be covered with
plants, whether it shall be dark as it is now, or whether it shall be Luminous
and Transparent, and things of like nature, than to pronounce boldly concerning
the qualities of our Bodies in their glorification: modesty and humility is not
less necessary in this subject than in the other. Therefore it shall suffice me
to say that when Adam was Created, he was without doubt marvellously moved at
the aspect of this World, and of all the marvels which were therein presented
to him; and that besides the admiration of the beauty of the work, he had
experience without doubt of contentment singularly great, when he made this
reflection thereon, that it was particularly designed for him, and that God had
made him Lord thereof, willing that it should Minister to his happiness. In
like manner it is necessary, that the believer be overwhelmed altogether, with
satisfaction and wonder, when this new World shall be presented to his eyes in
an Estate so flourishing and glorious, and that (if I may so say) he may there
read on all sides, that it is to increase his happiness that God has renewed
this Stately Fabric, and reinvested it with a form, beyond Comparison more
beautiful and advantageous than what it had before.

There remains the third respect under which man ought to be considered, in as
much as he is a part of the Church of God, and the happiness of the whole Body
must increase the sense that each member has of its own. Now without scruple
there are diverse things here, which do raise our happiness to a pitch
marvellously high. For because the Apostle St. Paul writing to the
Thessalonians says that those which sleep shall rise first, and afterward that
those that shall be found alive shall be changed, the first spectacle that the
believer will have before his eyes, will be the resurrection of all those that
in all ages have dyed. When we read, Ezekiel. 37. That magnificent promise, which
God there makes to the Children of Israel, concerning their restoration,
representing it under the figure of a Resurrection, the only reading of this
Divine vision, forms in our minds an Idea that gives them cause of admiration,
and makes them easily conceive, that it must be, that the Spirit of God had
seized that of the Prophet, certainly for this reason, because of it self the
imagination of man, was not capable of such Meditations. He reports, that this
Spirit placed him in the midst of a large plain, all covered with bones. Though
he says, that it caused him to turn all round, to the end that he might
attentively consider them, and that he might observe their quantity, which was
great to Admiration, and their dryness which was such, as there did not appear
the least sign, that ever they had either life or sense. After he had
sufficiently considered them, he demands if he believed that those bones could
revive: about which as it seems, he found himself perplexed, and suspended
between the impossibility that appeared to be in the thing it self, and the
consideration of the power of God, with whom nothing is impossible; and for
that reason he answers doubtfully and modestly, Lord thou know, being
unwilling to determine any thing, thereupon God commands him to prophecy upon
those bones, and to say unto them, as if they had been endowed with
understanding and sense. Yea dry bones, hear the word of the Lord, thus says
the Lord, behold I will cause breath to enter into you, and you shall live. I
will lay sinews upon you, and I will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you
with skin, and put breath into you, and ye shall live, and know that I am the
Lord, the Prophet having pronounced these words in vision, there was
immediately a sound accompanied with a general motion of these bones, which
began to draw one after the other, and to approach each unto that wherewith it
was to be joined, to make the just and perfect skeleton of a Body, immediately
after the sinews began to be extended, and the muscles to be formed, and the
flesh to cover all their protuberancies, and to fill up all their cavities, and
last of all the skin warps up altogether, in such manner that all the Organs,
and all the members being perfectly composed, there remained nothing but the
wind to give them life and motion. Which was done then, when God commanded the
Prophet to Prophesy toward the wind it self, and to call it crying, thus says
the Lord, come from the four winds, and breath upon these slain that they may
live. Which being punctually executed, every one of these Bodies was enlivened,
and stood up upon their feet, and the number was found so great, that it seemed
an Army arranged for the Battle. Now if the sole reading of this vision, does
seize our Spirits with some admiration, it cannot be doubted, but the vision it
self did fill that of the Prophet with much more of wonder: be it that the
thing were actually represented to the Corporeal senses, be it that it were
only drawn within, by the Spirit of God upon the imagination, the impression
thereof, without doubt was much more illustrious, and vehement than that which
we can impress upon our selves, by the Idea that we can form of it. Therefore
it must also be that the emotions of his mind concerning it be in proportion
much more great, as well for the astonishment that he received from a spectacle
so strong and unusual, as for the joy that the hope of the miraculous
re-establishment of the people of Israel, (foretold by this vision) did give
unto him, and for which the Prophet had extraordinary desires and passions.
Nevertheless what is this in Comparison of what we shall see then when not men,
but Angels, and the sound of the Trumpet of God, shall effectually command the
Earth that it open its Graves, and the Sea that it give up its dead, and to all
the other Elements that they restore what each of them do possess; and that
from the dust of the grave, and the bottom of the Sea, shall come forth the
matter of our Bodies to be re-establisht in life. And how much will the subject
of admiration yet increase, when we shall see that the power of God will form
them, neither of bones, or nerves or muscles, or skin, like to what we now
have, but of a Fabric so new, that excepting the humane shape, which it will
give us, and that lovely conformation, wherein we must express the image of our
Lord in the Resurrection, it is likely, that they are not humane Bodies, but
Millions of Stars Illustrious and Shining, which are produced of all sides, and
born out of the very bowels of the Earth.

The second thing which will be presented to our eyes, will be the change and
transmutation of those that will remain alive, which will not be less wonderful
than the former. For we see what are the diverse infirmities wherewithal humane
Bodies are incommoded. Some are Dwarfs, and others are of a prodigious, and
Gigantick greatness, some want some member, and others have too many; one has
some part of a monstrous shape, another is maimed in some of those senses,
which we usually call natural; one has the bone of his back bowed like an
Arch, another crooked like a Serpent, and another bended inward, and another
has some other fault in the Fabric of his neck or head; generally all have
some imperfection in the constitution of their Bodies, and if any be seen in
which there is none, he is a kind of Miracle. But although there were less by
many of the infirmities of that nature which I have mentioned, we have always
those that nature necessarily draws after it, which are very great and
considerable in themselves. When therefore by this mavelous power, which will
be displayed at the time of the coming of our Lord, we shall see in one day all
these incommodities corrected, and the Bodies of the living changed so of a
sudden, that there shall not be found one in that numberless number, which
shall not have obtained as in the twinkling of an eye. I will not say all the
perfections that can be desired or imagined, in what concerns stature and
beauty, but all the splendor and incorruption that is in the Heavenly Bodies
themselves, what will be the Transport in which our Spirits will be sound at
the aspect of a change so strange and wonderful?

Many here enquire whether we shall then know each other, and as the love we
bear to each other, and the sensible and deep regret which we have on the loss
of our Friends, do incline us extremely to desire it, so in like manner they
make us very willing to believe it. and truly forasmuch as God promised the
enjoyment of a happiness so perfect, that nothing shall be wanting to its
completing, nor to the perfection of the joy and content that we shall receive
from thence, we may be assured that if it will minister any thing to the
accomplishment of our felicity, we shall enjoy the Consolation of mutually
knowing each other at that day. But nevertheless I think here may be place for
some considerations. First of all knowledge consists in the memory of what we
have seen before, and as I have said above, there are in us two sorts of
Memories, the one consists in this, that the images of sensible things remain
impressed upon our Memories, with all their circumstances and particularities;
and the other in this, that our understandings remain imbred with the general
Idea's of things intellectual, and which consist in discourse. Now as to what
concerns this first sort of memory, I have said already that forasmuch as the
faculty of memory in which the images of things sensible are laid in reserve,
is either wholly or in great part Corporeal, there is great probability that
this faculty being extinct with the Body, its images will by that means be
obliterated, in such sort that there is no great appearance that we can call to
mind at the Resurrection, the sensible and Corporeal shape of those that we
have seen and known during the time of life. But though we should retain some
memory of them, knowledge depends on the conformity that is found between the
qualities which at present you find in the objects that are offered to your
eyes and other senses, and the images of those qualities which they had when
you formerly knew them, which are remaining in your memories: So that if you
find them such as you have seen them, you may indeed remember them. But if they
be so changed, that there be no likeness between their qualities, and the
Idea's which you have formerly received of them, as if you had known some
infant, and should see him again along time after well advanced in years, it
would be impossible for you ever to recall him to mind. Now we have already
said, that there will be a change marvellously great in all the constitution of
our Bodies, so that those that have seen us here below, will find nothing at
all of that by which we may become knowable unto them. Moreover whilst the
state of nature subsists, the natural affections are both necessary to its
subsistence, and very beautiful and lovely in themselves, when they are
governed, and conducted by that judgment, and right reason that ought to
preside over all our passions: So it is supreamly agreeable that Husbands love
their Wives, and Wives their Husbands, and that Parents have great tenderness
for their Children, and Children vehement affections and profound respects for
their Parents. And by consequent it agrees perfectly well to the institutions
of nature, that those should cordially love each other, between whom it has
established these Relations, but when the estate of nature shall be changed,
and all things put in a supernatural state, there is great probability that the
necessity of these affections ceasing, they will either be totally extinct, or
at least they will certainly lose much of their heat and vigor, and our Lord
Jesus answering to the Question which was made to him, concerning the Woman
that had seven Husbands, and teaching us that in the Kingdom of Heaven all
these Relations will cease, has as it seems likewise taught us, that the
affections that depend thereon will also be reduced to nothing. Add to this
that we know nothing more sweet nor more affecting in this life, than the
affections that we mutually bear to each other, be it that they proceed from
the inclinations and sentiments of nature, and the Relations that it does
establish between us; be it that familiar conversation, and a conformity of
humors, and inclinations do generate and produce them. Therefore as we are
inclined to measure all things by the knowledge that we have, and as it were
conceive nothing above it. Scarcely can we imagine that in the Heavens there be
enjoyment more agreeable and pleasant than those that we have here on earth,
even our Lord accommodating himself to these inclinations, and to the capacity
of our minds, promises us, as it has been said above, that we shall there sit
at Table with the Ancient Patriarchs; but nevertheless there is great
probability, that as when St. Peter saw the transfiguration of Christ, he was
so swallowed up in the admiration of those objects, that he forgot all those
that at other times he knew, and said it is good for us to be here. So then when
we shall have our Souls filled with that love and joy, which the presence of
the Redeemer, and the vision of God himself will beget within us, we shall no
more remember any of all that tenderness of affection, that we had experience
of in the present life. Notwithstanding I shall not in this place neglect to
observe two things that concern this matter, the first is that St. Paul writing
to the Thessalonians, and being willing to exhort them effectually, to
something of importance, speaks to them after this manner, Brethren we beseech
you by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto
him, the meaning is without doubt, that he conjured them by that which might be
most glorious, and most desirable for them in the coming of our Savior, and by
all that which might be one day most sweet and consolatory in our Holy
Communion, then when we shall be found together, and from all our dispersions
assembled round about him: which seems to signify that he expected to enjoy
content in their presence; as they should enjoy in his at the coming of our
Lord. Now it is difficult to conceive what that manes, if their be no mutual
knowledge of each other, I think therefore if it may be permitted to speak our
apprehensions, in things concerning which we have but little light from the
word of God, that the intellectual memory that is in us, retaining the
remembrance of general things which have been committed to it, neither the
Apostle St. Paul will forget that he Preached the Gospel to the Thessalonians,
nor will the Thessalonians forget that by the Preaching of St. Paul they had
been called to the Communion of the Gospel. If then St. Paul have any signal,
or mark, by which he may be known among the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ
(and we shall see by and by what can be said about it) the memory of it may
awaken in the Thessalonians their ancient affections, so that they may approach
St. Paul and give unto him, and receive from him, as far as the glory of their
Condition will permit them, mutual Testimonies of their love and good will. And
forasmuch as our happiness will not be only for that day, but for all Eternity,
and this Eternity will not pass in Solitude, but in most pleasant and agreeable
Communication, who doubts but that in so long a consequence of Ages, there may
be presented an infinite number of accidents, which may awaken in us those
general remembrances which do remain of what we have seen here below, and which
by this means will reanimate our affections toward those persons which we have
dearly loved in this life? But as a Father which equally loves his Children,
perceives his love for a time more lively toward him among them, which returns
from a far Country, after a very long absence, than toward those that have
been always with him; but afterward when time has quieted that extraordinary
emotion, he returns to that equality of affection, wherewithal he does embrace
them, in like manner that joy which St. Paul and the Thessalonians will have,
to find themselves together at the appearance of Christ, will not hinder but
that in a short time their love will return, and equally divide it self to all
the faithful, which they shall see partaking with them in the glory of the
Savior of the World.

The other thing is, that it seems that the holy Apostle would not that we
should doubt, but that there is something remarkable at the Coming of Christ,
which will make him knowable to those to whom he preached the Gospel of
Salvation; You are, says he to the Philippians, my joy and Crown in the day of
Christ. And things of like nature or manners of speech have given occasion to
some to think, that glory will be unequally divided among Believers at the day
of Christ, because it cannot appertain to all to make such discourses* and that
the Apostle does design thereby to tell us, that there is some peculiar honors
reserved for him in that day. Certainly if Believers shall be unequa lly
partakers in the enjoyments of the happiness that is on high, it is a thing that
may deserve very attentive consideration; and the diversity of Opinions of
great Persons upon this Subject, do sufficiently demonstrate, that the proofs
that are produced on both sides, are not at the first sight extremely evident,
whatsoever be the force of the Reasons of those that hold an inequality of
glory in the Heavens; So it is that there is not one among us which humility
does not oblige to have this apprehension aforehand impressed upon his mind, that
he will be none of the number of those that will be so advanced above their
Brother, for eminence of glory is presupposed to be the Reward of eminent
Virtues, on which account it is not permitted us to esteem our selves more
excellent than others. Now if this opinion be true, and confirmed by the event
in any of us, 'twill be difficult to comprehend in what this opinion will be
found verified, that there will be some that must have great advantages in this
inheritance; and if some must be more advantageously partakers of it there,
there must be some notable variety in the dispensation of the will of God
concerning glory and the degrees thereof, for to obtain glory it self, God has
expressly appointed us to believe that we shall have it, and by how much the
more firmly we believe it, by so much the more certain is it, that it shall be
given to us: Whereas to obtain the most sublime degrees thereof, it is most
suitable that we do not hope or believe it at all; and for as much as humility,
which hinders us from expecting it, is one of the most excellent virtues, the
less we hope to obtain them, the more certain it is that our humility will be
recompensed. And lastly to excite us to reach after the supreme pitch of
Virtue, the Scripture sets the reward of glory before our eyes; whereas to come
to its most raised degrees, it is necessary that we turn our minds from it,
humility, which is that which must make us highest there, not permitting us to
affix our thoughts thereon. So that we come to glory as he that runs a Race,
who sees the Butt whither he tends, whereas we obtain the highest degrees
thereof, as Rowers which always turn their backs upon the Port, to which
nevertheless at last they do arrive: However it be, for this is not as yet the
proper place to speak of the glory of Heaven, but of that of the most happy day
of the Savior of the World. I say that it is certain, that God will make some
difference in the testimony that he will give unto his Servants, in that day,
and that those who besides many labors that they have undergone, and many
journeys which they have made, have besides, as St. Paul, passed through many
reproaches here below, shall receive this testimony from the mouth of their
good Master, that they have been faithful and loyal Servants, and that they
deserved other things than the Calumnies whereof they had experience. This is
that which will then make them known, and I do not at all doubt, but that the
Apostles will be particularly signallized among others, and if there be any one
now, not which may be equallized with the Apostles in gifts and authority, (for
there has been nor will be none such) but in passing through Trials, like unto
those that have exercised them, does imitate in those Combats the example of
their Piety, of their Zeal, and their Constancy. I do not conceive that he will
do ill to comfort himself, by this hope, that God will put all things in open
light at his Coming, so that if Athanasius, Bazil, and Chrysostom among the
Ancients, if John Husse, Jerome of Prague, Wickliff, Luther, Colain, and many
other good Servants of God, which may with regard to the former be reckoned
among the Moderns, have in the midst of the Persecutions that they suffered
both from within and from without, had regard to this Consolation, surely they
will not find themselves deceived in their expectation. Now these had many
Friends in this life that knew them, and may have retained an intellectual
remembrance of this knowledge, in such sort that what happened to St. Paul may
very well happen to them, nevertheless preserving with proportion the
inequality that is between the least and the greatest things.

But be the particularities of our happiness what they will, in general it will
be such in that happy day, that I dare not attempt to describe it through fear
of obscuring the splendour of it. Assuredly I shall diminish by the feebleness
of my Expressions, the Efficacy of what he may conceive of it, whoever he be,
who shall set himself very attentively to consider what I have said concerning
the estate of each of us, of the World, and that of the whole Church. When our
Savior appeared at his first Coming, as all the Church was in a mavelous
expectation of his appearance, so those that saw and believed in him, did
thence receive an incomparable Contentment. Simeon testifies that he could dye
in peace, having seen the Salvation of God in this little glorious Infant.
Zachary was ravished to see his forerunner, the Virgin that Conceived, and
brought him forth, had such Transports as cannot be expressed: the Angels
themselves that declared him to the Shepherds, although they had no part
neither in the need nor hopes of Redemption, nevertheless conceived thence a
mavelous joy; at the sight of his miracles and the hearing of his Preaching
some one cried out, blessed are those that see and hear him, and then when he
entered into Jerusalem on the day, which is yet observed by the solemnity of
boughs, all the people cried Osanna with unimaginable pleasure, what will it be
then to see him come accompanied with Angels, in the glory of his Father, with
a shout, with the sound of Trumpet, and the voice of an Archangel, making king
the clouds his Chariots, and preparing a Throne in the Air, there to pronounce
eternal judgments upon all the World, and to confirm the hopes and promises of
Salvation, that he has made to believers? What Triumph was ever to be compared
to a spectacle so glorious? What pomp of a Conqueror did ever Crown his Battles
and Victories after this manner? A good old man of Lacedemonia that Traveled
even to the furthest part of Asia, only to see Alexander after he vanquished
Darius, said with very great emotion and pleasure of mind, that the Greeks that
died in the Battle of Marathon, and that of Salamine, were deprived of a
mavelous contentment in that they did not see this Prince sitting upon the
Throne of Xerxes, and Triumphing gloriously over the pride of the Enemies of
Greece. When we see how Historians report the Proclamation made by Calaminius
in favor of all the Greek Nations and how they represent the affections of the
people, the acclamations that they made, the Coronets of Flowers that they
wrought, and the Garlands that they threw upon him, and the incomparable
demonstrations of Love which they gave to his person, we cannot contain without
feeling some emotion of mind and partaking in some sort in their joy. Now what
is either this assembly of Greece, in comparison of that of all the faithful of
the Universe, or this Calaminius or Alexander in comparison of the Lord Jesus
Christ, or the liberty of these people, in comparison of that of the Sons of
God, or of deliverance from the dominion of the Persians, the Macedonians, the
Tyrant of Lacedemon, and other Usurpers from whom these deliverers set them
free, in comparison of being delivered from Satan and Death, to be put into
the enjoyment of Eternal life and glory. Moreover it is said, that the
comparing of the Calamity of another, does assist in making us more sensible of
our own proper felicity. And indeed the Poet says, that he took pleasure in
seeing upon the bank of the Sea, a Ship tossed upon the waves, not for that he
had any pleasure in the danger of another, but for that he saw it from without,
and that Perils either passed or present, but where we have no part, do give
some sense of joy. If it be so, certainly the horror of the condemnation of
unbelievers, must infinitely add to the joy of our pardon and glory. Christ
will show to them a visage severe and full of rigor; to us one supreamly
pleasant and full of serenity. Christ will fill their minds full of trembling
and horror; whereas he will overwhelm our hearts with assurance and
consolation. Christ will set them at his left hand with indignation, and us at
his right hand with demonstration of love and peace. Christ will examine them
as a Judge inflexible, and implacable to their incredulity. And us as our
advocate and witness of our faith. Christ will pronounce to them, go ye cursed
into eternal fire; to us he will say, come ye blessed of my Father. Christ will
effectively throw them down into Hell, and as to us, he will advance us to
Eternal glory in his Kingdom.

Concerning the Happiness of Believers after the Resurrection.
The Fourth Discourse.
WE are now come to the Consideration of the last degree of that happiness to
which we aspire, let us therefore see briefly what is revealed concerning it in
the word of God, and let us not approach it, with less discretion and wariness
than we have done the former Questions. The Apostles writing to the
Corinthians, and speaking to them of the mysteries of the Gospel, whereof the
Spirit of God had given the Revelation to him and his Companions in the
Apostleship, says after the Prophet Esaias, that they are things that eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered int o the heart of man to
conceive, what God has laid up for those that love him: words that we use to
accommodate to the glory of the Kingdom of Heaven of which we are speaking.

And truly it is not without good reason: For although this way of
interpretation be not suitable to the subject whereof they were first spoken,
so it is that such as was the Condition of the Jews which lived under the old
Covenant with respect to us, such well nigh is our Condition now with respect
to what it will be when God shall have assembled us altogether in the Heavens.
And as in this comparison of the Jews with us, they are compared to Children,
with respect to the measure and degree of their knowledge, and we in the
Scripture are esteemed as perfect men, so the Apostle in comparing himself with
himself makes a different judgment thereon. For he says, that now he is as a
Child, that he knows as a Child and speaks as a Child, but when that which is
perfect shall come, (and we expect it not absolutely, but in the Kingdom of
Heaven) then that which is in part shall be done away and he shall know as he
is known, that is to say, in a light which will not be mixed with any darkness.
For he adds that now we see nothing, but the simple images of things, as in a
glass, whereas then we shall behold things in their proper realities. Moreover
we consider not these images but as we regard riddles, where we know not what
they signify, but through a great deal of darkness, whereas when the time of
perfection shall come, we shall see, says he, face to face. When the Jews
formerly did attempt to expound the Oracles of the Prophets, touching things to
come, and thence clearly and distinctly to Divine of events, they were
marvellously mistaken in their conjectures, and had apprehensions touching the
Kingdom of the Messiah, which were found infinitely distant from the nature
thereof, when it came to be manifest, and for that reason it is necessary that
we take head that we do not fall into the same inconveniences, and that being
willing to anticipate things to come by the Curiosity of our Spirits, depaint
imaginations in the fancy, which the event of things will one day refute to our
shame. Notwithstanding provided we be mindful of the modesty that becomes us,
the search of what it will be is not at all forbidden us. And the faults that
others have formerly committed in such matters, may be helpful to hinder us
from falling into errors of like nature in the subject whereof we are
discoursing. For that which made them to stumble, was that they followed the
inclinations of the flesh in the interpretation of prophecies, and whereas they
ought to have placed the Sovereign perfection of the Kingdom of the Messiah, in
the clear knowledge of the nature of God, and the means of their Salvation, and
in true and spiritual sanctity which this clear knowledge was to produce, they
dreamt of worldly grandeur and dominion, and of the Triumphs of Conquerours.
Therefore if now we do separate our thoughts from all earthly and carnal
imaginations, and following the steps of our Lord and his Apostles, we place
the principal part of this Kingdom in knowledge and sanctity, we shall escape
the precipice on which these persons have fallen, and if it should happen that
we should commit any fault in this discourse at the least it will not be of
like consequence with theirs.

Saint John Collects the brief sum of our happiness in these few words, we
shall be like him in as much as we shall see him as he is; Certainly to see God
as he is, is to acquire the supreme degree of perfection in matter of knowledge
and understanding; and to be made like unto him, is to attain the supreme pitch
of Holiness and Virtue. Forasmuch therefore as the first is the cause of the
second, and that on the knowledge of God as he is, depends necessarily our
transformation into his likeness, it behooves us to enquire what is meant by
seeing God as he is, and what is the nature of that knowledge: Because God is a
Spiritual Essence, and totally separate from the matter of Bodies, it is
absolutely impossible that he should be seen as he is with our bodily eyes; and
therefore it is necessary that we refer the word see by a Metaphor, to that
faculty of our minds that consists in understanding: Now although the nature of
God be marvellously one and simple, so it is that according to our manner of
conception, we distinguish his virtues and Properties from his Essence.
Concerning his properties, we conceive them under very different respects, and
pretend not when we say that he is merciful, to beget an apprehension in the
minds of those that hear us, that he is just, or when we say that he is wise,
to give occasion to think of his power and might, as his Attributes have very
different Objects, so we comprehend them in our understandings under very
different Idea's: But then when we speak of his Essence, we make a kind of
abstraction of it from his Properties, and represent it as a single and simple
thing, in which all his Attributes exist as in a common Subject. As to what
concerns his Attributes, we see them in some sort in this life, in that we
understand at least in some degree, what is the nature of those Operations, by
which they display themselves upon their Objects. For we are not perfectly
ignorant what may be that inclination in God of pardoning sins to the penitent,
and punishing the obstinate and impenitent and things of like nature. But as to
his Essence, there is no man that does not acknowledge, that we understand it
not at all in this life; that is to say, we are not able to form any conception
in our minds, which has any respect to the nature of his Essence, only some
think that when we shall be received into the Heavens, our supreme happiness
will consist in the vision of this Essence, which certainly seems extreme
difficult to be imagined: for since the question here is not concerning the
Corporeal Vision, seeing God is absolutely invisible after that manner: But
concerning the Vision of the Mind, our understandings here below know not in
any wise the Essence of things, but fix themselves alone on the Contemplation
of their Properties, so that it is not at all possible for us now to
comprehend, how this faculty of understanding, shall be so changed in the
Heavens, that not fixing it self on the Contemplation of the Properties of
things, it should pass on to the very Essence it self. Add to this, that if
there be any Being in the World, whose Essence is incomprehensible, it is that
of God, for all others have at least this conformity with us, that they are
Created, and by consequence there being some proportion between their Essence
and ours, it will not be so strange, if there should be some proportion between
them and the operation of our faculties; whereas God being an Increated Being,
which exists by it self, it is more than difficult to conceive, how created
faculties can attain to the comprehension of his Essence: as long as we are
encompassed with this body, although we be Spiritual as to the most excellent
part of our Essence, so it is that we know not at all what is the nature of
Spirits; and however subtly we do contemplate, however precise and delicate
be the Abstractions, by which we endeavor to withdraw our minds from all
Commerce with matter in our Contemplations, so it is that if we try to form any
conception in our minds, as they speak, which we will accommodate to the nature
of a Spirit, we know not how to hinder some Corporeal Idea from gliding
insensibly on our thought and imagination; Now I am of this opinion, that
though our Souls be truly Spiritual, if you compare them with the nature of
bodies, nevertheless they are in some sort Corporeal, if you do compare them
with the nature of God; that is to say, there is as much disproportion betwixt
the simplicity of the nature of God, and the quality of our minds, as there is
between the nature of our minds, and the quality of that part in us that is
Corporeal; and for that reason there seems to be a like impossibility for our
Spirits to comprehend the nature of the Essence of God, as there is for us
whilst we are clothed with this body, to conceive the nature of our own Souls
and that of Angels. Lastly, The Divine nature cannot be Divine, that is to say,
endued with the Perfection that becomes the excellency of its Being, if its
Essence be not altogether infinite. Either then this conception of our minds,
by which we comprehend the Essence of the Deity, equalleth it self to the whole
extent of this Essence, so as entirely to comprehend it, or else it comprehends
only as much as is proportionable to its capacity, and to its extent to that
same Essence: if it be equal to the nature of God, it will become infinite, and
we shall become so many Gods, which is too absurd and erroneous to be received
by any understanding of regular apprehensions; if it comprehend only what will
be proportionable to its capacity, seeing this capacity is finite, and that
between finite and infinite there is no proportion, there will always be an
immense disproportion, between the Essence of God, and what we comprehend
concerning it.

I know well that here are alleged certain subtle distinctions, which put us
to as much trouble to confute them as they give us trouble to understand them;
For some say that we see the Essence of God all entire, but that we do not see
it entirely. Well near as if we said that on the Sea Shore we see the Sea in
whole, but not in all its latitude and extension, for we see it in whole or in
its integrity, in that it is the Sea, and because in all the parts of the World
it has no other nature, than that which it has upon our Shores. But we do not
not see it in all its latitude because our sight cannot extend it self so far
as the extent of our Horizon, so far is it short of being able to see what is
at the Antipodes. But this does not at all weaken my Argument, for if the word
Sea signify nothing but a certain kind of water salt in its original, and
which by hidden causes in nature, has certain fluxes and refluxes more or less
observable, on such and such Shores, according as it has pleased the
Providence of God to dispose of them, it is true we see the Sea all entire,
though we see it not entirely: for if we should encompass the World by all
sides of the Ocean, we should not find there any other sort of Sea, than what
we see in our own Harbors and Havens. But if the Sea signify all that
extension of Water which encompasses the World, in such manner that, as we say,
its desinition includes universally all its parts, and that if we divide it,
then it loses the name and nature of Sea, without doubt he does not see the
Sea, who sees nothing of it but an Arm or a Haven. Now such is the nature of
God that his infinity enters its definition, or, to express it otherwise, his
immensity is of the nature of his Essence: so that he sees not God in his
Essence, which sees him not infinite, and he cannot see him infinite, that is
to say, know him such as he is in that respect, who has not an immense
capacity of understanding.

But there is yet more. We cannot only not see the Essence of God by portions,
but although we could see some portion of it, that is not properly the thing in
which our happiness does consist. I say we cannot see it by portions, for the
Properties of things are conceived by certain degrees, which do in some sort
divide their efficacy and virtues; but Essences are absolutely indivisible to
our understanding, and if they could be conceived, they would not be conceived
but as a point: so that either we do not comprehend that of God, or we must
comprehend it all entire, though we do not consider it as infinite. Now this is
a thing absolutely impossible to our understandings; moreover it will not be in
that, that our felicity will consist, for it is very true that the happiness of
our understandings, will consist in the supreme excellence of their operations,
and that the excellence of their operations in great measure depend on the
perfection of the Objects upon which they are employed. Now it is very true,
without doubt, that the Essence of God is something supreamly perfect,
nevertheless this perfection of the Divine Essence, is not acknowledged
principally in that it is an Essence, but in that it is an Essence which has
such Properties, as that it is supreamly powerful, supreamly wise, supreamly
merciful, that it is eternal, immutable and most happy in it self, and things of
like nature, in such sort that to the end that the operations of our
understanding may be as perfect as they ought to be, that we may be accounted
happy, in that we do produce them, there is no need that they fix themselves on
the Essence of God, in such sort as it is an Essence, it is nccessary that they
employ themselves in the knowledge of those virtues which I have named, and of
all others that may be mentioned of the same sort. Besides, to the end that
these operations of our understanding be such as they ought to be, it is
necessary that they produce in us conformity with God, for we must be made like
him because we shall see him as he is; Now our happiness in this respect cannot
consist in being made like to God in this that we shall have an Essence, much
less in this that our Essence be Divine, but in this that we be holy, just and
good as he is. And therefore this Vision of God which will make us such must
consist in the knowledge of his admirable properties and perfections.

Behold then well nigh what it is to see God as he is, and how the words of St.
John must be understood, it is that now we know the virtues and perfections of
God, but it is not but very imperfectly, as well because the revelation does
not discover him fully, as principally because of the imperfect constitution of
our Faculties and Beings; Then we shall understand them as perfecty as they can
be understood by a created understanding, when it is exalted to as high a degree
of perfection as it can ascend unto, and according to the most excellent degree
of revelation, in which they can be presented to a Creature, which has
attained the highest degree of perfection in the constitution of his Faculties
and Essence: for as long as a thing does not discover its qualities and virtues
perfectly, whatsoever attention we bring to the consideration of them, we can
neither see nor know it as it is, and when it is perfectly discovered, we know
it not as it is, if we be not in a condition to know and consider it. But when
these two things meet together, then a perfect vision or knowledge of it is
made, or obtained.

The declaration that God gives of his Properties to his Creatures, consists
either in the testimony that he gives to himself, that such and such
perfections are in him, or in this, that he does some works, and displays
himself in some operations, in which he puts the marks and impressions of them,
for every Effect bears some Character of its Cause, and the more excellent the
Cause, and the more elaborate the Effect is, the more evident and knowable are
the Characters thereof. Now as to what concerns testimony, that consists in the
word, either which God himself pronounces, or which he causes to be pronounced
by his Servants, therefore because it is a means which he employs, forasmuch as
men have not understanding sufficiently clear nor strong, to be able to
perceive in the works of God, the Virtues and Perfections whereunto his word
gives testimony; Then when man shall be put in such estate that his
understanding shall be endowed with all necessary light, to be able to know in
the works of God, his mavelous virtues, it is easy to imagine that this mean
will then cease; St. Paul says, That since in the wisdom of God the World by
wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save
them that believe. When therefore the World shall be re-establisht in such an
estate that it by wisdom can know God, and that the objects that will be in his
mavelous works can lead it to all the raised and sublime knowledge, to which
the ministry of the Word is capable of advancing it, there will be without
doubt no more need of making use of it, so that we shall know God chiefly by
the Contemplation of his Works; when God created man, he gave him the works of
Heaven and Earth, and all things contained in them; for the object of his
Contemplation, and because the faculty of his understanding was then in
condition so perfectly good, as the condition of nature would bear, he was able
to see God in them, that is to say, to know the Virtues whose Characters he had
impressed upon them: And the chief of those virtues were his goodness, which
alone induced him to create the World, his wisdom, which is so admirably
discovered in all the parts whereof it is composed, and his power, which
appears not only in the greatness of the work, and in the great variety of
forms wherewith it is replenisht, but especially in this, that it was drawn
from nothing, and formed without the aid of any preexistent matter: And that
leads him to the knowledge of the infinity and immensity of the nature of God,
for the World could not be created of nothing unless by an infinite power, and
an infinite power cannot reside in a finite or limited Essence; from the
infinity of his Essence, he was able to ascend to his Eternity, for it is
impossible but that a thing that had a beginning should have a limited nature,
to which the cause that produced it, does necessarily determine it, so that
what is infinite in its Essence has no beginning of its Existence, and what
has no beginning of its Existence, can have no end; it is for this reason that
St. Paul in the beginning of the Epistle to the Romans, says, that men may
know the Eternal Power of God in his works by the Creation of the World;
joining with the declaration of his Power, the revelation of his Eternity, from
thence he was able to conduct his discoursive power a little farther, and know
yet some other attributes of this blessed Essence, and see God a little
farther; Nevertheless to see him in this fort, is not called properly the
seeing of him as he is, and the reasons of it are evident; Firstly, In that the
perfections which God has displayed in this work of nature might have been
more magnificently discovered, if God had set it, as one day it must be, in a
Supernatural State: for as I have said already, the more excellent the work is,
the more clearly does it give us to understand the virtues and properties of
its Cause. Again, though God has revealed therein some of his Perfections,
nevertheless he has not revealed all of them; for as to his Justice, he has
given no other knowledge of it besides what may be contained in that
threatening, Thou shall dye the death; now there is a great deal of difference
between the knowledge that these threatenings may give us of it, and that which
is made from experience of the thing it self: for what concerns his mercy,
there was no declaration made of it, and therefore Adam could have no
understanding of it.

After the fall till the first coming of Christ, God has revealed among others
these two attributes, for death and other sorts of judgments which he has
caused to fall upon men, have given testimony to his Justice, and his mercy is
made known in the promise of Remission of Sins, so that the faithful that have
known them, have in some sort seen God in that respect; but nevertheless
diverse things hinder, so that we cannot say that they did see him as he is;
the one is, that as to what concerns his Justice, though death and other
judgments of God, do bear evident testimonies thereof, nevertheless the
punishment that God made of our Sins on the person of his only Son, was a far
more apparent evidence, and more authentic demonstrations thereof: until then
it appeared that God was just, but it did not appear that he was inflexible,
and altogether inexorable in his Justice, but when he delivered his welbeloved
Son unto death for the punishment of our Sins, he gave us to understand that
his nature did so abhor Sin, that it is absolutely impossible that he should
suffer it without punishing it in a very dreadful manner; this is it which St.
Paul teaches Romans 3. That God had made his Son a propitiatory through faith,
to the end that he might demonstrate his Justice, which had not been
sufficiently known during the forbearance of the times past; for how ever it
was, God, as says the same St. Paul, did as it were connive during the times of
the ignorance of Gentilism, and permit that men should entertain thoughts of
his severity less congruous, than became a Nature so holy and exactly just as
is his; the other is, that where the Justice of God is not known to the utmost,
the Mercy of God is not known neither, for he that knows not perfectly the
whole greatness of the Evil, cannot sufficiently comprehend the whole
excellence of the Remedy; add to this that the mercy of God was then indeed
known by excellent premises, but it was not sufficiently known by the
experience of the effects themselves, for death always reigned, and Believers
were always exposed to afflictions, which did precede death, and all this bore
the Characters, or were Signs of that inclination that solicited God to punish
Sin; so that all these things did in a manner obscure the splendour of this
Mercy; the third is, that the mean by which this mercy makes it self known to
be shed abroad upon us, being not yet manifest, the wisdom of God that
reconciled justice and mercy between themselves, could not be known in this
affair, which is the most magnificent and most admirable of all the works that
ever it did produce, for all the marvels that it has so liberally scattered in
the Heavens and in the Earth, approach not that of the incarnation of our
Savior, by which God was made capable of suffering the pains which the Sins of
men deserved; man knows God just by the threatenings of his Laws, and merciful
by the sweetness of his Promises, and the Efficacy whereby he accompanies his
word, render the one and the other of these two Properties sensible to the
Consciences of those whose hearts he touches: and besides, he is not ignorant
that God is sufficiently wise in reconciling them together, but nevertheless
what sublimity of knowledge and understanding could divine, that the mean of
this accord was to consist in making God become man, and this same man God,
without mixture or confusion between the natures that constitute his Person, or
the Properties that do accompany them; To conclude, man being not only in a
State of Nature, but also in a State of Corruption, and having not received the
Spirit of Illumination then, unless in some small measure, he could not
apprehend all the beauties of his Perfections, though they had been much more
clearly and illustriously revealed.

From the first Coming of Christ until the second the faithful are in that
Condition, that we cannot sufficiently express how much of increase their
knowledge has received. For the Justice of God has appeared in the highest
degree in the death of Christ, his Mercy in the effect of his satisfaction, his
Wisdom in the conduct of the mystery of our Salvation, his Power in the
Resurrection of our Savior, and in the Conversion and Sanctification of our
Souls so far that Saint Paul says, that we have believed according to the
excellent greatness of the mighty power of God himself; and although we see not
with our bodily eyes the Lord Jesus, nevertheless by the Doctrine of the
Gospel, in which he is represented so lively, the Divine Perfections that are
there displayed in him, are set before our eyes with so much luster, that we
may now say, that he which knows and sees Christ in some sort sees the
Father. Nevertheless it is certain, that as yet we do not see God as he is, for
on the one side the Spirit that is given us does not perfectly illuminate us,
to be able to perceive all that is in the lovely Objects of the Gospel, and it
cannot be that the remainders of the darkness of our understandings should not
obscure its brightness; on the other, the Objects themselves are not arrived at
that high degree of Revelation, which may give them all their splendour and
glory. We do not see as yet the love that God bears us, but through
Tribulations and the Cross: we do not see the wonder of his Wisdom in our
Salvation, unless it be through an infinity of difficulties, which are not as
yet cleared in the Gospel: we do not as yet see the greatness of his Power,
unless it be through the shadows of death, and the natural infirmities of our
bodies, which make our Resurrection a thing comprehensible with great
difficulty: in a word, God does indeed reveal himself in the Gospel, and we may
there contemplate his glory in the face of our Lord Jesus Christ: but there are
so many Shadows and Clouds thereon, so many dark strokes and aenigmatick lines,
that the greatest Saints of God, and those that have had the greatest occasion
of praising him, by reason of the excellency of his Revelations, have
nevertheless always acknowledged, and frankly confessed the imperfection, and
obscurity of their knowledge.

As to what appertains to the State of the believing Soul, I have already said
above, that it obtains very much light by death, but that nevertheless many
things are yet wanting to the plenitude of its happiness, because it sees not
as yet the real and effectual accomplishment of those things that were promised
to it, as well touching its reunion with its body, and for what concerns the
renovation of the World, and the entire redemption of the Church: it remains
now that we endeavor to see what accomplishment of the Promises, will add to
the knowledge, that we may have of these admirablevirtues of God. I will repeat
nothing of the Constitution in which we shall then be for the application of
our Faculties, to the consideration of the Objects, that will be presented to
us, to the end that we may profit by them in proportion to their excellency. I
have said above, that our Souls will be in such estate, that the operations of
our understandings, can be no less than admirable in all kinds. One thing only
I will add, it is that Saint Paul says, That God will be all in all, then when
the Lord Jesus shall have delivered up the Kingdom into the hands of his
Father; which signifies in my opinion, that our Lord Jesus must exercise the
Office of Mediator till the works of Salvation be finished; it is by his
interposition that we receive the favor of that Spirit of illumination, which
makes us whilst here below, more and more capable of receiving the knowledge,
and assurance of all the Christian verities in our minds, in such manner that
we have no communion with God, as long as yet remains any remnant of Sin, or
any enemy of our Salvation to be overcomed, unless it be that whereof Christ is
(if I may so speak) the Buckle and Bond; but when the work of Salvation shall
be finished, the Office of the Mediator being to cease, and the Communion that
we shall have with God being then immediate, he will himself fill us with his
Spirit in such manner that all the powers of our Souls will be fully and
perfectly enlightened thereby: now they cannot be filled in that manner, but
they will be marvellously strengthened in their operations, and by consequence
the productions that will follow thereon, will be supreamly exquisite and
admirable, therefore we have nothing to consider here, unless it be the Objects
which we shall have for our Contemplation, the time during which we shall be
exercised therein, with other circumstances which will accompany it, and to
conclude, the Fruit which this Contemplation will produce for the advantage of
our own happiness; Now for what concerns Objects, I will reserve them all to
two, the World, and the Church: As to the World, though it should continue such
as it was when it was first Created, it bears so many marks of the goodness of
God in the Creation and Production of its being, so many proofs of the Wisdom
of God in the variety of its forms, and in their fitness for their operations,
so many Testimonies of his power, in that it is made so vast and great, and
drawn from the womb or bosom of nothing, and to conclude so many demonstrations
of all his properties in its Conservation and Government, that there will be
enough to raise faculties such as ours will then be, to knowledge marvellously
sublime and raised. Therefore since the Estate wherein it will be then set,
will be incomparably more rich in all effects of the Divine perfections, what
may be the thoughts, which our Souls will form upon such admirable objects? For
from henceforth 'twill not be his goodness only which will be resplendent
there, 'tw^^^ be his mercy, yea his Mercy in its most Glorious Luster, and in
its brightest splendor, his Wisdom will there sparkle of all sides* far above
what the State of nature can furnish us with any arguments or proofs of, and
his Power, which has given to it an incorruptible Essence, and perpetually
immutable, will ravish our hearts without doubt, in the admiration of its
infinite extension, and although this natural constitution of things will be
changed: Nevertheless the memory of them will not be obliterated, and the Idea
that we shall have of them in our minds, will help much to furnish matter to
our Speculations, be it that we consider it in it self, be it that we compare
it with the constitution in which the World will then be. First in it self, for
at present we do only touch the surface of the wonders of nature, and Fathom
nothing to the bottom. Because the edge of our minds is blunted at the
occurrence of the first difficulty, and our understandings are perplexed, and
wearied immediately in the search of things, profound and difficult, whereas
then the light of our understandings, will find nothing so dark and so
intricate, which they cannot disintangle and make plain; and the facility that
we shall have in our ratiocinations, (which will be that we shall be able to
attempt all sorts of objects, without any pain) will cause that we shall use
this Contemplation, as with a success eternally happy, so with content wholly
incomprehensible. And if Pythagoras or Archimedes, or some other such renowned
Mathematicians, have been Transported with joy in having been able to find out
the truth of some Geometrical Problems, even so far as to feel some kind of
ravishment therein, how will it be with us, when there will be nothing in all
those secrets of Sciences, to which men ordinarily addict themselves, which is
not exposed to our sight, as in perfect light? In comparing them also with the
estate of things then: For although all these wonders of nature be supreamly
lovely in themselves, so it is that by comparison they cause us to find those
of the supernatural State, yet infinitely more lovely, and will contribute so
much the more to our satisfaction and ravishment, and if it may be permitted to
compare small things with great, it will be as if after we had considered a
glass of frail and ordinary constitution, mingled with store of knots, which
hindered much of its transparency and luster, we should see it in a moment
transformed into Crystal, not only pure, and resplendent to a wonder, but also
easy to be hammered and resisting all kinds of strokes without any offense or
damage. For it cannot be doubted but that our astonishment would then be very
great, and that we should enquire with extreme care, from what cause a change
so observable should proceed.

As to what concerns the Church, I shall not consider it at present so much in
it self; as with respect to that, Religion by which it arrives at this glory,
and which now seems to be composed principally of the Histories of things past,
of the predictions of those that are yet to come, of Doctrines that have no
particular regard to any difference of times, and of promises in which God has
declared his good will, and the riches that he has designed for us. All which
things do now compose a Body of science altogether admirable; as well in the
excellency of the parts whereof it is constituted, as in the wonderful symmetry,
and agreement that is among them, and in the beautiful Harmony which they make
with the Ceremonies which have been appointed to confirm the promises of God
unto us. Now it is very true that touching Ceremonies, we shall make no use of
them in the Kingdom of Heaven. They are helps for the support of our present
infirmities, which can have no place in the perfect State that is to come. We
shall not any more consider the promises as objects of our faith, because they
will be performed, and Faith as the Apostle teaches us, will in that respect be
abolished. We shall no more consider the predictions of things to come, in that
quality or under that notion, because we shall see the events of them
accomplished, whereof the most part will eternally subsist before our eyes, and
that which is at this time a prediction, will become a History. In like manner,
we shall no more consider the Doctrines, that have particular respect to any
difference of times, as things, the belief and assurance whereof is a means to
bring us to the fruition of happiness. For when we are in the enjoyment of the
end, the means as such, lose their use and value. But nevertheless, both the
Histories appertaining to Religion, which at the present we Consider as such
and the things contained in the Prophecies, to which we give the name of
predictions, and the Doctrines which we apprehend as Eternal verities, and
which change not their nature, with change of times, and that which is
contained under the promises, and the reasons of the institution of Ceremonies,
and Sacraments, will form, in the perfection in which we shall see them,
Objects so noble and lovely, to be presented to our understandings, and
instructions so illustrious concerning the perfections of God, whereof I have
spoken before, that we know not how to express with what greediness our Souls
will continually feed their thoughts on them; and we may not reckon what will
be their emotions and transports then, by that sluggishness and stupid
negligence, wherewithal we behave our selves very often at present in the
contemplation of these Divine Objects. The little knowledge that we have of
their excellence, and the little vivacity of desire, that is in our inward
thoughts for things of this nature, is a cause that very few men apply
themselves unto them, and even of those few, there are not any that have that
taste of them as they ought. We must measure and reckon them by the
inclinations of Angels themselves, who find in these Mysteries, although they
be at this time but imperfectly revealed, so many beauties, depths, and
wonders, that St. Peter represents them as bending, and inclining themselves
downwards, attentively to consider them, and to endeavor to fathom them, as
far as the light of Intelligences so excellent and perfect can attain. But if
besides this, you add to the consideration of Religion in it self, that of the
images and types thereof, which God has put in the constitution of the World,
and the old Covenant, you will easily conceive that the searching out of the
agreements that ought to be between the figures and the truths, is an
employment in speculations very profitable and agreeable to our minds. For we
may not imagine, that so many lovely similitudes, as are between the first
Creation, and Redemption of the World, whereof the Apostle St. Paul only
observes some few, nor that so many lovely things, as the shadows of the Old
Testament do now cover, and whereof we shall have little or no knowledge, as
long as the World endures, will remain Eternally buried in obscurity. All the
marvels which are unknown both in nature and in Religion, which notwithstanding
have been produced by the Divine wisdom, to the end that understanding
Creatures, might by them be raised to praise and adore it, shall one day be
unfolded from the darkness in which they are, that they may serve the end and
use to which they were intended. That cause to which they owe their Original is
too wise to have them buried like Gold in mines so deep, that we shall never be
able to fetch them thence. It Is necessary that the nature of things do open, if
I may so express it, its bowels and give us one day a view, and enjoyment of
the inestimable treasures which the hand of God has hidden there.

Now the time that will be given us for this Divine employment with the other
circumstances that will accompany it, is very considerable. For it is certain,
that to be profitably employed in the Contemplation of things, it is necessary
that we be exempt from all incommodities from elsewhere. Because the sense of
incommodity, carries away the mind from its Object and recalls it, however
unwilling it be, to that which troubles it. Now we shall be there, both so far
removed from all evils, and possessed of so great an affluence of all sorts of
content, that there is not the least reason in the World to fear, that any
thing will divert (be it never so little) our Spirits, or hinder them from
remaining fixed upon objects so agreeable and Divine. It is moreover certain,
that to be employed in the Contemplation of things with delight and pleasure,
it is necessary, that we have such with whom we may Communicate the knowledge
that we acquire, and the satisfaction that we derive from thence. Assuredly the
most knowing man in the World, would lose half the pleasure that his knowledge
gives him, if he had no man to whom he might impart any thing thereof. And that
Roman that said that he was never less alone then when alone, had the advantage
of having a mind so great and so strong (according to the opinion of Cicero)
that he could content himself with his own Meditations, nevertheless 'twas the
mind of a man which has a natural and irreconcilable inconsistency with
solitude. Add that although the Spirit or mind of man may in some manner be
content with it self, without needing the Conversation of any other,
nevertheless it is naturally Communicative, and the more perfections, and
advantages it possesses in it self, the more inclination it has to disperse
them. Now we shall be in the company of so many happy believers, and in a
Conversation so continual and ravishing, that we shall never want persons to
whom we may discover the thoughts of our minds, and who may discover theirs to
us, to our common joy and consolation. To conclude it is certain that to obtain
knowledge sufficient to correspond to that happy condition that we shall
possess, there will need a long time for the humane mind, which however
excellent it be, is nevertheless always finite, and for that reason cannot
receive the images of all in a moment, it must necessarily be that they enter
there successively, and one after the other. For there is none but God alone
whose understanding is infinite, who sees all at once, all sorts of objects in
an instant, and who perceives in that same instant; both their sides, and their
bottom, their Essence and their Properties, their Principal and their
Dependances. Now for this we shall have an Eternity, so that it seems there
will be more reason to fear, that objects may be wanting to our Meditation,
than that time should fail us for the gaining a perfect knowledge of them. And
certainly this deserves attentive Consideration. For blessedness will consist
properly in the contentment that we take in the Operations of our faculties,
and in great part contentment arises from this, that the Operation of the
faculty is performed with nimbleness and vigor. For the objects which we
conceive and lay hold on but languidly, do not as it were at all touch our
understandings, nor stir up any Considerable emotion there, the force and
vehemence of the action comes also in great degree from this, that the object
appear new to us, and that by its Novelty it excite and awaken our minds, and
inflame them with a desire of understanding it. As soon as we know it, it seems
that our minds languish a little concerning it, and according to the measure
that we accustom our selves to see or consider it, in the same measure
ordinarily the satisfaction that at first we had therein, does diminish: So
that at last we leave it altogether, and search out other objects, to serve as
pasture to that greediness of knowledge, that is natural to our Souls. So that
the time that we shall have to exercise our selves in this pleasant employment
being infinite, and the Objects of our contemplation being not so, it seems
that there may be reason to fear, whether there will be always there, what will
keep and preserve our minds in this raised taste and relish of their happiness
and joy.

Nevertheless if we consider well what will be the nature of this
contemplation, we shall easily free our selves of this fear and pain. If it be
necessary that I serve my self of School terms, this contemplation will have
two acts, the one direct, which is carried directly to the object, which
presents it self before our eyes; the other reflex, that is to say, that from
the object makes reflection upon the cause. For other is (for example) the
motion by which our mind is carried toward some engine artificially composed,
as is a watch, to consider the wheels and springs thereof, and other that by
which it turns it self from the watch to the workman, to consider that industry
and dexterity wherewithal he composed that work. Now touching the object, if we
imagine that Adam had remained in his integrity, and by consequent had lived
eternally, I say the sole work of the world had been capable everlastingly of
furnishing matter to his speculations. And when we shall have represented to
our selves, how far he might have led his ratiocinations in Logic, Physics,
Metaphysics, Morality, Arithmetic, Geometry, Algebra, Astronomy, Optics, and
other Mathematical Sciences, in the natural History of Animals, Fishes, Birds,
Creeping things, Insects, Plants, Metals, Minerals, their Qualities,
Properties, and Powers, and then how far his understanding might have proceeded
in the knowledge of Religion, such as he might gather from the works of God, and
was agreeable to the condition in which he then was, we shall find that there
had been in all this, employment for him, until, I know not how many, millions
of ages. For men at present see nothing but the fringes of those sciences, and
the superficies or outside of the wisdom of God in the subjects that are
explained in them. There is throughout them all such knowledge to be enquired
into and fathomed, that if our minds were capable of apprehending the latitude
and extent thereof, there is none of us who would not remain swallowed up of
despair ever to come, I will not say, to the end, but to the least part of the
considerations that may be made only on one of these Sciences. And it seems to
me that he had good reason that said, that all that we know compared with what
we know not, and yet may be known, is as if we should compare a little brook
which is dried, and drained during the heat of Summer, to the vast extent and
depth of the Ocean it self. And verily I believe that Geometry alone, to him
that would follow it whither its figures and proportions would go, and
Chemistry alone to him that would search all its secrets, would be able to
furnish to the humane mind, wherewithal to employ it self many hundreds of
years. Now it is to be known that as the difficulties that are in things, and
the labor that our understandings have experience of in Fathoming them, does
oblige us as much as we are able to make abridgment of Sciences, and to
restrain our selves within the bounds, either of what we judge profitable, or
of what we can attain, the facility that we shall there find in them, and the
success wherewithal weshall apply our understanding to them, will cause us to
extend them to that length that the desire of knowledge will not terminate it
self, unless it be where the object of knowledge it self determines. We are at
this time like those that Sail along by the borders, and which, by the fear
that they have of Pirates and Tempests, do not put themselves out upon the main
Sea. Then there being nothing to fear in Voyages of the longest circuit, we
Sail with assurance upon the deepest Gulphs, and in no wise fear any danger in
discovering new Seas and unknown Lands. But what need is there of going farther
than the objects that are continually exposed to our senses, to know how God
and nature has prepared matter for men's Meditation? There is in the production
of the qualities of things that touch our senses, and the images by the
interposition whereof they do come thither, and in the manner after which our
Nostrils, our Taste, our ears, and particularly our eyes do exercise their
functions on them, so many Miracles, that the custom of experiencing them, or
despair of being able to Fathom them, hinders us from searching them, but if we
had obtained only some little part of the knowledge of them, we should be
equally touched with the admiration of their beauty, and an astonishment at our
former ignorance. Certainly those that take some little notice of things, find
matter of admiration, on which side soever they turn. And when I consider, that
as yet we know not, what is either the nature of the light that does enlighten
us, or that of fire that does warm us, or that of the Air which we breath, and
that some maintain that there are no such things as Colors, and that it is the
Earth that moves, and the Sun stands still, by such reasons as it is the hardest
thing in the World to confute them, I am almost ready to say, that we shall be
long in the spaces of Eternity, before we shall exhaust all that is found
difficult in things, on which at present we scarcely form any at all. Now how
will it be then when besides the employment that the remembrance of the natural
state of the universe will give us. We shall moreover have it before our eyes
in that supernatural state without comparison more rich and more glorious, and
besides that we shall have also so many Divine Mysteries in Religion to know
and contemplate? Certainly when I set before my mind the beauties which we find
in the truths of the Gospel, and the admirable agreement of all those truths
among themselves, the correspondencies that are found between the old World and
the New, whereof St. Paul has given us notice, as I have said above, the
allegories that are found in the Histories of Genesis, whereof the birth of
Isaac, and Ishmael, of Jacob, and Esau is but a small part, which we do but
imperfectly understand; the Mysteries that are covered in the History of the
people of Israel, and in the institution of their Ceremonies, whereof the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews has only showed us a little part; the
Visions of the Prophets of the old Covenant, in Ezechiel, Daniel, Zachary, and
many others whereof at present we scarce understand the least fully and
distinctly; and the Revelations of the Apocalypse, which will never exactly be
unfolded, unless it be after we shall have had a perfect knowledge of an
infinite number of events which at this time we know not at all, or do not know
how to apply to those Mysteries whereof they are the Explication; my mind is
swallowed in astonishment of that which we are ignorant of, and in the joy of
the hope, that I have to see removed one day from before our eyes, the band
that hides from us so many marvels. Add to this, that although it be true, that
the Operations of our minds do become a little more languishing, when they
apply themselves to objects that are known already, so it is that it never
almost happens, unless it be then, when the things that we Contemplate, are not
in themselves very excellent: But because there are objects so excellently
lovely and beautiful, that although we have seen them many times, and perfectly
understand them, so it is that of it self their excellency gives content and
admiration, in as much as their beauty does not diminish, by the knowledge that
we have of them, we do not cease to return often to the Contemplation of them,
and find almost as much satisfaction at the last as at the first. And I imagine
that if we could see the Sun near at hand, and observe all the marvels of his
Body and his Light, Nevertheless we should never distaste it, and that if the
novelty should not draw us thither, the sole magnificence of the object would
be capable of fixing our eyes and thoughts steddily upon it. Therefore where
there will be a mavelous variety of things, whereof every one will surpass
all that can be most attractive and shining in the Sun, can it be feared, that
there should not be enough wherewith to content the activity of our mind to all
Eternity?

As to what concerns the cause whence all these things proceed, when we shall
come to make Reflections on it, to admire the perfections thereof, according to
the measure that we advance in the knowledge of its effects, we shall find it
so infinite in all respects, that on which side soever we turn the eyes of our
minds, we lose our selves in the largeness of it. Shall we set our selves to
consider his goodness? There we cannot content our selves to admire, how God
possessing in himself eternally his own felicity, and having no need of the
Existence of any thing: For his satisfaction, was notwithstanding willing to
give Being to the universe and man. Shall we cast our eyes upon his Justice? We
can never sufficiently admire neither the invariable rectitude of its conduct
in all things, nor the inexorable rigor of its severity in the punishment of
our sins on his Son. Shall we affix our minds on the Consideration of his
power? The Testimonies, which the effects thereof that are before our eyes,
give us, will indeed astonish us; But as much as the immensity of the void
Spaces above the Heavens, do exceed the extensions of the Heaven of Heavens
themselves, so much shall we be ravished in admiration by knowing and
understanding that this power of God, which might have filled these infinite
spaces with thousands and thousands of worlds if he had pleased, exceeds that
which was necessary to be displayed in the Creation and Restoration of the
Heavens and the Earth. Shall we attempt to enter the wonders of his wisdom?
They are curiosities beyond all imaginations agreeable, But nevertheless
inexplicable to all Eternity, and although we never wander, yet we shall never
be able to get out of those Labyrinths. Shall the Immensity, the Eternity, the
Simplicity of the nature of God be presented to the Consideration of our minds?
There will be neither strength nor subtilty of Spirit that can ever attain to a
sufficient Conception of them. And although our understandings be not repelled
by the impossibility of success, and do desire to advance themselves as much as
may be, from day to day, and from much to more in the knowledge of these
objects, notwithstanding they will always see infinite spaces above their
thoughts. Shall we call our minds from thence to the Contemplation of his mercy
toward us? These are Abysses that will never be sounded, whose length and
breadth, whose height and depth, will Eternally exceed all understanding and
comprehension, after this manner; as the Eternity of our duration will consist
in this, that we shall never live so long above, but we must yet live there,
and that the ages to come appear yet infinitely more long than those which we
shall have passed already: So will our knowledge, and Conceptions be infinite
in this point, that the Eternally Flourishing beauty, and the Eternally
inexhaustible fertility of our Objects, will give us always new matter for
Consideration, so that the things that remain to be seen, will always appear to
us as much and more worthy of our Contemplation, than those that we shall have
seen already. Imagine then a Knowing and Curious man to whom every wave of the
Sea brings some very fine singularity, who at every step that he makes upon the
earth finds some Rarity among the Plants, and who at every time that he lifts
his eyes toward the Heavens discovers some new Star. Suppose you that he
constantly Recollect them without weariness, that he consider them with
understanding, the one after the other, and Contemplate them with admiration.
Imagine you that he often casts his eyes upon the vast extent of the Ocean, from
whence they come, then that he recall them to consider in gross the beauties of
the earth which does produce them, and afterward that he pass through in an
instant, all the extent of the Heavens, where so many wonders are scattered.
Give him friends with whom he may Communicate the content that he receives from
thence, and receive from them the Communication of that which the Observations
which they on their part have made, do give unto them. Suppose you also, that
without ceasing he always moves about the World, sometimes along the banks of
the Sea, sometimes amidst the Fields, always Contemplating, always Learning,
and never ceasing to Learn, always in the company of his Friends, without
incommodity from the Air, without indisposition of Body, without unquietness in
his mind, without fear of any evil accident. And above all, imagine that
without ceasing he lifts up his heart to God, to admire and avow that his
goodness is without bottom, his wisdom inexpressible, and you will have formed,
I know not what shadow, of that happiness, the substance whereof, we shall
possess in the Heavenly places.

Here were properly the place, to touch the question, concerning the equality,
or inequality of the glory of the Blessed; for as it is certain, that happiness
will universally fill all the powers, both of our souls and bodies, so it is
not to be doubted, but that this plenitude of happiness, must adopt it self to
the capacity of the faculties that do possess it, that it may be more or less
great according as the faculties shall be more or less capable; so that the
understanding being the most noble part of our Being, and by consequence most
capable of glory and happiness, so that it seems indubitable, that although the
other powers of our souls, and all the parts of our bodies, shall possess as
much of it as they can contain, nevertheless, according to the proportion of
its nature, and its greatness, our understanding will possess more of it; for
it is here that the comparison that we ordinarily make use of on this subject,
must have place, that although diverse Vessels, that are plunged into a River
at the same time, are all equally filled, in as much as there is not any one of
them which receives not as much Water as the extent of its capacity will bear,
nevertheless they receive it unequally, because this extent of their capacity
is not equal: such therefore as is naturally the proportion of the excellency
of the parts whereof we are composed among themselves, such without doubt must
be that of the happiness and glory which does attend them; besides, in a work
so well composed as is man, and which will be in much better condition by the
Resurrection, the most excellent parts, and where the understanding resides, do
hold the government of the rest, in such manner that they depend upon it, every
one in the degree of its subordination, from whence it comes to pass, that not
only the proportion of more and less, must be observed in what concerns their
glorification in proportion to their natural excellency, but it even seems that
the glory and happiness of the understanding, is in some sense the cause of
that of all the other faculties; if therefore the glory of the understanding of
every Believer be unequal, it will be also unequal in all that depends thereon.
On the contrary, if the understanding of each Believer be equally glorified, it
will follow thence in like manner that they will be also equal in the remainder
of their happiness. Now we see indeed a mavelous great difference between the
quickness, the largeness and the vigor of spirit in men, such as now we are:
For there are some that we look on with some kind of admiration, and as persons
in whom it has pleased God to show what he can do if he pleases, they have so
much both of lively and fruitful imagination, a vast and constant memory,
subtle and curious fancies, reasonings sublime, vigorous, and full of light.
Some others appear stupid and blockish, and as one would think, but little
raised above the condition of beasts themselves. Among believing Christians, it
cannot be denied but that there are many, of whom we cannot speak more
advantageously, than by saying that they are indifferent: But that proceeds
either from the variety of their Temperaments, and the Constitution of their
Organs, or from the diversity of their Exercises and Employments, or from the
great difference that is put in the manner of their Instruction and Education,
or chiefly from the differing manner after which it pleases God to deal with
them, be it by the efficacy of his Providence, be it by the power of his Spirit
of Wisdom and Revelation; And all this seems a consequence of Sin, and effect
of that conduct which it has pleased God to follow, as well in the
Establishment and Government of Kingdoms, as in the Constitution of his Church,
and the Edification thereof: This notwithstanding there is great probability
that the Souls of men are well near all equal, and that if they had remained in
their integrity, as all these differences had been neither equals nor
expedients, so we had never seen so great an inequality among us: Therefore,
when Sin shall be totally abolished, and all variety of Temperaments, and
Conformation of Organs done away, when the Faithful shall be eternally fixed on
the same Occupations, and shall have perpetually the same Objects before their
eyes, when there shall be nothing to divert them neither one nor other from
being exercised without any intermission in the contemplation of excellent
things, and that God who is all in all shall fill them with the illuminations
of his Spirit, it is difficult to conceive how some shall be more advanced than
others in this Knowledge. Nevertheless it is not my intention to determine any
thing concerning it in this place, and it is much more to the purpose to be
exercised in embracing the Cross of Christ, by which alone we have right to
partake with him in the inheritance of the Heavens, than to busy our selves in
computing our good actions, or measuring the degrees of our virtues, that one
day in the highest Heavens we may see, if our Rewards be proportionable unto
them: it remains therefore that we explain in a few words what fruit the
Contemplation of all these wonders will produce, toward what concerns our
happiness.

We have in us two Faculties absolutely inseparable, the Understanding and
Will; and as to what concerns the Understanding, forasmuch as its felicity
consists in its Perfection, and that its Perfection lies in knowledge, and a
Perfection of what it knows, it cannot be filled with so many Divine
Illuminations, as I have essaied to represent by my words, as if I should have
drawn the Sun with a Cool, but it must perceive it self eternally happy, and
taste therein inexpressible pleasure: They which think that the contentment
that we take in seeing things, depends of this, that they excite the operation
of our faculties, and that by the Operation of our faculties we perceive that
we are, and that the perception of our own Being gives satisfaction and joy,
joy indeed something very considerable and very true: for Being, if you compose
it with Not-Being, seems to be good in some kind infinite, the sense of the
enjoyment whereof, must give a great deal of content. Nevertheless, because
griefs also give us a sense of our Being, it is necessary to add to this
opinion, that the Objects whereupon we act, must have such proportion with the
faculties whose operations they do excite in us, that they do not at all offend
them: otherwise instead of giving us pleasure, they importune and trouble us.
We may yet go a little farther, and say that excellent things being more active
than others, do also more powerfully awaken our faculties, and excite our
operations in such manner that giving us more sense of our Being than things
common and ordinary do, they render the pleasure that arises from them
proportionably more excellent and sensible. To conclude, it seems to me that as
grief depends of this, that the thing which causes it tends to the destruction
of the faculty, in which it produces this afflictive and troublesome sentiment,
so the pleasure and the joy that comes to us from the fruition of our Objects
depends of this, that our faculties are perfected and raised to a more noble
and advantageous condition by their presence; for by reason that the faculty is
designed unto certain operations, and that Operations are not performed without
Objects, and by consequence do not act at all, they remain imperfect, as Matter
void and destitute of Form, which desires some one that may fill it with
extreme greediness: according to the same measure therefore that the Object is
excellent, increases the perfection of that estate in which the faculty is
placed, and by consequent the pleasure which is generated from the Perception
of the Perfection of its Essence: as if the Matter whereof bodies are formed
here below, had any knowledge of it self, there is no doubt but it would
receive incomparably less content to see it self filled and possessed with the
Form of a vile and contemptible Stone, than with that of a rich and precious
Diamond; and of whatsoever Matter, Elementary, or Quint-essential the Heavens
be made, I know not whether in that insensibility which is attributed to them,
they do not experiment some pleasing touch of joy, to see themselves united to
a Form so pure, so incorruptible and shining; our understandings therefore
being so marvellously filled with the forms of so many excellent Objects, and
becoming (if I may so say) one and the same thing with them by the power of
Contemplation, it can neither be expressed nor conceived, what will be the
greatness of their content and happiness to see themselves transformed into
those admirable Idea's wherewithal they will be enlightened, and into the
Perfections of Jesus Christ, and those of God himself.

Concerning the Will; its happiness consists in loving things amiable,
according to the knowledge that the Understanding has of them, and in that
which necessarily follows, the perception that it loves them: Not only for that
we perceive our Being in perceiving that we love them, and that in the degree,
that the things that we esteem worthy of our love, are excellent, in the same
they awaken this perception with much the greater efficacy: but also for this,
that as the Understanding transforms it self, in some manner into the nature of
its Objects by Contemplation, the Will unites it self so to his by the force of
love, that it confounds it self with them, and incorporates them with it self.
So that there being so many brave things in the world whose excellency and
worth we shall perfectly understand, it cannot be, but that we must earnestly
love them, nor that according to the proportion of our love, we should not have
a sense of pleasure and joy. There is yet more; the nature of things that we
love on Earth is such, that there is nothing in them surely permanent; Be it
therefore that they absolutely cease to be, or that they only cease to be
amiable, the fear of not loving them at some time or other, mingles it self
ordinarily with the affection that we bear them, and so holding our minds in
suspense, it weakens both our love and the exercise of it, and by consequent so
much diminish the content and joy thereof. And it has been well said by some,
that this maxim, that we ought to love so as we may one day hate, ruins all
friendship from bottom to top, it being impossible it should subsist with
thoughts as bespatter the object, which at present we ought to love, with
qualities worthy of hatred wherewith it may be possessed in the time to come.
This is it that causes it to give us an aversion, whereas it should attract our
good will and affections. The love therefore that we shall have for so many
brave Objects, as will be in the Heavens, will have this advantage which cannot
be sufficiently esteemed, that never suffering any change, they will always be
presented to us, under one and the same Idea, and that being always considered
by us under the same aspect, they will enkindle in our hearts an affection, the
pleasant and agreeable flame whereof will endure eternally.

To Conclude, as it happens that there are two sorts of things that we love.
One whereof are insensible of our love, because they are so in themselves: The
other have knowledge of our affection, and on their part correspond unto it,
the love that we have for the first, gives not a pleasure, that comes near that
of the love, that we have for the second, then when we are assured that they
love us reciprocally. And the reason thereof is two fold. The first is that the
things that cannot love us reciprocally, however excellent they may otherwise
be, are nevertheless void of understanding: those that are capable of a true
affection for us, are partakers of it. Now things endued with understanding,
are infinitely better than those that are not, if therefore the satisfaction
that we receive, either from our contemplation, or from our love, increases,
(as we have seen above) according to the proportion of the excellency of the
object upon which our faculties display and exercise themselves; the love that
we have for things endued with understanding, must infinitely over-weigh the
other. The second is, that as we love nothing earnestly, which we do not value
much, so we cannot perceive our selves loved, but we perceive our selves also
valued and esteemed by those that love us. Now it is a thing supreamly sweet and
pleasant, to be valued and esteemed by those that we believe do exactly know
us, and which otherwise we know are themselves to be valued and esteemed in a
Sovereign manner. For either they esteem us for the sake of our proper worth;
as when we love our Friends for the sake of their virtue. Or else they esteem
us for this, that although in our selves in comparison of them, we be of no
mavelous great price, so it is nevertheless that they have made us, and it is
by them that we are; what we are. So we love our Children; so every
understanding Cause loves the work that he has produced with some
Understanding and Art. The first is marvellously pleasant: For if it be a thing
agreeable to be, and to know that we are, how much more is it to possess a
Being, accompanied with commendable qualities? The second ought to be much
more. For although we do not perceive our selves commendable in our selves*
it is no small commendation to be dependances of a great Cause, and parts of a
Noble Principle, from whom we are derived; Now in the Estate in which we shall
be in the Kingdom of Heaven, we shall possess both all these degrees, and all
these kinds of happiness. For as we shall love both the Angels and the
faithful, that shall there be partakers with us in one and the same glory, with
tenderness unimaginable, so will they on their part love us so heartily, that
they will perfectly correspond to our affections. And in the same manner that
we shall love them, as well with that kind of love wherewith we embrace our
Friends, by reason of their Holiness and virtue, which we shall see arrived at
the highest pitch of its perfection, as with that kind of love wherewith we
love our Brethren; For the sake of the Communion we shall have with one and the
same Heavenly Father. So, we do certainly know that we shall be perfectly loved
of them, on the same considerations, because our virtue and perfections will be
the same with theirs, and we shall be equally the Sons of God. So that as by
the love that we shall bear to them, we shall be so closely joined to them,
that we shall have them perpetually in our minds, they will be joined so
closely to us by the affection wherewith they will embrace us* that they will
have us perpetually in theirs, and so our Souls shall be as it were melted and
mingled together. And this will be wonderful in the vehemence and sincerity of
this love; that whereas it is impossible here below to have many such Friends,
for whom we have such deep and great affection, there will be above in the
Heavens Millions with whom we shall have these indissoluble Ties and
Obligations. For on one side, here are found but few, that upon Trial we have
judged or can judge worthy of this degree of love; and on the other side our
minds in this natural Constitution in which they are, cannot supply to so many
Operations of so great and extraordinary vehemence. Whereas there we shall be
fully assured of the excellency and merit of all our Objects, without any need
of Trial, and our minds having obtained by their glorification, a supernatural
and extraordinary vigor, they will become as it were fruitful and
inexhaustible fountains of these kinds of operations, from whence love and
kindness will run down not as little streams or brooks, which presently grow
dry, but as floods abounding and remaining to eternal ages. Again as we shall
love the Lord Jesus, and the Heavenly Father, all, as much as the properties
infinitely, and supremely amiable that are in them, shall be known by faculties
such as ours will be, that is to say, with the whole extent of the power of a
reasonable Creature raised to glory; in like manner they (both the one and the
other) will love us all as much as such Creatures can be loved, by those that
are wholly love. Insomuch that although we do not find in our selves (to
whatever perfection we do arrive) what may correspond to the honor of so great
love; Nevertheless we shall not cease to esteem our selves supremely happy in
it, and to receive unspeakable joy from it. For this Relation which we shall
have with God of being his Children, and that which we shall have with Jesus
Christ of being his beloved Brethren, will certainly be sufficient to give us
esteem and value, and to make us eternally the objects, not only of those,
which shall partake with us in the same Salvation, but the admiration of Angels
themselves. Behold, will they say, those that were taken from the Earth, raised
above the Heavens; those that had deserved Eternal confusion, advanced to the
top of glory and honor; those that have deserved to inhabit Hell with Devils,
partaking Heaven with the Son of God: Those that were sometimes worthy, that
God should separate them from his presence Eternally, received into his own
bosom, there to enjoy the Communion of his Holy Spirit, in Eternal life and
glory. Now to him that shall have all the powers of his Soul filled with so
great and perfect contentment; what can be wanting of a most perfect and
Sovereign happiness? Observe principally (as I have above represented it) that
the Body shall become shining, incorruptible and immortal, and that the
enjoyment of this happiness will be given us in an Habitation Eternally
glorious. For it is not for nothing that St. John representing the Jerusalem
that is on high, says that it is full of the glory of God, and that its light
is more sparkling than that of Precious Stones. That the wall thereof is
Jasper, the buildings thereof of pure Gold, like unto transparent glass. The
foundations thereof so many Quarries of Precious Stones: That its twelve gates
were twelve Pearls, its Streets paved with Gold, and that the Lord Almighty,
and the Lamb that accomplished our Salvation, is the Temple thereof: That it
has no need of Sun nor Moon. For God enlightens it on all sides, and the Lamb
is the Torch which makes it sparkle with an Eternal light. For although these
terms be Prophetic and Mysterious, their sense is nevertheless a
representation of a magnificence which cannot be expressed. And although it
have a particular regard to the light of knowledge, and the perfect holiness of
the Church of God, nevertheless it includes the quality of its remaining
happiness, and the beauty of its Habitation. Now although it be not
unprofitable thus to bring down (if I may so express it) Heaven to Earth by our
Meditation, and from thence to form some imperfect Idea thereof in our minds:
It Is yet notwithstanding incomparably more advantageous, to raise (as far as
our infirmity will permit) Earth to Heaven, and even now to fix our hearts and
affections on high, expecting that the Lord Jesus will do us the favor, and
bestow on us the privilege, really to contemplate there, what we do not yet
see, but in the promises that he has given us: to him with the Father and the
Holy Spirit be glory, power, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3 l. 14 r. merry, l. 16 r. occurence, p 4 l. 1 r. of, p 5 l. 7 r. fails,
l. 21 r. consequence, p 6 l. 14 blot out forms, p 9 l. 22 for to r. so, p 14 l.
25 r. there, p 15 l. 4 r. that, l. 9 r. abstractions. p 17 l. 1 r. those, l. 28
r. on, p 18 l. 8 r. he, p 19 l. 22 r. how, p 21 l. 12 r. affixed, l. 22 r.
retained, p 22 l. 28 r. Spirits, p 26 l. 8 r. this, p 30 l. 27 r. therein, p 31
l. 9 r. so, p 33 l. 27 r. Christ, p 35 l. 13 r. buried, l 16 r. so, p 39 l. 20
r. Orpheus, p 52 l. 10 r. entered, p 59 l. 3 r. it, p 75 l. 9 r. may, p 81 l. 12
r. there, p 83 l. 21 r. consists, p 85 l. 4 r. them not, p 97 l. 27 r. already,
p 109 l. 12 r. of, r. All l. 15 blot out now, p. 111 l. 8 r. love, p 114 l. 3
r. so, 122 l. 14 r. raised, p 123 l. 1 blot out of, p 126 l. 23 r. precedent, p
131 l. 15 r from, p 147 l. 11 r. then, p 148 l. 22 r. wraps, p 150 l. 20 r.
will appear, p 153 l. 8 r, imbued, p 157 l. 15 r. means, l. 16 r. Brethren, p
163 l. 3 r. Calvin, p 165 l. 23 r. Flaminius. And Also, p 166 l. 6, and p 170
l. 12 r. and Prophets.


