A Gentle Reflection ON THE MODEST ACCOUNT, AND A VINDICATION OF THE Loyal
Abhorrers, FROM THE CALUMNIES OF A FACTIOUS PEN.

By the Author of the PARALLEL.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Tho.
Sawbridge at the Three Flower-de-Luces in Little-Britain. MDCLXXXII.

A GENTLE REFLECTION ON THE Modest Account, etc.
ALthough Person of Quality, in the beginning of a Book, is grown now as common
as Finis in the end, and an illiterate Fellow might take both for voluminous
Authors, yet this Gentleman shall have the benefit of his Peerage, both because
he endeavors so much to secure it in the Title Page, and also because the
following Discourse looks very much like that of a noble Peer. So that we will not
treat him like a common prostituted Scribler, though his Books and Pamphlets
are tumbled in the City by day, as much as their Jilts and Wenches at night,
but give him that Title which he pretends to so much, and so little deserves:
Each scribbling Ass expects now to be answered with a Sir, as well as every
Whore with a Madam. Wherefore --

May it please your Lordship,

IT would be an officious piece of Presumption, for my Pen to defend that
worthy Person, whom yours acknowledges (except one) the Kingdom's best Penman.
All the Vindication here intended, is only of the King's best Subjects, from
his worst of Enemies, and to wipe off those scurrilous Aspersions, impossible
to be cast on them in any Modest Account. And to begin in your civil Style: All
the Lines in your following Discourse, have very elaborately given the lie to
the first in the Title Page; and never did man take so much pains to confute
his pretensions to Modesty, in such impudent and immodest Assertions. It might
have been tolerable, my Lord, for a poor senseless Scribler, for an ignorant
Theophilus, to title his Scrole a Rationale, though when sifted it will not yield
a grain of Sense or Reason. But for your Lordship, a man of applauded Wit and
Integrity, to juggle thus with the Nation, and decoy the credulous Buyer out of
his easy Sixpence, with a Smithfield Trick, a Raree Show, and a fine front,
when there is nothing like it to be seen in the Booth; certainly this does not
agree with the Quality of that person you would be taken to be, or that
undeserved Character you may really bear.

In the first place you take notice of other peoples Railings, when all the
while you design to write nothing but a Satyr; you observe persons having been
unsuccessfully hired to libel and abuse you: That Calumnies are fruitless and
ineffectual, proceeds many times from the Guilt, as well as Innocence, of those
that are aspersed. And some peoples Crimes may be so notoriously black, not to
be darkened with any deeper dye: some are armed with confidence against the
most pointed Satyrs, and with a conceit of their own judgment, against the
strongest conviction of reason; and so neither to be reclaimed by bitter
Invectives, or sober Debates. But sure your Party cannot with any modesty
reflect on Hirelings, either for Affidavit Drudges, or railing Satyrists, who
first made such large Contributions for their Salaries and Maintenance; much
less your selves, shrewdly suspected for having had the breeding of such
rascally Irish Cattle, and the sole command and management of the Protestant
Exchequer; and so never wanted a Whiffler, to throw dirt in the face of the
Government, or your Plot-Leeches, to suck the blood of any Minister of State.

But pray tell me, my Lord, Are these Volunteers, or rather hired Rascals, that
under an Hereditary Monarchy, can be got to write an History of the Succession,
only to prove it alterable, and under a merciful Monarch can insist on the
Presidents of deposing Kings? Would those Wretches that live under a gracious
Prince, venture to place the Sovereignty in the People? Were they not pretty
well paid for venturing their Necks too? Would there ever have been writ An
Appeal from the Country, had it not been first moved and encouraged from the
City? And I much question whether ever Mr. College would have had the stomach
to breakfast on the Gallows, had he not dined sometimes at the Sun-Tavern. And
therefore (were your Suggestions as rational, as they are really groundless and
unreasonable) pray consider, my Lord, when you condemn loyal and honest Hearts,
for mercenary Rogues, what will become of those poor Wretches, that can libel
their Prince for a Penny, and write Treason for Bread?

It is but a little and a poor Vindication of that noble Peer, to make his
paternal Revenue so rich and great: It only aggravates his continual espousing
of the Quarrels of the Factious, in which commonly few engage themselves, but
men desperate either in their Lives or Fortunes; it makes him to have chosen
his bad Principles out of inclination and humor, which others maintain only
out of want and necessity; and any Casuist would look upon a Wretch, that is
starved almost into a Rebel, far less a Criminal, than a wanton Jesurun that
kicks at God Almighty and his Sovereign, only because he is grown fat.

Your Lordship talks of other People's having a sort of Impudence beyond the
Jesuits: An Emphatical description indeed of eminent Boldness, whilst you
think, with a great deal of Modesty, you may lay down these following
Hyperboles: First, That your noble Peer had a chief hand in restoring our
Prince; which Paradox, I confess, shows you a bold Champion for the Cause, but
a weak Assertor of the Truth, when the Memory of Man, as well as Narrative and
History, can give you the Lie.

Yet I don't question but several might have a little Finger in bringing in
their Sovereign, when they found it impossible to keep him out; and
triumphantly shouted their O King, live for ever, when they could not make him
die on his Father's Block: The Fox that insults over the Lion when entangl'd in
his Snare, is always the first too that congratulates his deliverance.

But your Lordship is not the first and sole Person eminent for such palpable
Forgeries in these Matters: It has been as confidently asserted, (and that long
ago in Print, by as eminent a Divine, as never boggl'd at Conscience, or
scrupled at a Lie) That the late War and Rebellion was begun by the Episcopal
Party, which he in his wonted phrase statedly declares to be very true. It was
but lately that another, as famed for Law, as this for Divinity, undertakes to
prove the Presbyterian Party the sole Restorers of his Majesty; and so between
them leave nothing to the poor Prelate and Cavalier, but the guilt and shame of
having been Fools, Knaves, and Traitors; of having trepanned and murdered their
Sovereign, only to oblige them with the Villainy, and like poor silly Tools, let
others reap the Spoils, in the following Anarchy and Confusion: And now your
Lordship here has miraculously discovered the strange Restorer of his Majesty.
I confess, the Veracity of these Gentlemen, and their wild Positions, may be
unquestionable with a City-Rout, a crowd of credulous Fools, or resolute
Knaves: But if ever the Country has an occasion for a Triumvirate to write
Paradoxes, Lies and Forgeries, it will wisely pitch upon Mr. Baxt. Mr. H-t. and
this Person of Quality.

You are willing to lay a great Obligation on his Majesty from his Act of
Oblivion, but yet ungratefully forbear to mention your Party so much as
obliged. Then you address your self to the King's Friends, and their Friends,
the Papist together: I thought your Lordship could not allow Roman Catholics
any relation or acquaintance, with men that love the Religion of the Church of
England, and King of it, as in common Charity, my Lord, some of us at least may
be thought to do. But why must we and they be thought such Intimates? It no way
appears upon Record, my Lord, as the Familiarity of your Party with the
Jesuits; neither has Mr. Oats sworn, that they frequent our Churches, as he
testifies they do your Conventicles; therefore without being such Favorites to
them, if you please, we will obey your Injunctions: and

Consider what Promises, Declarations, and Engagements the dissenting
Protestants had, both of his Majesty, his Lords and Bishops, at the time of his
coming over, and how they have since been used, and with what Submission and
Loyalty they have carried themselves.

And now must tell your Lordship, having considered and weighed every jot and
tittle of it, I can answer you to every Punctilio; first, that the Promises
your dissenting Protestants had, have certainly been made good to them,
(perhaps above their bargain and expectation) I am sure beyond their merit and
desert; not only the Laws, when in full force against them, and such Offenders,
have been seldom executed, but for a while wholly suspended, with a general
Toleration; although that, I confess, they will by no means grant to have been
done in their favor, notwithstanding it seemed extorted by their own clamors
and importunity, and was the Counsel and Advice of some that are now the
greatest Patriots and Bigots of their Cause. And it is very notorious, that this
dissenting Protestant all the time of that Indulgence, resented it as an Act of
Grace and Favor, (though I confess, never the nearer won to Peace and
Conformity with such a condescension, but had their tender Consciences, as much
hardened and steeled with the Lenitives of Moderation, as ever they could have
been in the hottest flames of a real Persecution.) But as soon as ever they
came to be bridled again by the Law, with a seasonable restraint, the Wretches
(that at best but flatter and dissemble, when they command any thing in the
Government) presently arraigned it, as a design of introducing Popery, though
it truly promoted nothing more than the growth of their own Faction, and made
the Beast insolent and unruly, by giving it the reins, whom the curb of a
severe Discipline might have made more gentle and tame. And now I would have
your Lordship tell us a way of satisfying so froward and perverse a Sect, that
is clamorous till it is indulged, and then is discontented at its own
Indulgence.

But beside all this, your Lordship very well knows, that they were not only
connived at in their Religious Schisms, and sanctified ways of violating the
Canons of the Church, and the Laws of the Realm, but some of them were advanced
to Places of Honor and Profit, and fared once altogether as well as those that
had more faithfully served the King, and dutifully conformed to the Discipline
of the Church. But granting these Promises and Declarations were not so
punctually performed, is the Government pretently to be upbraided for it? And
his Majesty almost told in plain terms, that had you thought he would have
failed you so, he should never have got in the Throne so easily; and can these
grumbling and discontented Wretches be called the Restorers of his Majesty,
that would capitulate with their Prince for his Birthright, stand upon Terms
and Articles, like Rebels in a Garrison, before they will surrender, and are
now sorry they had not made him compound for his Kingdoms at a dearer rate?

Your Lordship knows all this to be as true, as the Suggestions of their hard
usage are false and malicious; would you have the greatest Laick of your
Faction, made the greatest Minister of State too? that has been done already,
and your Noble Peer himself, advanced to the Mace; would you have some Head of
your canting Priests preferred to be the Head of our Church, and a thing put
for the Pillar of it, that has twice endeavored to undermine it? why somewhat
of this has been offered too, and we have Mr. Baxter's own word for it, that he
refused a Bishopric; and now for God's sake, my Lord, what usage would you
your self advise to be shown to such Miscreants, whom neither Honor or Profit,
can persuade so much, as to suffer the Government to remain undisturbed?

Thus much for our Promises and Usage; now, my Lord, for their Loyalty and
Submission, which you so vainly extol and magnify; but I wish your Eloquence a
more copious Theme, whenever you have a mind to write a Panegyric, or else
you will want indeed a great deal of Invention, or rather another part of
Rhetoric, plain Hyperbole, to make amends for the barrenness of the Subject:
You talk of the difficulty of finding a parallel Instance, but all the while
don't instance in one single act of this unparalled Submission, and you
vindicate your own Party, just at the same rate as you vilify all others, only
with general Assertions; but your Lordship shall see, I will more fairly
demonstrate their Treasons and Insurrections, than you have done their Loyalty
and Submission.

His Majesty was hardly settled in his Throne, before these submissive Villains
began to disturb it; in -- 61. Venner and his Crew were plotting on the
Government, discovered and executed for High Treason; about -- 62. Phillips,
Tongue, Gibbs, and one Stubbs, with another, were arraigned for a Plot, as
Hellish altogether as this of the Papists, the latter of which confesses the
Fact before his Trial, the other four abiding it, were upon full evidence
condemned and executed. In -- 63. we have one Captain Oats, mustring up his
Regiment of Traitors. In -- 66. Another little Mutiny and Rebellion of a parcel
of discontented Officers and Soldiers, lately Mr. College, that with his last
breath professed himself a dissenting Protestant, condemned and executed for a
more unparalled piece of Treason, than any incomparable Instance you can give
of Dissenters Loyalty; and last of all, for a head to this Comet, this long
train of Rebellion, out comes the treasonable Scheam of Association, and alarms
the Kingdom with the fearful Presages of a second War.

Thus much, my Lord, for the submission of English Dissenters since the
Restoration; and now for the Loyal deportment of your Scottish one; How many
Field-Preachers since -- 60. have been executed, renouncing with their last
breath, all Allegiance and Supremacy? Kid and King, two late Villains, that
preached Rebellion at the very place of Execution, no doubt 'twas with a great
deal of Submission; they made two several Insurrections, one of which was but
lately dispersed at Bothwel-Bridge; they submissively murdered the Bishop of
St. Andrews, and very lately with a great deal of Dissenters Humanity, mangled
and mutilated the poor Soldiers; These are many, I hope, and strong Evidences
of their bad Carriage, whereas you have not given one single Instance of their
good.

Your business in the next Paragraph, is to make the discovered Association a
Popish Hobgoblin too, a Mormo conjured up at White Hall; or to use your own
expression, The keeping Hounds in full cry with a Red-Herring, out of their own
Kitchen, trail'd through the Kingdom to make a noise.

A pleasant Metaphor, I confess, in comparing a piece of Rebellion with a
Red-Herring; somewhat a more apposite Allegory, even upon this account, because
both are great Commodities in the Dutch Commonwealths; but I fancy, my Lord,
could your Party but have kept this Herring close, and drying in their own
Chimney, till the Nations Palate had been a little better disposed to relish
such a salt Bit, the Dogs that would have followed the scent then, I am afraid
would have shown themselves a thirsty sort of Bloodhounds, and took some of
the King's best Subjects for their Prey; but now this dried Fish has took a
little Air, and rank Treason stunk and offended the whole Kingdom, it is no
wonder if your Party will not allow the Dish to come out of their Kitchen, when it
looks as if it had been dressed in Hell, and had the Devil for its Cook.

Your Lordship has not carefully perused those Proceedings at the Old Bailey;
neither is to be imagined how you should impartially, when you seem to be so
much prejudiced, or else you would find the Impudence to lie on your side, in
making the seizing of the Paper questionable; the words of Mr. Gwin are as
positive as the Case could admit, which are plainly these: It was certainly
there, for there I found it; I don't know as to the particular Paper, but all
in that Bag were there: vid. page 34.

Now your Lordship will not allow it to be positive Evidence, because not to the
particular Paper. But suppose, my Lord, one of your Irish Witnesses should
transport hither a Ship-load of his Country Cattle, to stock your Lordships
Manor, would you not believe him, if he swore they all came from thence, and
it was unlikely any other Breed should leap up in the Voyage?

And sure that Gentleman may pass for a more competent Witness than a common
Bug-trotter. The Messengers seized a whole bundle of Colledge's infamous,
treasonable Ballads; had it not been positive Evidence, if they had sworn only
to the whole Bundle, as well as if to the particular Ballad, produced in the
Court? But you cannot have the Patience or Heart to examine the Parallel, it
being the woeful Case of a dissenting Protestant. But then you will take the
pains to consider this* there were Bundles of Letters found in Coleman's Study,
two or three of which were only used in his Trial; would your Lordship have had
that sort of Traitor escaped too, had the Witnesses been only able to swear to
the Papers in general that they found, and not to the very particular one
produced?

I don't know in what English Reports your Lordship has met with Monsieur
Fouquet's Case, which is a French one; I am sure your Honor would be loath to
be tried by their Arbitrary Laws, when it can hardly abide the Test of ours.
And whatever you think, I fancy the State is higher concerned against him that
endeavors to subvert it, than him that only defrauds its Exchequer; And yet
the one you see has been kept a long time Prisoner in the Bastile, though the
other quickly got out of the Tower. And as for those Laws of Nature and Reason,
you urge on your part, sure they are never so irrational, to befriend a man
suspected for unnatural plotting against his Prince, and the Father of his
Country, which was the thing then in question; but its being a loose Paper and
unsubscribed, will that exempt a man from being questioned, especially in
Matters of Treason, where there are no Accessories, but every Concealer a
Principal? Were not some of the Jesuits questioned for Papers unsubscribed, and
Langborn partly condemned for receiving Commissions never produced, found, or
like to be heard of? And these Parallel Instances, I don't urge as an
extenuation of their Guilt, who merited death by the Law, but to show your foul
Reasoning and prejudiced Argumentation, in making that sort of Evidence light
and empty in your Friends Case, though only to put him upon his Trial, when you
thought it full and weighty in your Enemies, even for their Sentence and
Execution.

The detestation of a damnable piece of Treason, your Lordship calls, A Popish
Clamor and Abhorrence. Are they all Papists, my Lord, that protest to defend
his Majesty? If so, your own Party will be libel'd too in that Accusation, who
most of all make such Protestations, though they least intend it.

And if they must be Papists, that vow to preserve the present Government of
Church and State, your Lordship, by such Doctrines, will draw more Proselytes
to the Romish Faith, than ever did Priest or Jesuit, (or to use your own words)
have given a greater Blow to the Protestant Religion, than all that ever went
before you; for such wild Positions, and unreasonable Censures, will make all
to be of that Communion, who love their God and their King, or are willing to
commence good Christians and loyal Subjects. But not withstanding all your
malicious Accusations, is it to be proved there were any Roman Catholics, that
promoted these late Abhorrences, or any single one that signed such an Address,
though they were ready perhaps to do it, and can shame some of our Protestants,
whose Religion truly gives no such Dispensations for Treason and Rebellion, and
consequently should make them better Subjects? Yet some of those spent their
Blood for our late Sovereign, when so many of ours lost it in fighting against
him; and also it is unadvisedly objected, that the Papists should be concerned
in these Abhorrences, for that would make them more Friends to your Party than
any other, in affording you Matter for aspersing all those, as such with whom
they subscribe; and only give your Lordship and your Crew a Pretense for such
scandalous Suggestions. But the mischief of it is, they do no great service in
such a forbearance, since we deal with an Accuser, as subtle and malicious as
that primitive one the Devil, and who would blast his Enemies Reputation, were
they all Angels.

But, my Lord, there are a number of as great and better Subjects than your
selves, who have better thoughts too, concerning the late Abhorrencies, and are
so far from bering troubled at what they have done, or persuaded to forbear, by
your unjust censuing and traducing it, that they many times in their Addresses
beg pardon for not having begun sooner; not my Lord, but that it was abhorred
in the Heart of every good Subject, looked on as the Contrivance of Hell and
Darkness, as soon as ever it came to light, but that they vye with one another
for an early of those villainous designs, which they think none can soon enough
detest. Upon the appearance of your terrible Comet, the Nation seemed to gaze a
while on the dreadful Phenomenon, before they could make their Observations;
and the Reason why they might not presently fall on abhorring such damnable
Practices, might proceed rather from the deep Impression it had on their Minds,
than any shallow Inadvertency; for Hearts that are surprised with any Passion,
either of Love or Detestation, have their Tongues for a while suspended from
expressing their Sentiments and inward Conceptions. It has always been the
stale Clamor of the vigilant and jealous Faction, that the King and Kingdom
was asleep; if so, I am confident they have now pretty well awakened both out
of their secure slumber. And that with a ghastly Spectrum of a Rebellion, and
the dreadful Ghost and Appearance of another Civil War.

In the next place, Your Lordship lays a mighty stress on the single Vote of an
House of Commons; and well you may, my Lord, when your Friends have had of late
such an ^nfluence and Interest therein; and any Statesman will have a great
Conceit of their Proceedings, who think well of his Maxims, and take him for
their Achitophel. But this is but a reciprocal sort of associating in one
another Defense, and somewhat like that natural Combination there is among
some Creatures, when they are mumbling of a Thistle, to claw one another. Yet,
my Lord, should the next House be men of other Sentiments, condemn the Treason
of this Association, vote him for an Enemy to King and Country, in whose
Custody it was found, would your Lordship be willing, their Ordered and
Resolved should be the sole Test of the Guilt, as well as Innocence of the
Person? Yet our own Chronicles will afford Instances of greater Alterations in
the Vein and Humor of Parliaments, and whose Pulses have beaten as strongly
quite another way: A Parliament deposed Richard the second, and a Parliament
advanced Edward the fourth; a Parliament set a price on the Head of our present
King, and a Parliament afterward set the Crown upon it. And why one House of
Commons may not as well vote him a Friend to the King and Kingdom, whom others
have done an Enemy, I cannot understand?

But then from Irish-Witnesses and well-chosen Iuries, the whole Nation prays
as well as your Lordship, Good Lord deliver us; but then you may give them
leave to curse too, those that first brought over the one, and pack't the
other. It seems Haynes was no Irishman, when a blank Pardon was su'd for;
Dennis, Oneal, and Macnamarra, no Rogues, so long as they would hang none but
Papists: Willmoors, Rowses, Whitakers, Harveys, and the Jury (I should have
named first) of the noble Peer you vindicated; these were not picked and
chosen, were they? But because you instance in unreasonable Damages given by
the Surry-men, you shall have a Rowland for that Oliver too; and what do you
think of that of the Guild Hall, who found it Assault and Battery, for an
Officer to pull off an insolent Fellow's Hat, when upon his Trial in an
Ecclesiastical Court, (a Fellow that behaved himself as rudely toward your
Party, in his Curse ye Meroz, as he has done since to ours in his Naked Truth?
And what a dishonest and ungrateful sort of Retribution is it, for them to
countenance now such a turbulent Wretch, only because he can disturb our
established Church, when all our sober persons condemned him for such an
impetuous Railing, even against your unwarranted Assemblies? What can an
indifferent, and impartial person, think of the foulness of such Proceedings,
but that you would close with any Villain, that will but libel the Government,
and even with your worst of Enemies, to do it an injury, observing a sort of
malicious Politics, in the very directing of your Anger and Revenge, and
wisely smother your Resentments against a private Foe, if you can but make him
an Instrument to disturb the public Peace?

But, my Lord, the truth of it is, that which makes you so uneasy, is, you
find your selves lashed with Rods of your own making, and have conjured up a
sort of Devils, that will not be awed only by your own Wand, and whom, all your
Sorceries, I am afraid, will not quickly lay; Cavies in the late time was an
opprobious Name fixed on good Subjects, and then they were nettl'd as soon as
Roundhead was given to the bad; Whig now had never been thought of, had not
Tory been first started; we should have had no Pilkington Juries, had the E. of
S. been put upon his Trial; and you would have met, my Lord, with no such
Gentle Reflection, had you not first published your Modest Account; and since
your Party always leads the Dance, can you in Conscience blame any for following
the Round?

Then as for the business of the City-Charter, perhaps it may not be so long in
being compassed, as your Lordship imagines; and for the justice you shall meet
for your Fortunes when it is gone, I dare promise, will be better than others
will meet with for their Lives while it is there. But why do you think it so
long, my Lord? Are Charters given and confirmed without any Limitations and
Reserves? Had they their Swords in their hands when 'twas granted? And did they
article and capitulate for theirs in the City, as the Barons did for the great
one in the Meadow? Then perhaps your Advocates might find a Clause in it, to
prove it not forfeited by Rebellion; in which the City seems already so deeply
engaged, as if it were actually in another state of War with its Sovereign: For
will not your Lordship judge that Ass to rebel against his Driver, in standing
still, or running back, as well as if he had lifted up his heel against his
Master? And how near the stopping the Channel of the Laws, or perverting the
Justice of the Nation, borders on the taking up of Arms, and the cutting out
their own Statutes with the Sword, I leave even to the Determination of your
Lordship, who perhaps were an Eyewitness of that fatal Affinity that is
between them, and what a pretty sort of Praeludium it proved to the Civil War.

The President of the Guises was the most unhappiest Parallel your Lordship
could have brought upon the Stage, and at this time had been much better
omitted, it suiting as little with your Lordships Application, as it mightily
agrees with your Parties Practices. The Guises were a bloody Faction indeed,
and designed the overthrow of that Monarchy, by the same means and measures
your Associators do that of ours. It was they deluded a youthful Prince with
the hopes of a Crown, and strengthened their Party by the weakness of a young
Duke: It was they made the professed Religion a pretense for all the
Desolations that attended a miserable War: It was they drew up the primitive
Association, and were the first Founders of an Holy League: Lastly, 'twas they
fell a cutting the Throats of the poor Hugonots, and distinguished* themselves
in the bloody night at Paris, with a white Scarf on their Elbows: And by your
endeavoring to remove Guards, one would think you designed the same way to cut
off Popish Abhorrers, and make your green and blew Streamers serve for the same
purpose they used their white. And so we may even conclude this Paragraph with
an bearty Prayer, as well as your Lordship does his with a faint Wish; That God
would preserve the King, and keep us out of the hands of all bloody Papists,
and as cruel and inhumane a sort of Protestants.

Your Lordship has not only the Subtilty of the Serpent, but the Venom too, and
that you spit forth all now here in this place, in arraigning the best Actions
of the Duke, for the worst Plot and Conspiracy, and making his passing the Test
in Scotland, a fair step to the destruction of the Protestant Religion. Is the
swearing to preserve the present established Religion, the way to subvert it?
Are not the Bishops there as competent Judges of what will undermine the
Church, as your Lordship, who profess your self a Friend to Protestant
Dissenters, and such as would blow her up? And han't they thanked his Majesty
for his sending his Royal Brother, and testified their satisfaction of his Zeal
for our Church? But these, you will say, are all blessed with a Torish
Humility, (as your new phrase has it) though upon other occasions, you can
dignifie them with their old Appellation of proud Prelates. But, my Lord, do
you think that the Field-Preachers there, (to whom you must be a Friend, if to
the dissenting Ministers here) do you think, I say, they show what is more
expedient for the good of the Church, in refusing the Test, than those
spiritual Lords did in passing it? Do you think that the Rebels at
Bothwell-bridge, did not make a fairer step to the destruction of the
Protestant Religion, than, as you maliciously suggest, his Royal Highness and
the Parliament have done since? But we must give people leave, when they are
nettl'd with Passion and Revenge, to be transported into Lies and Absurdities;
and Malice is always the greatest Enemy to Truth and Reason.

Your next Paragraph falls foul again upon Abhorrers, whom you look upon as a
pitiful Faction, when all honest people take them for true Loyalists. But
waving the absurdity in calling them factious, which none can reasonably apply,
but to such as oppose the Government in Church and State, their Numbers are not
so small as to be pitiful or contemptible; two or three thousand Freeholders
are said to subscribe that of Derby, and then more, I am sure, by much, than
could be gotten out of any County in England to your Petitions. And could your
Lordship but get the favor and opportunity to consult the List, you would find
them more numerous, and much to your dis-satisfaction; and also amongst them,
many persons that have served their Country in Parliament, and been Members of
that Honorable Assembly, to whom you pay so great a Deference. But it is a
little harsh Censure for you to suspect all the Countrey-Sheriffs for ill men,
and their under-Sheriffs for Rogues. Could we but get an indifferent person to
decide the Controversy, he would with more reason judge your City-Officers for
such, Gentlemen commonly versed in the juggling Tricks of Buying and Selling,
and all the methods of a priviledg'd Knavery, such as first set about packing
of Juries, and alarming the Nation with an obstruction of Justice. And will not
you allow the King and his Council to be as honest and wise, and as fit to
prick the one, as your City-Rout and Rabble, who chooses the other?

I cannot imagine what you mean by this elaborate task, and all this fruitless
pains you take to prove the number of Abhorrers so small and insignificant,
unless your meaning be only this, to show plainly that you contend for a Party,
and have sent abroad your Muster-masters, to take a List of all your
Volunteers, or else have got your Association to stalk about the Kingdom
incognito, and now upon comparing the Subscribers of that with those of our
Abhorrences, find your selves the stronger by a million, or thereabouts; but I
fancy, were this really so, you would never suffer this Abhorring and
Protesting to go on so quietly. Yet my Lord, I Will debate, though not the truth,
yet the Reason of this Matter still more fairly with your Lordship: Give you
all that the prejudiced Party can desire, and for a while suppose this Paper of
Association a mere Sham, and a piece of Forgery, or in your own phrase, A red
Herring, trail'd through the Kingdom to make a noise, yet still why must all
those that detest and abhor it be traduced as Popish, only because they dislike
a Paper that is in it self treasonable, and which your own selves presume
unwarrantable at least, by your seeming to renounce it? There is every year a
Zeal, as hot as the Flames themselves, shown against his Holiness in
Pasteboard, and in God's Name let them still in that Matter express their
Resentment: But you would think it a hard Censure, my Lord, to traduce all that
innocent Rabble in Fleetstreet, for Puritans and Fanatics, only because they
express such an Abhorrence to that painted Effigy, when all this while this is
but a Pope of their own making. And why then must all those be vilified as
Tories, Hounds, and Popish Abhorrers, that only dislike, declare, burn, and
protest against a paper'd Idol of a Commonwealth, in whose Forehead is writ
Treason* as well as Abomination in the others.

Now when I have been so fair as to yield to your Lordship in his own
Postulatum, and yet the Corollary deduced will detract much from that Reasoning
and Modesty you pretend to, what will become of those Pretensions, when it
appears a demonstrable Proposition, that this Scheam of Rebellion was drawn by
your own Party, and truly found where it was sworn to be? And therefore for
those Considerations tendered to us in the beginning of your Book, let us offer
these to you toward the end of ours. Consider this Engine, and design how much
it looks like the Workmanship of your State-Projectors: And though the end
seemed somewhat honest, pretending to unite a divided Nation, consider it will
never be compassed in animating a factious and a zealous Crew; it is a Work only
now for Omnipotence it self to heal our Breaches, and cure our Divisions, and
the Union of God's people will never be perfected by your Protestant Ioyners,
and such Agents of the Devil. Consider how likely that Faction is to contrive
such an Association, which has been so well vets'd in drawing up so many
Covenants, and how improbable it is, that those who entered into a League to
fight against Charles the First, should associate themselves for the
preservation of the Second. But these are but such Arguments, I confess, as the
Schools call* a probabilibus; that which makes it demonstrably plain, are the
Shifts your Party use to avoid the Imputation, whose Answers, when they are
questioned about it, are like those of conscious Criminals, full of
Distraction. Sometimes they fancy the truth of its being found not plain
enough, and then they deny the Matter of Fact; then they begin to distrust that
Refuge, and stand up for its defense, backing it with a President in Queen
Elizabeth's time; and pray, my Lord, Would you not take the young Bear to be
the Whelp of such a Dam, if you found her licking the little unformed Monster
into shape? Then for its being found in the Closet, we have a plain positive
Oath, and that of a very credible Witness: The Keys sworn to be delivered by
your Earl*s own hand; his Servants by when the Papers were put up, and the Bag
sealed: And sure his vigilant Domestics would never suffer their Master to be
so grossly abused, had they put up other Papers than were found, and brought
Treason in their Pockets when they came to search for it. My Lord, It was the
same poor defense College made, to the finding his treasonable Ballads, and
when nothing else could confront the Evidence, it was insinuated as if they
were laid there by the Searchers: And you would do well to use some better
Arguments for so great a person whom you would prove innocent, than they did
for a rascally Joyner, whom all impartial people thought guilty. But nothing
makes it more unquestionable than those poor Shifts you use in questioning it:
You say, Gwin dares not swear it; and any one (by what you say there to the
contrary) would swear you don't deny it; and all your Argumentations look so
conscious and guilty, that they betray the very Cause they pretend to defend.
Among Heads that have but one grain of studied Logic, or natural Reason, it is
always presumed, that nothing can be like it self; and whatever has any
Reference, must have another Extreme to which it may refer; and then what need
of all this Comparison and Similitude, if there be nothing found with which you
would compare it? What need has your Lordship to talk of Queen Elizabeth's
Association as a Parallel, if nothing since has been contrived like it, by your
Friends and Associates? But you will say, There has been a pretended one put
upon you: Then, my Lord, let me ask you, Would you take all this pain to
justify a piece of Treason forged by your Enemies? Did any of your Party write
in favor of the Papers found in the Meal-Tub? If these are your Measures and
best Politics, what better Encouragement can there be for Shams and Forgeries,
than by writing Panegyricks and favorable Parallels, on those Treasons of
which you are suspected and accused.

You very civilly will allow his Majesty a Prerogative to call a Parliament;
but like the cursed Cow that gives a little good Milk, which she presently
kicks down with her heels; or Mr. H-t* that defends the Bishops in his Book,
and blows them up in the Postscript, your next Lines talk of having them
convened frequently, and sit usefully, that is indeed, whenever your selves
please, and as long as your Faction shall think fit, or till Grievances are
redressed, and the Bill of Exclusion passed. But for these Matters, I may, with
better Authority, use your own words in the business of the Charter, Assure
your Lordship, It will be long before it be done.

But I would fain have you fix, my Lord, that indefinite Term of Frequent
Parliaments.

Is your Lordship for Triennial ones again? The Consequences of that were too
fatal, to expect such another unreasonable Grant: And besides, it is not above
a twelve month since that your Lordship had one, and that to your Mind too, and
therefore as yet no Reason to complain. But if great Emergencies (as you say)
shall determine the Prince to convene his States, sure you may give him and his
Council leave to judge whether they are really so or not: Otherwise Dr. Oater's
Quarrel with the Scotch Knight, or the Disappointment of the City-Feast, may by
some be thought Matter of great Emergency, and worthy the Consideration of a
Parliament; neither will the People, my Lord, as Things stand now, be all of
your Sentiments, in thinking his Majesty's Friends and Counselors, humble
Tories, stupid Fools, or designing Villains; the best opinion you can have of
them, for not advising his Majesty (as you think fit) to call a Parliament. We
know those that gave worse Advice both for the Kingdom and all Christendom
beside; those that in their best regreted the Success of their own Councels,
and maliciously took now and then a few good Measures, lest others should do it
for them. I cannot apprehend, my Lord, what that distance of Time is, in which,
without a Parliament, our Liberties would expire, and our selves, on a sudden,
be shackl'd into Slaves. We have not seen one for a whole year, and perhaps may
not for another; and yet after many expired, I dare swear, our Magna Charta
will be still the same, though your City-Charter may not. We will allow you
Parliaments to be the Subjects Birthright, but then, I hope, we are not born
to all sorts of Parliaments; that Position, my Lord, would make you put in for
a Right to that in Forty one, since by special Act declared Traitors.

Your Lordship proposes by way of smart Interrogatory:

Whether the King's Prerogative in appointing the day, will deprive us of the
Right of having them in such a time, and his Power of dissolving can render
them useless to us?

I confess, to men of your own Principles and Sentiments, it is impossible to
answer them; for such are resolved to take it for granted, that the not letting
them sit when they please, is a deprivation of the Right of the Subject; and
the dissolving them when the King pleases, is that which makes them useless,
whereas there are as great Men, and as good Head-pieces, who think the quite
contrary. And that his Majesty's appointing the day, is the only Security we
can have for their Sitting: Perhaps without it we might have a Convocation of
Rebels, but not a Parliament; a major part of Members treasonably associated,
but never an House of Commons lawfully assembled: And then in this Case also
differing so far from your Opinion, that they think the only thing that can
make them useful, is the King's Power to dissolve them. I confess, to men that
make an House of Commons to patronize all their Irregularities, to countenance
all those gross Abuses they put upon the Government; to such a Dissolution is a
useless thing indeed, and deprives them of the making an honorable Assembly, a
pretended Abettor of all their scandalous Actions. And now for your two civil
Interrogatories, give me leave to propose a couple of honest Queries.

1. Whether the late King's frequent Parliaments, did not bring the Nation into
that miserable Confusion? 2. Whether his not being able to dissolve them, did
not bring him to the Block?
I fancy, your Lordship has the same Notions of Parliaments, that a late wild
extravagant Author has published in his Tory-Plot, That they have an absolute
Dominion over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates, of all the Subjects; vid. page
16. But with what Face then can such Wretches talk of his Majesty's assuming an
Arbitrary Power, when all the while they endeavor to make their petty Kings in
Representative more absolute than the Turk himself? And cannot the miserable
Change that they made at Athens, terrify these preposterous Assertors of
Liberty, and satisfy them of the Felicity of the Subject, even under a
tyrannizing Prince, in respect of the Miseries they suffered under a
Commonwealth of Tyrants? This, I confess, is a Power of Parliaments, that
would give them an unquestionable Right for the altering Succession, when it
impowers them to deprive the right Heir of his Life too, as well as of his
Dominion. But I would have such an extravagant Fellow tell me, What sort of
Government he stands up for? and what Notion the silly Wretch has of Justice
and Equity? Does not this giddy Libertine at the same time draw up a Scheam for
Tyranny and Oppression, when he would be thought to stand up for* the Liberties
and Freedom of the Subject, and like a crack'd-brain'd Politician, run counter
to his own Maxims? This Gentleman first preaches up his absolute Dominion in
King, Lords, and Commons, and then what Security have we, that his gifted
Brethren will not come and found it again in Grace, and so place it only in their
sanctified Brothers of the Lower House? And then no wonder if Clubs turns up
Trump again, when they are let alone to shuffle the Cards. We Will grant this
politic Ass his Parliament so far omnipotent, as able to make any Statute, but
then they must be consonant to the Laws of Nature and Reason: Our Savior among
all his Precepts never contradicted those, and sure his Commission was a little
larger than that of the Parliament's they adore. Must their Laws determine what
is just and equitable? or rather ought not Justice and Equity be the Standard
of their Laws? There is a great deal of difference sure between Legality and
Justice, the Power of making Laws, and the Reason of them: But it is always
observable, that every politic Body, when it endeavors to swell it self into
an arbitrary Sway, will be sure to confound them. Thus those Villains,
conceited of their own treasonable Principles, justified the Murder of our late
Sovereign, only because they passed an Act for his Trial, and made their own
Orders a punishing of him according to Law. Thus Strafford might be said to be
legally executed, because they then made accumulated Treason, death by a Law;
and now another would illegally die for the same Crimes, because they passed
another to make his Case no President. But would a Turk or Mohammedan take this
for Justice? And with the same false Notions, our present Statesmen justify
the Lawfulness of the Bill of Exclusion, only because when their Parliament has
enacted it, it will be really Law. But would an Heathen take this for a piece
of Equity? And these same Bigots, for a Parliamentary Power, upon these
Principles, are forced to grant them a Right of punishing Offenders, by
Statutes enacted after their Offense, and to make them suffer by those Laws
they could never transgress, when even the Judge of all the Earth has made it
no Transgression, where there is no Law.

It is a pretty sort of State-Paradox, my Lord, to say a Parliament can do no
wrong: The only Argument they use for such a strange Position is, that there is
somewhat of improbability, so great and wise a Body should enact any thing
contrary to Reason or Equity. But, my Lord, since we know these great Bodies to
be but humane, why may they not sometimes verify the Latin Aphorism, and err
too? Or why should not a numerous Assembly be as fallible as his single
Holiness? Since we have known several poor Subjects ruined with an Act of
Parliament, why should we always think it to do right? and since we have seen
such a mighty Senate transported, like one man, with Fears, Iealousies,
Animosities, and Discontent, and that to the very ruin of three Kingdoms, why
should we think the Nation secured, of being saved by their deliberate
Councils, and sober Debates? And these Reasons I offer, with a greater
veneration for that Body, than those fawning Sycophants, that would be thought
to revere it more, and who with a sort of blind Obedience, think them
infallible too, and stretched the Power of their Governors, even to the
unhinging of the Government it self.

In the next place, my Lord, you fancy the Militia, as you call them, of
Abhorrers, and Addressors, will put a trick upon you, one of these days, and
tell you, that by Religion, established by Law, they meant Popery, as
established by Magna Charta; a pretty conceit indeed: But why may not we fancy
too, when you set up so plausibly for the Government, that you mean nothing
else, but that of Oliver Cromwell, and that your bawlings which are always the
loudest, about Religion, is only for the Catechisms of your old Assemblies, and
the re-establishing of a Directory? I can assure your Lordship, your Friends,
the Protestant Dissenters, have put this trick upon us once already, and so we
have more reason to fear such another Cheat, than you that were never served
so, and are too cunning to be circumvented. But why does this Malitia of
Abhorrers shiver you now into such a panick fear, when but in the preceding
Page, you swagger at them as a parcel of inconsiderate Fellows, twelve or a
Bakers dozen in a County; I am afraid, you fancy too, with your Friend, in his
Tory Plot, that these Addressors only make his Majesty fearful of Parliaments,
and so you will be never like to have one; whereas, any rational body, would
rather think the quite contrary. And that these Assurances of their Fidelity,
and Resolutions to protect him against all his Enemies, upon any color or
pretense whatsoever, should make the King venture the calling of a Parliament,
though your City had the choosing of every Member, and they were sure to prove
another such a pack of Traitors as those in Forty one. But did ever a forging
Villain cast a more unreasonable aspersion, on so many loyal Hearts, that love
their Country as well as their King, that they but endeavor to make him
fearful of Parliaments, when your own Party still talks, how fearfully they
were dissolved at Oxford, which was long before any Declaration was penned, or
Addresses thought of? and if your Protestant Friends show themselves Turbulent,
Factious, and Dangerous, pray tell us who they are, that make the Nation
timorous and fearful? and therefore, my Lord, you might have forborne to have
termed them in such terrible Jargon, a Militia, we having nothing that can be
called so, but the Train'd-Bands, and his Majesty's standing Forces, unless you
have procured an Army, to obey that major part of disbanded Members.

The growth of the French King ought least of all to be imputed to us, since
your own Faction is always the Promoter of foreign Invasions, as well as of
domestic Broils; and nothing makes a Neighboring Prince look higher, than the
Civil Dissentions amongst his Neighbors, which will be sure to keep them low;
the Wars here at home, on our Continent, made William of Normandy, take that
opportunity of invading it, who had bought his Conquest at a dearer Rate, if
Harold had not sold a great deal of English Blood before; the Footing we once
had in France, might have been still retained, had not the jealousies of a
Faction at home, given occasion for their revolting abroad; while Malcontents
here, were always quarrelling at the Government of the Regent there; and our
Kings necessitated to leave Forces, to keep their Subjects orderly in England,
when they might have subdued their Enemies in France. And to what sort of
People, now do the French owe their growth? But, your Lordship, has less reason
again to take up such a defensive Weapon, in the Vindication of your noble
Peer, when it wounds the Party that wheels it in the Rebound, more than ever it
does the Adversary in the direct Stroke. All the Kingdom knows, who they were,
that persuaded the breaking of the Triple League, and then the whole World may
judge, who nursed up the King of France to this height; had that Old one been
yet inviolated, there would have been no need of this New one of Gueranty. The
French Conquests had never made up so large a Map, or the Spaniards retained so
little Footing in the Netherlands; so that upon Computation, my Lord, to all
that poor Bankrupt Country your own Friends will be the Creditors, and all
Christendom in your debt, for a vast expense of Blood as well as Moneys; and
well may your Lordship's Party be contented to see a most Christian King lord
it over all Europe, when they envyed even his Majesty's success against the
Moors in Africa; and those that were so little moved at the Siege of Tangier,
can never be much troubled at the Conquest of Flanders.

In the next Page, you very fairly confess your self a friend to Protestant
Dissenters; the Confession is somewhat generous and superfluous too, because we
should have understood that without it; but the Reasons you give for it, are
most absurdly vain and ridiculous. First, you say, because there is not yet
found an Infallible decider of Faith; the same Logic will afford you an
Argument for the befriending Turks and Mahometans, who have a sort of Faith
too, and believe better in their Alcoran, than men of your Principles can do in
the Creed. Secondly, because they live soberly and honestly by you; but did
they do so, when they plundered, sequestrated, and massacred their
Fellow Subjects; when they deposed, fought, and murdered their Sovereign? I can
assure your Lordship, they were as true Protestant Dissenters as any of your
Friends, and do they live soberly and honestly now, when they violate the Laws
most immoderately, abuse the Government grossly, and combine together
treasonably?

I will concur with your Lordship, in an Abhorrence (if you can bear with that
expression) of Popery, grant that it is a Religion, inconsistent with
Government, and full of rebellious Principles; But suppose, my Lord, that the
Alcoran did authorize the deposing and murdering of Princes: For as their
History tells us, there are Fanatical Sects among those Heathens too. Would
your Lordship, for that, ever have the better opinion of the Popes Bull, that
first pulls off their Purple Robes, and then delivers them to be crucified? Or
did the Turks Mufti preach up Rebellion, would you think Priests and Jesuits
good Subjects? The blackness of one Negro, will never make another of the same
color appear white. And yet, my Lord, this is the very Case; the Popish
Councils have allowed the deposing of Kings, and how can you defend our
Assemblies, that have commenced the same sort of Casuists? Pope Hildebrand
countenanced that Arch-Rebel Phocas, against his Sovereign, yet you are a
Friend to Mr. Baxter, that maintained the Usurpation of Oliver Cromwell; their
Suarez and Bellarmines, no doubt, are damned by you, for treasonable Doctrines,
and yet you can own your self a favourer of Knox, and Buchanan; it is plain, my
Lord, that both these Religions are rebellious, and these treasonable Positions
have been on both sides defended, and some of the very Reformers of our
Religion, have been so little Friends to Monarchy, and so much agreed with the
Romanists they dissented from, as to tolerate, in some Cases, the dangerous
Doctrine of deposing Kings; and there is still but a small interval, between a
degraded Prince, and a Prisoner; and then it was the Assertion of our Royal
Martyr, that died for it, and verified the fatal Aphorism in his blood, that
there is but a little distance between their Prisons, and the Grave.

Your Lordship reflects on the black Transactions of Court-Converts; but I can
tell you of the blacker Crimes of those that have deserted it, and become your
own Proselytes, such as have been drawn from their Love and Allegiance to their
Sovereign, with the Sorceries, Cunning, and Carresses of your High and
Mighties, that can keep open Entertainments for every staggering Judas, and
make the Devil, and Sedition, enter the completed Apostate with a Sop; these
are those, that are now a days betraying their Sovereign too, with a sort of
Kiss, and with a pretense of discovering his Enemies about him, would
dispossess him of his real Friends, and persuade the Nation, they know every
evil Minister of State, from their having been a little concerned in the
Affairs of it: But what does your Lordship think of the Faith and Integrity of
these Runagadoes, that were formerly nothing but Objects of your Hatred and
Indignation, Enemies to King and Country? And what security have you, they will
serve you more faithfully than they did their Prince,; those pampered Iesuruns,
that fatten'd with his Bounty, kick at him, only for withdrawing his hand, and
like a politic sort of Table-Brutes, fawn no longer than they are fed.

But, can any soul living, take the suggestions, and insinuations of these
discontented Wretches for Gospel Truths, and their discoveries of the slips and
failings in the Government, (which none ever was without) for Revelation, when
these lying Oracles of the Rabble, are possessed with a Devil of malice and
revenge, two things that quickly transport any disaffected Creature, beyond the
bounds of Truth, Reason, and Humanity it self? Will any indifferent person,
concur with those, who thinks the Kings business ill done, only because they
can no longer solicit it? Can an unbias'd man, believe the justice of his
Courts corrupted, and his Judges Arbitrary, because it is the opinion of some
perhaps, that have a mind to sit on the Bench? Are those fair and competent
Asserters of an Arbitrary Power, and good Witnesses of their Princes Tyranny,
only because they are banished the Court, and could see nothing of it, when
they sat in the Council? Lastly, can he truly fear Popery, that is of no
Religion at all, and be an impartial Judge of the Temper of the Duke of York,
that is his avowed and mortal Enemy; neither the Civil Law, or Common, will
admit of any prejudiced Evidence? And for God's sake, let the King and
Government, when they are arraigned, have as fair play for it, as one of your
Joyners, or Cobblers, a College, or an Hewson, would expect.

Next, my Lord, you would prove the Queens Association to have been carried on,
without her knowledge, from a certain Speech of hers, to her Parliament; but
whether the Quotation be false, or true, we will not dispute at present; but this
seems to me, a plain sort of owning the Paper, of which your Friends are
accused, only you would say somewhat for your selves, in not acquainting his
Majesty with it a little sooner* by telling the Kingdom, his Predecessor, Queen
Elizabeth, knew nothing of such a Combination, any more than himself, and that
she looked upon it, as an obligation from her Subjects, to find so many hands
unknowingly subscribed; but granting, they agree in this circumstance, that
such a Loyal Design, as well as a Treasonable one, may possibly have been
carried on in the dark. Can you imagine, my Lord, She would have taken it for
an Obligation too, had they tendered her a Paper, that would have sworn her out
of her Supremacy, and lodged it in the major part of her House of Commons? and
with what face, could ever any Subject, offer a scheam of Rebellion to his
Sovereign, and desire of him, the liberty to commence a Rebel, and a Traitor,
only for his defense and preservation?

The Story of the Queen of Scots, which you would make so plain a Parallel, is
in my judgment, as little to the purpose. First, Did the Queen of England show
her self as vigorous in opposing the disinheriting of her next Heir as our King
has been both kind and just, in asserting the Rights of his Brother and
Successor? Secondly, Do you think, if she had really declared her self against
the proceedings of her Parliament in that Affair, her Subjects would have
entered into an Association to have done it by themselves? No, no, your
Lordship is too good an Historion, not to know that things were then carried on
with her Majesty's Connivance, and tacit Approbation, and that she acted her
part of the Tragedy, like one of Matchiavel's Monarchs behind the Curtain; and
for which, even Writers, very favorable to your own Party, and no Causines,
have justly condemned her.

And it seems, all your own factious Crew don't agree with your Lordship, in
thinking the Proceedings against that unfortunate Queen so fair and honorable;
for very lately, a certain Protestant Buffoon, has proved it plain Murder, in
his second part of a thing called a Speculum, or the View and Reflection of a
Chimera, half Droll, half Author, and half Ass; and from that very Case, this
Hotch-potch Animal, proves Kingkilling to be the Doctrine of the Church of
England; but I hope, you will agree with me, (because he differs from you in
this point) that this his Argumentation, is like the rest of his Stuff, very
ridiculous; but as for his abusing the Churchmen, there you may shake hands
again, for he paints them out very pleasantly, like Fools, Anticks, and
Jack-Puddings, and you draw them out terribly, all in blood, Governors of the
Popish Interest, revengeful, implacable, and such as never forgive; so that
between you, the Clergy may be pretty well secured of an Odium, when you can
expose them even in the two several extremes. But would a Jew take such to be
Christians, that vilify the Church, of which they would seem to be, and
ridicule the very Religion, they are thought to profess.

And here I cannot but observe, a Barbarous, as well as a Malicious hint of your
Lordships; who, when you have represented, how violent the Parliament was
against the Succession of the Queen of Scots, with a cruel and emphatical
Malice, cry out -- Nay, and against her Life too. We know, my Lord, the
Parliament helped the Grandmother to the Block, and you saw another made the
Father stoop to it. But would you have your Associated Baalites sacrifice the
Blood of the Son too? This is stretching up a private Revenge, to vye even with
the Vengeance of the Almighty, and an angry God only visits to the third and
fourth Generation. Your Lordship in this Insinuation shows a great deal of
Inhumanity, not to be paralleled but by that of your Friends, the Dissenters,
in their Association, or the Cannibals of the West Indies, which, as some say,
infest our Plantations there, and refresh themselves in nothing more than in
the Blood of an Enemy. These are the bloody Measures which your Passion
transports you to, and not your Judgment directs: People look through these
transparent Politics like Water, and see nothing but Malice and Revenge at the
bottom.

Your last politic Observation is, That his present Majesty is the first
Prince that ever was persuaded to be so willing, to settle indubitably the
Title of his presumptive Heir. But why persuaded? Has he not natural Affection
enough to be willing himself? And would he not much rather be thought the first
(should he humor your Faction) that ever unnaturally disinherited a kind
Brother, and his Heir apparent? And, I believe, nothing grieves you more, than
that his Majesty's Consent must be required; and could a Parliament be gotten
once to act again without him, no doubt but the Bill of Exclusion would be the
first Act of the Session. But the Law of Nations ever since the Time of
Justinian, the Laws of the Kingdom down from the Conqueror, have happily placed
the Sanction of every Law in the Will of the Prince, and you and your Friends
must be contented, my Lord, till you can persuade the King to give you his Le
Roy Vult, and the Crown and Scepter to the Bargain.

And seeing you are pleased to call the D. of Y. but a presumptive Heir, and
seem to lay such a stress and Emphasis upon the new-coin'd word, we will
discuss this Business a little further. My Lord, (if I mistake not) your Friend
you pretend to vindicate, was the first that applied this pretty Distinction to
the next Heir of the Crown: It looks like a piece of State-Sophistry, and your
noble Friend, some say, was famed for a fine distinguishing Logical Head, when
a young Academick; and a body would almost swear, this Vindicator, the
Vindicated, and the noble Peer, differ only like the little Man with three
great Names, who still makes but the same person: And it was a merry Conceit of
a pleasant Gentleman, who never had a good opinion of these sort of individual
Triumvirs. But though there may not be much weight in such a quaint Fancy, I am
sure there are some that disturb the Government with the quaintness of their
Politics, as if they had so many Heads too as well as Names, and verified the
seign'd Monster of the Poets in themselves, in resembling a sort of factious
Hydra, and which kind of Creature, (if you believe St. John's Revelations in
the Ille of Patmos) this Whore of Babylon, (with which terrible Tropology your
canting Priests are always alarming the People) is seen to ride on. And I hope
you may allow this as good an Interpretation of the Vision, or at least it may
pass for a Moral drawn from it; That whenever Popery is brought into England,
it will be on the Back of some of the greatest Politicians, among your Friends
(as you call them) the Dissenters, and by the sole Projects of some of their
dangerous Head-pieces: And if Commentators can expound the Cruelties of the
Church of Rome, Emblematically represented in this purpl'd Harlot, I don't see
but it may be as warrantable an Exposition to make the bloody Principles of
your rebellious Assemblies, predicted in the Description of the scarlet Beast.
Your fine Notion of his being a presumptive Heir, looks more like a Distinction
in Metaphysics, than a Term in Law: In this your selves seem rather spinning
your Politics into Cobwebs, as if you only designed to catch Flies; for a bare
presumptive Heir is really none at all, and that you can quickly prove, I
warrant you, when it serves for your Turns; much less can one be called so,
that appears to be the immediate Successor, and has none living to intercept
the Title. Your Lordship need not mince the Matter so tenderly, and only
distinguish him out of his Title: You have a Law-Maxim, I warrant you, at your
Fingers end, that will prove him no Heir at all, with a Non datur Haeres
viventis. But this received Aphorism among the Learned, in the Faculty (though
it happen to be true Latin) yet is a fallacious and Ignoramus sort of
Sophistry, when every body knows the common Acception of the word Heir, and
that it is oftener applied to him that expects to be so, in futuro, than to one
that is actually, and de facto, such. With this your distinction of
Presumptive, you may make an Heir of him that is never so far off, if you can
but have a strong Presumption he will survive all those that are before him; or
even of one that has no Right at all, if you presume he shall destroy all those
that have, or get them to relinquish their Titles, and so make himself a
Proprietor, as the Civilians phrase it, Pro derelicto. Upon these
Considerations, you may call the fair Idol you now set up and worship, a
presumptive Heir too: And if you call him only Presumptive, who may be
dispossessed by the Birth of another, neither in that Notion will it hold good
too. We have many Places here in England, my Lord, where Custom has made it
statutable for the youngest Brother to inherit; but I can see no Reason, why
this youngest one may not pass for an Heir apparent for the while, till there
is a younger again appears to dispossess him. Though in most of these Cases,
there may be more ground for a Presumption of their being debarred the
Succession, by a latter Birth, viz. from the Fertility of the Parent, than your
Lordship himself will admit in the Case of the D. of Y. who but in the same
Paragraph talk of the King's being married to a Lady of great Birth, whom, with
the help of the Spanish Ambassador, you could have proved long agone, was never
able to have Children. And then who is not the D. of Y. an apparent Heir to the
Crown, as much as ever your Friend was to his Estate of 9000 l. per annum? Or
who may be presumed to pretend to it now, beside his Highness?

But I can tell you other Mediums you seem to take, to prove his Royal
Highness, but to presume himself a Successor.

First, Because it is possible that according to the words of your Association,
he may be subdued, expelled and destroyed, and so has no absolute certainty of
succeeding to the Crown, because not so much as Security for his Life: But this
is making him but a presumptive Heir, upon a presumption of your own Power to
dispossess him, or the readiness of your Associators to subscribe for his
Murder and Destruction. These are Methods the Turks and Jesuits use, to make
Princes resign their Birthrights with their Breath, and keep them from being
any ways apparent, by sending them to the Grave.

Secondly, Because you have cajoled another young Prince (unfortunate in your
very Favors) to set up for a Pretender, notwithstanding the sad Presidents you
have of the miscarriage of no less than two such Projects in the time of Henry
the Seventh: And this deluded and abused young Gentleman, I am afraid, will
only stand obliged to you, for having made him the greatest Cully, but the
poorest Prince. I confess, I have read, my Lord, that in the Parliament, 20 of
Henry the Third, it was moved in the House, that such natural Sons as were born
before Wedlock, might have the same Right of Succession, as those that were
truly legitimate and begot after: But the Motion was soon unanimously rejected,
all declaring, they would never change their old Laws of England; and your
Lordship and his Adherents will hardly find there was ever such an Act passed
since. I grant, if you consult the Constitutions of the Imperial Law, and the
Codes of Justinian, instead of the Statutes of the Realm, you will find an
illegitimate Birth allowed to put in for an Heir too: But I may defy all those
busy, factious Archivesearchers, and Record-mongers, you now employ, to
discover it in any Roll or Act of Parliament. And it is strange you should set
up now, my Lord, for such an Alteration in a Prince's Right to the Crown,
against the Sense and Opinion of the very Parliaments you adore, and who
opposed it, even in the Succession of every private Subject to his Estate. By
these Methods you may prove a Prince of Wales, never an apparent Heir, because
it is in the Power of an associated Crew of Malcontents, to set up another
Pretender.

Lastly, You may think the D. of Y. but a presumptive Heir, because you think a
Parliament may dash his Expectation with a Bill of Exclusion. But pray, my
Lord, would the Judgment of that High Court, and Sanhedrim, ever make him
really appear to have the less Right, In foro Conscientiae? The very sacred
Writ tell us, that all things are not just and equal that are expedient: And
there is no necessity we should cease to be Christians, to set up for
Statesmen, or burn our Bibles, though it were to prevent our own Suffering in
the Flame; and one of the greatest Reasons your Sticklers urge for such a
dangerous Alteration in the Government, is but Matter of Expediency. These
factious Innovators, I confess, fling about a common Objection too, That it is
a little strange, a Parliament, their public Representative, should not be
allowed, what we grant every private Subject, viz. To Disinherit. But, I hope,
there is some difference between an Heir to three Kingdoms, and one perhaps
only to so many Acres; Lands and Leases may be disposed of by the Proprietor,
when Crowns and Scepters are out of the disposal of the Prince. The Laws of
Nations will allow men a Dominion over their Issues and Estates, when they
will not Kings a Power of disinheriting their own Successors, much less an
hereditary Monarch to pass for a Parliament's Heir, instead of the Crown's. Our
Chronicles tell us of one of our young Princes, that laid hold on the Crown as
soon as ever the old King was but supposed dead, and told the dying Monarch,
when he revived for a little while, that he thought him expired, and then knew
the Crown to be presently his. And why would not the D. of Y. (who
notwithstanding all your Lordships malicious Suggestions, never showed such a
forwardness to mount the Throne) have the same Diadem immediately transferred,
should his Majesty, which (I hope will be long first) yield to the same Fate,
the Laws admitting no more of an Interregnum, than an Exclusion? But if your
Lordship (whose Politics are best understood from the Measures you take) can
bring this Monarchy to an Elective one, then, I grant, the Successor must be
forced to court your honorable Assemblies for their Suffrages: But then I date
promise, he will wave his Pretension to the Crown, and have more reason to
despair of Justice, than those that lately let fall their Suits and Actions:
Then he shall relinquish his Right to the Government of Old England, and leave
your Lordship sole Candidate, to be King of a New Poland.

There are many Creatures sometimes maliciously good, and that makes your
Lordship bestow a few faint Elogies on his Majesty, only that his Brother may
appear the more odious; and with a great deal of spite you could picture him a
Saint, could you make the other the more truly to represent the Devil; the
Greatness of our Sovereign's Spirit is as well known as the Meekness of his
Temper, and his Abilities and Courage, need no such spightful Pen as yours, to
write the Panegyric. But why then must his Highness, that has the same Blood
in his Veins, be thought an effeminate Person, and a Coward? but the best of it
is, no one will think him so the sooner, for an envious Suggestion of his
inveterate Enemy; and no indifferent person can be so mad, as to take the
Character of the Duke of York, from a Friend of the E. of S. And can those with
Modesty accuse him for want of Valor, that has hazarded his Life for the
Service of his King and Country, against the Forces of the Dutch, and the Rage
of Wind and Water, who have never shown any of their own, unless it were in
Arms against their Sovereign, and fighting under the Banner of a Commonwealth?
And as for his Temper, it is both generous and mild enough, and not hated by
such Multitudes, as your Lordship would insinuate, and by none, I fancy, but
those that fear it, and have merited the severest of its Animadversions; and it
was the Foxes Trick in the Fable, my Lord, when it had offended the Guardian
Mastiff of the Flock, to accuse him for the worrying of the Sheep.

And as Religious as you seem to be in the Close, you shall find us altogether
as Devout, praying with more Zeal, and less Hypocrisy, that the God of Heaven,
who is the searcher of all Hearts, would still detect the deep Designs of
yours, bless the King, in defeating the Counsels of all Achitophels, and the
Curses of every Shimei.

FINIS.

