THE LAST SPEECH OF Col. Eusebius Andrews, SOMETIMES A Lawyer of LINCOLNS-INNE,
AT The time of his Execution on the Scaffold at Tower Hill, Thursday the 22 of
August, 1650: WITH Several questions propounded to him by Doctor Swaddling, and
his answer thereunto.

Licensed, Entered, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN CLOVVES, 1650.

THE LAST SPEECH OF Col. Eusebius Andrews.
AS soon as he came upon the Scaffold, kissing the block he said, I hope there
is no more but this block between me and Heaven; and to the Leiutenant of the
Tower he said, I hope I shall neither tire in my way, nor go out of it. After
he had been a good while upon the Scaffold, turning to the rail, he speaks to
the people as follows. Christian Gentlemen and People, Your business hither
to day, is to see a sad spectacle, a man to be in a moment unmanned, and cut off
in the prime of his years, taken from further opportunities of doing good
either to himself, his friends, the Commonwealth, or especially to GOD, It
seldom happens but upon very good cause. And though truly, if my general known
course of life were but inquired into, I may modestly say, there is such a
moral honesty upon it, as some may be so sawey as to expostulate why this great
judgment is fallen upon me; but know I am able to give them and my self an
answer, and out of this breast to give a better account of my Judgment and
Execution then my Judgers themselves or you are able to give; It is Gods wrath
upon me for sins long unrepented, of many judgments withstood and mercies
slighted; therefore God has whipped me by his severe rod of correction, that
he might not loose me; I pray join with me in prayer, that it may not be a
fruitless rod, that when by this rod I have laid down my life, by this staff I
may be comforted, and received into glory. I am very confident by what I have
heard since my sentence, there is more exception made against proceedings
against me, then I ever made. My Tryers had a Law, and the value of that Law is
indisputable, and for me to make a question of it, I should but shame my self
and my d^scretion In the strictness of that Law, something is done by me, that
is applicable to some clause therein, by which I stand condemnable: the means
where by I was brought under that interpretation of that which was not in my
self intended maliciously, being testimony given (by persons whom I pit^y) so
false, yet so positive, that I cannot condemn my Judges, for passing sentence
against me, according to legal justice, for equity lies higher breasts.

As for my accusers, or rather, betrayers, I pity, and am sorry for them, they
have committed Judas his crime; but I wish and pray for them, Peter's tears,
that by Peter's repentance they may escape Judas his punishment, and I wish
other people so happy, they may be taken up betimes, before they have drunk
more blood of Christian men, possibly less deserving then my self.

It is true, there have been several addresses made for mercy, and I will put
the obstruction of it upon nothing more then upon my own sin, and seeing God
sees it fit (I having not glorified him in my life) I might do it in my death,
which I am content to do: I profess in the face of God, particular malice to
any one of the State or Parliament, to do them a bodily injury I had none.

For the cause in which I had a great while waded, I must needs say, my
engagement or continuance in it has laid no scruple upon my Conscience, it was
on principles of Law: the knowledge whereof I profess, and on principalls of
Religion, my judgment satisfied, and Conscience rectified, that I have pursued
those ways for which I bless God I find no blackness upon my Conscience, nor
have I put it into the bead-roll of my sins.

I will not presume to deside controversies; I desire God to honor himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and
plenty, when I shall enjoy peace and plenty, beyond all you possess here; in my
conversation in the world, I do not know where I have an enemy with cause, or
that there is such a person to whom I have a regret; but if there by any whom I
cannot recollect, under the notion of Christian men I parden them, as freely as
if I had named them by name, I freely forgive them, being in free peace with
all the world, as I desire God for Christ's sake, to be at peace with me. For
the business of death, it is a sad sentence in it self, if men consult with
flesh and blood: But truly without boasting, I say it, or if I do bo^st, I
boast in the Lord, I have not to this minute, had one consultation with the
flesh about the blow of the Axe, or one thought of the Axe, more then as my
Passe-port to glory.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they have sent me hither to a place however of punishment, yet of some
honor to die a death, somewhat worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth and
qualification, and this courtesy of theirs, has much helped toward the
pacification of my mind.

I shall desire God that those Gentlemen in that sad beadrol to be tried by the
High Court of Justice, that they may find that really there that is nominall in
the Act; an High Court of Justice, a Court of high Justice high in its
righteousness, though not in its severity, no more clouded with the testimony
of such as sell blood for profit. Father forgive them, and forgive me as I
forgive them.

I desire you now that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till
the hour of death, not till the minute of death, for the hour is come already,
that as I have a very great load of sins; so I may have the wings of your
prayers, to help those Angels that are to convey my soul to Heaven, and I doubt
not, but I shall there see my Savior, my gallant Master the King of England,
and another Mr. whom I much honored, my Lord Capel; hoping this day to see
Christ in the presence of the Father, the King in the presence of him, my Lord
Capel in the presence of them all; and my self there to rejoice with all other
Saints and Angels for evermore.

Dr. Swaddling (he being upon the Scaffold) spoke as follows unto the Colonel.

You have this morning in the prsence of a few, given some account of your
Religion, and under general notions or words, have given an account of your
faith, charity, and repentance.

To those on the scaffold, If you please to hear the same questions asked here,
you shall, that it may be a general testimony to you all, that he died in the
favor of God.

To the Colonel. Now Sir, I begin to deal with you: do you acknowledge that
this stroke you are by and by to suffer, is a just punishment laid upon you by
God, for your former sins?


Coll. Andrews. I dare not only not deny it, but dare not but confess it, I
have no opportunity of glorifying God more, then by taking shame to my self,
and I have a reason of the justice of God in my own bosom, which I have put to
your bosom.


Doctor. You acknowledge you deserve more then this stroke of the Axe, and that
a far greater misery is due to you, even the pains and torments of Hell that
the damned there endure?


Coll. I know it is due in righteous judgment, but I know again, I have a
satisfaction made by my elder Brother Christ Jesus, and then I say it is not
due, it is due from me, but quitted by his righteousness.


Doctor. Do you believe to be saved by that Mediator and none others?


Coll. By that and that only, renouncing all secondary causes whatsoever.


Doct. Are you truly and unfainedly sorry before God, as you appear to us, for
all those sins that have brought you hither?


Col. I am sorry, and can never be sorrowful enough, and am sorry I can be no
more sorry.


Doct. If God should by a miracle (not to put you to a vain hope) but if God
should as he did to Ezekiah, renew your days; what life do you resolve to lead
hereafter?


Coll. It is a question of a great length, and requires a great time to answer.
Men in such streights would promise great things; but I would first call some
friends to limit, how far I should make a Vow, that I might not make a rash
one, and so offer the sacrifice of fools; but a Vow I would make, and by Gods
help endeavor to keep it.


Doct. Do you wish health and happiness upon all lawful Authorities and
Government?


Coll. I do prize all obedience to lawful Government, and the adventuring
against them is sinful, and I do not justify my self, what ever my judgment be
for my thus venturing against the present Government. I leave it to God to
judge whether it be righteous, if it be, it must stand.


Doct. Are you now in love and charity with all men? do you freely forgive them?


Coll. With all the world freely, and the Lord forgive them, and forgive me, as
I freely forgive them.


Doct. You have for some late years laid down your Gown, and took up the Sword,
and you were a man of note in those parts where you had your residence. I have
nothing to accuse you for want of diligence in hindering the doing of injuries,
yet possibly there might be some wrong done by your Officers, or those under
you to some particular men: if you had your Estate in your hands, would you
make restitution?


Coll. The wrongs themselves you bring to my mind, are not great, nor many;
some things of no great moment, but such as they are, my desire is to make
restitution, but have not wherewithal.


Doct. If you had ability, would you likewise leave a legacy of thankfulness to
Almighty God, something to his poor Servants, to his lame Members, to his deaf
Members, to his double Members?


Coll. My will has always been better then my ability that way.


Doct. Sir, I shall trouble you very little further, I thank you for all those
heavenly Colloquies I have enjoyed by being in your Company these three days;
and truly I am very sorry I must part with so heavenly an associate. We have
known one another heretofore; but never so Christian-like before, I have rather
been a Scholar to learn from you, then an Instructor: I wish this Stage
wherein you are made a spectacle to God, Angels, and the World, may be a School
to all about you; for though I will not diminish your sins, nor shall I
conceal, nor hypocrize mine own, for they are great ones betwixt God and my
self, yet I think there is few here have a lighter load upon them then you
have, if we consider things well, and I only wish them your repentance, and
that measure of faith God has given you, and that measure of courage you have
attained from God, and that constant perseverance God has crowned you with
hitherto.


Coll. His name be praised.

Here the Doctor prayed with him almost a quarter of an hour, after which, the
Col. turning himself again to the People, spoke as follows. One thing more I
desire to be clear in. There lies a common imputation upon the Cavaliers, that
they are Papists, and under that name we are made odious to those of the
contrary opinion. I am not a Papist, but renounce the Pope With all his
dependencies, when the distractions in Religion first sprang up, I might have
been thought apt to turn from this Church to the Roman, but was utterly
unsatisfied in their Doctrine, in point of faith, and very much, as to their
Dissipline. The Religion which I profess, is that which passes under the name
of Protestant, though that be rather a name of distinction, then properly
essential to Religion. But the Religion which was found out in the Reformation
purged from all the errors of Rome, in the Reign of Edward the 6. practiced in
the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles, that blessed Prince
deceased, that Religion before it was defaced. I am of which I take to be
Christ's Catholic, though not the Roman Catholic Religion: in the profession
and practice whereof, I will live and die, that for my Religion. Then he turned
himself unto the Executioner, I have no reason to quarrel with thee, thou art
not the hand that throws the stone, I am not of such an Estate to be liberal,
but there is 3 l. for thee, which is all I have. Now tell me what I lack.
Executioner. Your hair to be turned up Col. Show me how to fit my self upon the
block. After which his doublet being of, and hair turned up, he turned again to
the People, and prayed a good while. Before he laid down upon the block, he
spoke again to the People, viz. There is not one face that looks upon me,
though many faces, and perhaps different from me in opinion and practice, but
(me thinks) has something of pity in it, and may that mercy which is in your
hearts, fall into your own bosoms when you have need of it; and may you never
find such blocks of sin to stand in the way of your mercy, as I have met with.
I beseech you join with me in prayer. Then he prayed (leaning on the Scaffold)
with an audible voice for about a quarter of an hour; having done, he had some
private conference with Dr. Swaddling, then taking his leave of his friends,
Sheriffs, and acquaintance, saluting them all with a courteous valediction, he
prepared himself for the block, kneeling down said, let me try the block, which
he did, after casting his eyes up, and fixing them very intentively upon
Heaven, he said, when I say Lord Jesus receive me, Executioner do thine Office,
then kissing the Axe he laid down, and with as much undaunted, yet Christian
courage as possibly could be in man, did he expose his throat to the fatal
Axe, his life to the Executioner, and commended his soul into the hands of God,
as into the hands of a faithful and merciful Creator, through the merritorious
passion of a gracious Redeemer, saying the foremencioned words, his head was
smitten of at one blow.


FINIS.

