STEREOMETRICAL Propositions:

VARIOUSLY APPLICABLE;

But PARTICULARLY INTENDED For GAGEING.

By ROBERT ANDERSON.

LONDON,

Printed by William Godbid for Joshuah Conniers at the Sign of the Black Raven
in Duck-lane, 1668.

To the READER.
ABout seven years since I resolved these following propositions, with others
of the like nature; but did not intend ever to have published them: But being
overperswaded by some of my Friends, I have here made so many of them public,
as I thought would be convenient to what here is intended.

Here I ought to acknowledge that great Respect which I owe to my Worthy Friend
Mr. John Collins, one of the Royal Society; which propounded to me about 6
years since, that proposition of the second Sections of the Sphere and
Spheroide; and also in giving me Information, and helping me to such Books as
might be most advandageous: Further, not only I, but all Lovers of the
Mathematics are very much obliged to this our Worthy Friend for his good
Intelligence, great care in sending for Books from beyond the Seas, and his
continual love in promoting the Mathematics, and Mathematical Men.

Forasmuch as throughout this little Tract, here is much use made of
Parallelepipedons, Prismes and Pyramides: I think fit, a little to insist
thereon; chiefly for the young Learners sakes, for which this is only intended.

In the Diagram,
Let there be a Solid, as POHG VFIR; the plane POHG parallel equal and alike to
the plane RIFV; Further, POIR is parallel equal and like to the plane GHFV: Yet
further, the plane OHFI is parallel equal and like the plane PRVG: such a Solid
is called a Parallelepipedon.

Let there be a Solid as GHDEV F, the plane GEV is parallel equal and like the
plane HDF; Further, the planes HGFV and DEVF are alike and the line FV common
to both: such a Solid is called a Prisme.

Let there be a Solid as HBCDF, the planes BCF, CDF, DHF and HBF all meet at
the point F, such a Solid is called a Pyramide.

Further,

Pyramides, Prismes and Parallelepipedons upon the same Base and Altitude, are
as, one, one and a half, and three, that is, if the Pyramide be 4, the prisme
will be 6, and the parallelepipedon will be 12.

An Example in Numbers.
If PG, 6; PO, 8; and HF the Altitude be 9; Then multiply 6 by 8, and the
product will be 48, the Area POHG, this Area multiplied by 9 the Altitude, the
product is 432, the parallelepipedon POHGVFIR, if the Area 48 be multiplied by
half 9 that is 4^ the product will be 216, equal to a prisme of the Base POHG
and altitude HF.

If the Area POHG, 48, be multiplied by one third of 9, that is by 3, the
product will be 144 equal to a pyramide whose Base is POHG and altitude HF.

To find the solidity of the prisme ^HDEVF.
Let GE, 10; GH, 8; HF 9; multiply 10 by 8, and the product will be 80 the Area
GHDE, this 80 being multiplied by half the altitude HF, 9; that is, 4, the
product will be 360, the prisme GHDEVF.

To find the solidity of the pyramide HBCDF.
Let HD, 10; HB, 4; multiply 10 by 4 the product will be 40, the Area HBCD,
this Area multiplied by 3, that is one third of the Altitude HF, the product
will be 120, the pyramide HBCDF.



To find the solidity of a Solid, that has one of its Bases an Ellipsis and
the other Base a Circle, these two Bases are supposed to be parallel.
In such a Solid, the sides being continued will never meet at a point as in
circular and Elliptick cones, and therefore the general Rule will not resolve
these kind of Solids: therefore consider it thus;

Let PE be equal to the Transverse diameter in an Ellipsis, PA its Conjugate
diameter. Let RV and RI be the diameters of a Circle. First, Let there be made
a Rectangled figure of the Transverse and Conjugate diameters of the Ellipsis,
as PACE. Let there be a square made of the diameter RV, as RIFV. Let the
altitude of the Solid be HF, find the solidity of the Solid PACEVFIR, thus, Let
it be cut into as many parallelepipedons, prismes, and pyramides as are
necessary: then find the solidity of those parallelepipedons, prismes and
pyramides, as before is taught, those parallelepipedons, prismes and pyramides
being added together will be equal to the whole Solid, thus, the parallepipedon
POHG VFIR, more the prisme GEDHFV, more the pyramide DCBHF, more the prisme
HBAOIF; these 4 Solids being added together make the whole Solid ACEPRIFV. For
the whole is, 4 the product is 40 equal to the prisme GHDEVF. HD, 3; HB, 1;
therefore HBCD is equal to 3; which being multiplied by one third of the
altitude HF, that is, 3; the pyramide HBCDF will be equal to 9; BA, 3; AO, 1;
therefore ABHO will be equal to 3, which being multiplied by half HF the
altitude, that is, by 4 the product is 13, equal to the prisme OABHFI. Now
these 4 composed Numbers being added together make 144 equal to the whole
frustum pyramide PACEVFIR. Then as 14: 11:: 144: 113 1/7 the irregular
Elliptick solid, whose Transverse PE, and conjugate PA diameters at the
Elliptick Base are 6 and 4, and the diameters of the Circular Base is RV 3.

Here note,
Although Archimedes gives the proportion of the square of the diameter of any
Circle, to the area of that Circle; as 14, is to 11. And also; that the
diameter of any Circle is to the circumference of that Circle, as 7, is to 22;
Yet you are not to underderstand that these proportions are in their just
values; But that they are the least numbers that will best agree to that
approach.

If those numbers be thought not to agree near enough to truth, instead of
those, these may be used; for, 14 and 11, take 452 and 355; for 7 and 22, take
113 and 355.

Further note.
In the 24th. proposition there is somewhat said of Cylindrick hoofs. Those
cylinders ought to be upright and not inclining cylinders.

Ye^ further note.
By reason of much business, I could not attend the Press as I ought to have
done; and by that means there are considerable faults, which I desire may be
corrected before the Book is read, otherwise there may rise a misapprehension
of what there is intended.

Lastly note,
Almost at the beginning of the first proposition you may find it printed,
Thus, CN: NZ:: EH: HZ, 4. 6. the meaning is thus, as CN is to NZ; so is EH, to
HZ, by the fourth prop. of the sixth of Euclid; The like in the rest.

R. A.

PROPOSITION I. To find the solidity of a Frustum Pyramide, whose bases are
parallel and a like.
LEt ABCNHEDF be a frustum pyramide, whose solidity is required; Let the Lines
AF, BD, CE, and NH be continued till they meet at Z; Let GO, be the height of
the frustum pyramide, OZ the height of the Continuation; Let FDEH be set at the
Angle N, as NR QK. Then CN: NZ:: EH: HZ, 4. 6.

And CN: EH:: NZ: HZ, 16. 5. CN -- EH: EH:: NZ -- HZ: HZ, 17. 5. That is, CK:
KN:: NH: HZ, because the planes HFDE, and NABC are parallel, they cut the Line
ZG, in G and O in the same proportion as they cut NZ, in N and Z, by 17. 11.
Thus, NH: HZ:: GO: OZ, Therefore CK: KN:: GO: OZ, 11. 5. OZ being found, which
added to GO makes the whole Altitude GZ; by which find the whole pyramide
NABCZ, which done, find the pyramide HFD EZ, by the 7. 12. then N ABCZ less
HFDEZ, the Remainder is the frustum HFDECB AN.



A 2d way may be thus; First to prove that AK is a mean proportion between AC
and F E; then C N: NK:: C A: AK, 1. 6. AN: NR:: NM: NQ, 1. 6. CN: NK:: AN: NR,
7. 5. CA: AK:: NM: NQ, 11. 5.

Further, if GO the Altitude of the frustum FDEHCBAN, be multiplied by AC more
AK more KR, that Product will be the triple of the said frustum; for the
parallelepipedon made of GZ the altitude of the pyramide in the Base NABC is
triple of the pyramide NABCZ, by the same reason the parallelepipedon made of
GO in AC, together with the parallelepipedon made by ZO in AC is triple of the
said pyramide by 7. 12. if the parallelepipedon made of OZ in FE, that is, in
RK, that is, the triple of the pyramide HFDEZ be taken from the
parallelepipedon NABCZ, there remains that which is made of GO in AC, together
with those that are made of OZ in AQ and the same OZ in MC, the triple of the
frustum ABC NHEDF, by 5. 5. for, CK: KN:: GO: OZ, CK: KN:: AR: RN, Therefore
GO: OZ:: AR: RN, and CK: KN:: CM: MN, 4. 6. AR: RN:: AQ: QN, therefore GO: OZ::
CM: MN, 11. 5. GO: OZ:: AQ: QN, therefore GO in MN=OZ in CM, GO in QN=OZ in AQ,
add GO in AC to both, that is, GO in MN, more GO in QN, more GO in AC, is equal
to OZ in CM, more OZ in AQ, more GO in AC; but OZ in CM, more OZ in AQ, more GO
in AC are triple of the said frustum; therefore GO in MN, more GO in QN, more
GO in AC are equal to the triple of the said frustum.

An Example in Numbers, and first of the first.
CK, 34: KN, 26:: GO, 68: OZ, 52; then 68 more 52=120, GZ: then AC 3600; in GZ,
120; is equal to 432000, a third part is 144000, ABCNZ, FE, 676 in OZ, 52 is
equal to 35152.

A third part is 11717, HFDEZ, 144000 less 11717 is equal to 132282^ the
solidity of the frustum ACEF.

The Second way.
AC, 3600 more FE, 676, more AK, 1560 the sum of those are 5836, which
multiplied by GO, 68, is 396848, a third part is 1322 82. These ways
Christopher Clavius has, page 208 of his Geometria practica. I shall give a
third in conformity to what follows.

A Third way.
Let ACEZHPOF be a frustum pyramide the Bases Squares and Parallel; Let HPOF be
projected in the Base ACFZ, as ZVRT; VR and TR be continued to D and B; then
will TD be equal to RA, and RC a Square; most manifest it is, that the
parallelepipedon ZVRTPOFH, more the prisme VABR OP, more the pyramide RBCDO,
more the prisme RDETOF is equal to the said frustum pyramide.

For all the parts of any magnitude being taken, together are equal to the
whole. Axiom 19. 1.



The prisme V ABROP is equal to the prisme RDETFO, because of equal bases and
altitude, but the prism VA BROP is half the parallelepipedon, made of the base
VABR, and the altitude TO, by 28. 11. therefore the parallelepipedon made of
the base ZABT, that is the Rectangle made of HF and ZA, and the altitude TO,
more the pyramide RBDCO that is ^ of the square of the difference of the sides
of the upper and lower Bases and the altitude TO, shall be equal to the frustum
proposed.

Example in Numbers.
ZE, 60; ZT, 26; the product 1560 equal to BZ, a third part of RC is 385, which
added to 1560, is equal to 1945^, this last composed number multiplied by 68
equal to TO makes 132282 the solidity of the said frustum; then as 14 to 11, or
more near the truth, as 452 to 355, so is 132282 to 103894^ the frustum cone
adscribed within the frustum pyramide.

PROPOSITION II. To find the solidity of a frustum pyramide, whose Bases are
parallel, but not alike; that is, when their corresponding sides are not
proportional.
LET ADGOVZTS be the pyramide proposed, here AG is a square, SZ a
parallelogram; Let STZV be projected in the base, as, QPKL; continue the sides,
as QL, to B and I; PK, to C and H; LK, to M and F; PQ, to E and R; the Figure
being completed, the whole frustum will be composed of these parts, namely 4
pyramides, as CDEPT, KFGHZ, LIOMV, RQ BAS, more 4 prismes, as BCPQTS, QR MLVS,
LKHIVZ, KFEPTZ, more the parallelepipedon PQLKZVST; a further demonstration is
needless.



An Example.
CD equal to 25, DE equal to 12, the ^ike for the other Angles, CE equal to
300, which being multiplied by 5, that is of TP, makes the pyramide CDEPT equal
to 1500, which multiplied by 4 (because there are 4 of them) is 6000; BC, 34;
CP, 12; BP, 408; this last being multiplied by 7^ that is ^ the altitude TP,
makes 3060 equal to the prisme BCQPTS, this being doubled (because there are
two of that magnitude) is 6120; PE, 25; PK, 60; PF, 1500; which being
multiplied by 7^ makes 11250, equal to the prisme PEFKZT, this being doubled
(because there are two opposites equal) is 22500; PQ, 34; QL, 60; LP, 2040;
this last number being multiplied by 15 the altitude of the pyramide TP,
produces 30600; the parallelepipedon QPKLVZTS; these 4 composed numbers being
added together, makes the whole frustum pyramide.

Thus.
The 4 pyramides are 6000. The 2 lesser prismes are 6120. The 2 greater prismes
are 22500. The parallelepipedon is 30600. The whole frustum pyramide is 65220.

A Second way thus.
Let FC be the greater base, RQ the lesser, GO the height; make it as RH: HQ::
FA: AB; draw BE parallel to FA, then will the plane FB be like the plane RQ;
Let the Figure be completed, then will the frustum ACDFRHQZ be equal to the
frustum ABEFRHQZ more the prisme, BCVT QZ, more the pyramide TVDEZ: here note
that TB is made equal to QZ.



The Example in Numbers.
The frustum ABEFRHQZ, is equal to 124501^, found by the first Proposition, BC,
16; CV, 26; BV, 416; being multiplied by the altitude, that is 32, makes 13312,
equal to the prisme BCVTQZ; TV, 26; VD, 34; TD, 544; being multiplied by ^ of
GO that is 21^, makes 11605 equal to the pyramide TVDEZ; these three composed
numbers being added together, makes 149418^ equal to the frustum pyramide ACD
FRHQZ.

The frustum ABEFHRZQ 124501^. The prisme BCVTQZ 13312. The pyramide TVDEZ
11605^. The frustum ACDFRHQZ 149418^.

A Third way thus.
Let PC the greater base; RF the lesser; Let the upper base be projected in the
lower, as RIFV be equal to POHG, most easy it is to apprehend, that the
frustum pyramide PACEVFIR, is equal to the parallelepipedon POHGVFIR, more the
prisme OA BHFI, more the pyramide HBCDF, more the prisme HDEGVF, for the whole
is equal to all its parts.

In numbers thus.

Let AC, be 56; AP, 38; RI, 26; RV, 30; RP, 40; RI, 26; VR, 30; IV, 780 equal
to PH; which being drawn into RP, 40; makes POHGVFIR, 31200: OA, 12; AB, 30;
AH, 360; being multiplied by 20, that is half the height PR, it makes 7200
equal to OABHFI. BC, 28; HB, 12; BD, 336; being multiplied by ^ of the altitude
that is 13, it produces 4480, equal to the pyramide HBCDF; GH, 26; HD, 28; HE,
728; being multiplied by 20, the product is 14560 equalto the prisme HDE GVF;
these 4 composed numbers being added together, makes the solidity of the said
frustum.

The parallelepipedon-POHGFVRI= 31200 The prisme -- OABHFI= 07200 The pyramide
-- HBCDF= 04480 The prisme -- HDEGVF= 14560 The frustum pyramide -- PACEVFIR=
57440

Then,

As 14 is to 11, so is the solidity of any frustum pyramide thus found, to any
Elliptick frustum, adscribed in that frustum pyramide.

PROPOSITION. III. To find the solidity of a Frustum Prisme.
LEt CAGDEF be a prisme, who solidity is required, let BC be mad^ equal to FE,
and BH parallel to CD, and the



Figure being completed, the frustum prisme ^CDGFE may be composed of the
prisme ^CDHFE, more the pyramide BAGHF: further demonstration is needless.

An Example in Numbers.
BC, 52; BH, 64; BD, 3328; this last ^umber being multiplied by 40, that is
half ^he height, makes 133120 equal to the prisme ^BCDEF; AB, 32; BH, 64; BG,
^048: this last being drawn into 26^, that ^s, a third part of the altitude
makes 54613^ equal to the pyramide GABHF: this prisme and pyramide being added
together, makes 187733^, equal to the frustum prisme AGD CEF.

The second Case thus.
Let ZBCDEH be a frustum prisme; Let AC be equal to HE and AO parallel to ZB,
the Figure being completed, the prisme AC DOHE less the pyramide ABZOH is equal
to the prisme BCDZHE; or thus, the prisme ZBCDFE more the solidity ZBHF, that
is, half the pyramide ZBAOH, is equal to the frustum proposed.

Example in Numbers.
AC, 84; AO, 64; AD, 5376; this last drawn into 40, half the height makes
215040; equal to the prisme OACDHE; AC, 32; BZ, 64; AZ, 2048 being multiplied
by 26^, that is, one third of the height, it makes 54613 equal to the pyramide
ABZOH this pyramide taken from the prisme leaves 160426^, equal to the frustum
prisme proposed.

Then as 14 is to 11, so are such prismes to Elliptick solids adscribed in
those prismes.

Hence follows a Fourth way for finding the solidity of these irregular
frustums.
Suppose ACDFGNIH be the frustum proposed, because FA is equal to DC, and AC
equal to DF, and GN equal to IH, and NI to GH; and because GN is less than FA,
and HI than DC; therefore if AN, CI, DH, FG, be continued toward Z and V, they
will meet, suppose at Z and V, then AC DFVZ, less NI HGVZ, there remains ACDF
GNIH the frustum proposed.

It also follows, That such prismes have such proportions one to another, as
Squares and Cubes of their corresponding sides, disjoined, thus.

The pyramide BCDEZ, is to the pyramide RQIHZ, as the cube of BE to the cube of
RQ; 8, 12. The prisme FABEVZ, is to the prisme GNQRVZ, as the square of FA, is
to the square of GN; the reason why these prismes are not in a triplecate ratio
of their homologal sides, as well as the pyramides; is because FE, GR, and VZ
are equal, and the ratio rises but from VG^ GN and VF, and FA; whereas in the
pyramide the ratio rises from three, that is from ZR, RQ, and RH; and from ZE^
ED, and EB.

In Numbers thus.
Let VZ be 9, ZR, 3; ZE, 6; RQ, ^ EB, 8; RH, 3; ED, 7; Therefore G^ QRZV is
equal to 54, and RQIHZ ^ equal to 14; then as the cube of 3, that ^ 27, to the
cube of 6, that is 216; so is the pyramide RQIHZ, that is 14, to the pyr^mide
EBCDZ, that is 112. Then 112 le^ 14 is equal to 98, equal to RQIHDCB^ Again, as
the square of 3, that is 9, to the square of 6, that is, 36; so is the prisme
G^ QRZV; that is, 54 to the prisme FABE^ V, that is, 216. Then 216 less, 54 is
equ^ to 162, equal to GNQREBAF. This la^ frustum, more the frustum RQIHDBC^ is
equal to the frustum GNIHDCA^ equal to 260.

Or thus.
As 27: 189:: (that is the cube of ZE le^ the cube of ZR) 14: 98, equal to the
fr^stum RQIHDCBE. Again, as 9: 27* (that is the square of ZE less the square o^
ZR) 54: 162, equal to the frustum GN^ REBAF.

What ever is said of these prismes and pyramides, the same is to be understood
in Cones and Ecliptic prismes;

For they are in duplicate and triplicate ratio of their homologal sides,
further for as much as that, the two first terms in each proportion may be
fixed; there may by the help of a Table of Squares and Cubes, the solidity of
such solids easily be calculated gradually, that is, inch by inch, or foot by
foot, the two fixed numbers in the pyramide are the Cube of the continuation,
or the side RZ; and the pyramide RQIH, the like in the prisme, and with the
square of the continuation RZ.

Thus.
27: 14:: 37: 19 ^, 27: 14:: 98: 60 ^, 27: 14:: 189: 98, these three numbers,
namely, 19 5/27, 50 ^, and 98, are the solidity of the frustum pyramide RQIHDC
^E, the first number is the solidity of one ^nch, the second number of two
inches, the ^hird of three inches; for the prisme; as 9: 54:: 7: 42, 9: 54::
16: 96, 9: 54:: 27: 162; these 3 numbers, viz. 42, 96, and 162 are the solidity
of the frustum prisme GNQREBAF, taken ^nch by inch; therefore 42 more 19 5/27
equal ^o 61 ^, 96 more 50 ^ equal 146 ^, 162 more ^6 equal to 260, are equal to
the solidity of ^he whole frustum GNIHDCAF, taken inch ^y inch; the like for
any Elliptick frustum.

Proposition. IV. To find the solidity of a frustum pyramide, whose Bases are
not parallel; and the inclination is from side to side.


LEt R HE TCBA^ be a frustum pyramide, the base R^ ET, no^ parallel to the base
^ ABC; le^ RHD^ be paralle to AB^ F, the^ may the whole frustum pyramide RH
ETAB^ F be composed o^ the frustum pyramide RHDZABCF more, the prisme RHDZTE,
by a composition of the last Propos. PD being the altitude of the frustum
pyramide RHDZABCF: EX the height of the prisme RHDZTE may be found, thus* BD:
DP:: DE: EX; a further demonstration is needless.

II. To find the solidity of a triangular frustum pyramide, whose bases are not
parallel.


Let CABDHF be a frustum pyramide, CAB not parallel to HDF, let QDE be parallel
to CAB; the triangular frustum Q DEBAC is half a quadrangular frustum pyramide,
found by the 2 Proposion, DZ the height of the pyramide QHFED; Therefore the
frustum pyramide QDEBAC more the pyramide QHFED will be equal to the frustum
pyramide FHDABC.

III. To find the solidity of the frustum pyramide, ACFEDZ.


Here the base AFC is not parallel to the base ZDE but to the plane ZOE; the
frustum pyramide ZOE FCA may be found by the 2 Proposition, the part ZOE D will
be a pyramide, its altitude may be found, thus, As OF: OG:: OD: DR, the frustum
pyramide ZOEFCA more the pyramide ZOED will be equal to the solid ACFEOZD.

IV. To find the solidity of a frustum pyramide, whose bases are not parallel,
and whose inclination is from Angle to Angle.
Let CABDFXKQ be a frustum pyramide, the base CABD not parallel to the base
FXKQ, but parallel to the plane FEH G; then the frustum pyramide C ABDHEFG
found by the 2 Propos. more the pyramide EQXG F, found by the 2 case of this
Propos. more the frustum pyramide GEHZXQ, found by the 2 Propos. more the
pyramide XKZQ, found by the 3 case of this Propos. will be equal to the whole
frustum pyramide CABDFXKQ.



PROPOSITION V.
LEt FHAOE be a Semicircle, HO parallel to FE; FB and ED parallel to CA, the
Figure being completed, the Cone QCI is equal to the Cylinder GE less the
portion of the Sphere FHOE.



For the square of CO less the square of TO is equal to the square of RC, the
square of RN (equal to the square of CO) less the square of TO is equal to the
square of ON more the Rectangle twice under RON; therefore the square of RC
(that is the square of RI) is equal to the square of ON more, the double
Rectangle RON, by 4: 2. every one of these being considered one by one; but
being collected ( viz.) all the squares of RI is equal to all the squares of
RN, less all the squares of TO; or if there be taken the quadruple of them, all
the squares of QI is equal to all the squares of GN less all the squares of HO:
by 2: 12, all the circles; therefore the Cone QCI is equal to the Cylinder GE
less the portion of the Sphere HFEO which was proposed.

The second Case.
Let ROBC be of a Circle, and RSQC of an Ellipsis complete the Diagram, then
will the square of QC, that is IV less the square of LV be equal to the square
of SV. For AR: RD:: TV: VL, there fore the squares of them, and AR: RD:: OV:
US, therefore the squares of them; therefore, as the square of TV, to the
square of VL, so the square of OV, to the square of US; Therefore, as the
square of EV, to the square of EV less the square of TV. So the square of IV,
to the square of IV less the square of LV, but the square of EV less the square
of TV is equal to the square of OV; therefore the square of IV less the square
of LV equal to the square of SV.

PROPOSITION VI.
IN the Hemisphere IAP, Let FE be parallel to IP, SZ and GX parallel to AC; the
Figure being completed; the Cylinder QG is equal to the Cylinder IE less the
Cylinder RH; for as the square of AC, to the square of BC; so the Cylinder IE,
to the Cylinder RH; again, as the square of AC, to the square of AC less the
square of BC, (that is the square of BS) so is the Cylinder IE, to the Cylinder
IE less the Cylinder RH, (that is the Cylinder QG) it follows that the
Cylinder RH is equal to the excavetus Cylinder IQSFGEPV, for the Cylinder QG is
equal to the excavetus Cylinder IROFHTPE.

But if the excavetus Cylinder ORQSGV TH, be added to both; the Cylinder RH
will be equal to the excavetus or hollow cylinder QIFSGVPE; but the cone OCH is
equal to FISGPE by the first part of the Fifth Proposition; Therefore IQSGVP is
equal to ORCTH, that is, ^ of the difference betwixt the circumscribed IE and
inscribed QG cylinders; subtracted from the circumscribed cylinder IE is equal
to the portion of the Sphere ISGP; or if ^ of the difference be added to the
inscribed cylinder QG it will be equal to the portion of the Sphere IS GP.

The like in a Spheroid by the second part of the last Proposition.



In Numbers thus.
Let IP be 20; QV, 16; CB, 10; the square of IP is 400, the square of QV 256;
the difference of the squares is 144, a third part of that number is 48, which
subtracted from the greater square 400, leaves 352: or if two thirds of the
difference, that is, 96 be added to the lesser square, that is, to 256, the sum
will be 352 the true mean square; but if it be as 14: 11:: 352: 276 4/7 the
mean circle, which being multiplied by the length ZS, 20; the Product is 5531
3/7 the solidity of the portion ZISG PX.

PROPOSITION VII.
IF two equal and alike Triangles as GCA and GFA be contrary put, ( viz.) the
Vertex of the one to the Base of the other, and Lines drawn parallel to the
Base as MXV parallel to CA; If MX be drawn into XV, that so the Triangle GCA
and GFA being drawn one into another; they will generate a solid equal to one
sixth of the paralellepipedon ABD CEFGH.



For by 4; 2. the Line MV being cut into 2 parts in X, the square MX, (that is
IZ) more the square of XV, (that is XO) more the double Rectangle of MXV, that
is, the Rectangles XQ and OR, are equal to the whole square VZ; for that reason
the whole paralellepipedon ABDCEFGH is composed of these parts, the pyramide
ABDCH more the pyramide EFGHA more the two solids BDKOIRHE and ACMXIQFG, but
the paralellepipedon ABDCEFGH is equal to three pyramides of the same Base and
Altitude; therefore one of these solids as ACXMQIFG will be equal to of the
whole.

PROPOSITION VIII.
IF in the side of the paralellogram ACDE there be taken a point, suppose at B,
and the Line BF drawn parallel to AE and CD, the Diameter BD being drawn, and
the Figure being completed; then will the Rectangle under EB and BD, be to the
Rectangle under the trapezium EABD and the Triangle BDC, as AB, to the composed
of AB more of BC; For the Rectangle EB, BD; that is, all the Rectangles of AB,
BC; QR, RX; OF, FD; that is the paralellepipedon made of AB, BC; and the
Altitude BF: the Rectangle EABD, BDC; that is, all the Rectangles OF, FD; QR,
RZ; that is a prisme of EFD and the Altitude FB; more all the Rectangles of RZ,
ZX; but a paralellepipedon is to a prisme of the same Base and Altitude as 1
to, that may be as AB, to AB, but all the Rectangles of RZ, ZX, are of the
paralellepipedon BCB and the Altitude CD by the last Proposition; but the
paralellepipedon BCBFD, is to BC, as of the paralellepipedon BCBFD, to of BC,
the prisme made of DFE and the Altitude EA, more all the Rectangles of RZ, ZX;
that is of the paralellepipedon BCB and the Altitude BF, is equal to the
Rectangle EA BD, BDC; that is all the Rectangles of QZX; Therefore as AB, to AB
more ^ BC, so are all the Rectangles AB, BC QR, RX; OF, FD; to all the
Rectangle of AB, BC; QZ, ZX.

The second part of this Theorem may b^ that the Rectangle EC, CF; is to the
Rectangle of the Tropezium EABD and the Tr^angle BDF, as the Line AC, to AB mo^
BC; the demonstration of this differs no^ from the former part, except in this,
that a^ the Rectangles DFD, ZRZ, ZR Z, are of the paralellepipedon, as appears
by the la^ Proposition.

This Proposition is the 30 of the second o^ Caval. Geomet. Indivis. and is of
good use i^ solid Geometry.

PROPOSITION. IX.
LEt ADBEK be a cone and be cu^ through the axis, whose Section will b^ the
Triangle AKB, Let it be cut by another Plane as EZD, the diameter of the
Section Z^ parallel to BK, the Base of the Section ED at Right Angle at C with
AB; Let it b^ as ABA: AKB:: PZ: ZK, then will PZC be equal to the square of CE;

For,

AB: BK:: AC: CZ, therefore by 23. 6.

BA: AK:: CB: ZK, therefore by 23. 6.

ABA: BKA:: ACB: CZK:: PZ: ZK, apply CZ to the two last terms, and it will be
as ACB: CZK:: CZP: CZK, because CZK is in each proportion; Therefore ACB that
is the square of CE is equal to CZP; the like in all other planes parallel to
the Base AEBD. This manner of section Apollonius calls a parabola; but if the
semiparabola EIZRC be moved about the axis ZC, until it return to that point
from whence it began its motion, it will Generate a solid, Archimedes names
such a solid, a Rectangled conoide; but generally it is called by the name of a
parabolical conoide.

PROPOSITION X.
LEt AVBXK be a cone, and be cut through the axis, whose Section shall be the
Triangle AKB, Let it be cut by another Plane as NIEC whose diameter is NC,
(being continued if need be) shall cut both sides of the cone, the Plane NIEC
being at Right Angle with the Plane AKB, the Planes FED and TIG parallel to the
Plane AVBX, Let it be made, as CRN: GRT:: CN: NP, then will QRN be equal to the
square of RI; for CN: NP:: CR: RQ, taking the Altitude RN it may be CN: NR::
CRN: QRN:: CRN: GRT, in these last four terms CRN is twice, therefore QRN is
equal to GRT, that is the square of RI.

By reason of the similitude of the Triangle CHD to CRG, and of the Triangle
NRT to NHF, it may be, as

NR: TR:: NH: FH by 23. 6.

RC: RG:: HC: HD by 23. 6.

NRC: TRG:: NHC: FHD, but T ^ G is equal to the square of RI, and FHD ^s equal
to the square of HE; therefore as ^RC to the square of RI, so is NHC to ^he
square of HE.

This Section of a cone is named by Apollo^ius an Ellipsis.



But if the Semi-Ellipsis CEIN be move^ about the axis, CN, until it return to
tha^ point from whence it began its motion, it will Generate a solid,
Archimides calls such a soli^ a Spheroide; but if it be turned about the lesser
Diameter, then he calls that solid a Spheroide prolatus.

PROPOSITION XI.
LEt ABCBF be a cone, and be cut through the axis, whose section will make the
the Triangle AFC, Let it be cut b^ another Plane BHD, the Diamete^ HG, and the
side of the Triangle C^ being continued may meet at K, HN at righ^ Angle with
HG, the Plane OIE parallel t^ ABCD, the Plane BDH at right Angl^ with the Plane
AFC; Let it be made, a^ KRH: ERO:: KH: HN, draw RZ parallel to HN, and join
ZNK, then will ZR^ be equal to the square of RI; For, as KH*^ NH:: KR: ZR, take
the Altitude RH an^ apply it to the two last terms, and it will be a^ KH: NH::
KRH: ZRH:: KRH: ERO* Therefore ZRH is equal to ERO that is the square of RI
because of the similitude of the Triangle AGH to HRO, and of KGC to KRE, it may
be as,

KG: CG:: KR: ER by 23, 6.

GH: GA:: RH: TO by 23, 6.

KGH: CGA:: KRH: ERO; CGA is equal (...) the square of GB, and ERO is equal to
the square of RI; Therefore as KGH, the square of GB, so is KRH, to the squa of
RI.

This manner of Section Apollonius calls Hyperbola; but if the semihyperbola
BIHR be moved about the Axis HG, until it retu^ to that point from whence it
began its mtion, it will Generate a solid; such a solid called by Archimedes an
Amblygon conoid^ but generally it is called a Hyperbolical conide.

PROPOSITION XII. To find the solidity of the portion of the Sphere BNRE.
LEt ABNE be a Sphere and BH a C^ linder, it is manifest that the
paralellepipedon whose Base is the square of GE, a Altitude GN is equal to the
paralellepipea whose Base is the square of GN and Altitu AG; it is also
manifest that the Rectang AGN is equal to the square GE, the li for any other,
as, AZN equal to ZR Therefore by the 8 Proposition, as AG t^ AG more GN, so are
all the squares Z to all the squares of ZR; Therefore, as A to AG more GN, so
the Cylinder E ^o the portion of the Sphere ERNB. The ^ike in a Spheroide.



In Numbers thus.
Let AG be 150; GN, 54; GE 90; the paralellepipedon made of the square of BE
and Altitude GN, in 1749600; then, as AG, 150; to ^ AG, more GN; that is 75
more 9; that is 84; so is 1749600, to 979776, that is all the squares in the
portion of the Sphere BNRE; then as 14: 11:: 979776: 769824, the portion of the
Sphere BNRE.

PROPOSITION XIII. To find the solidity of a Parabolical Conoide
LEt BCOE be a semiparabola; by the 9 Proposition it is, as EB, is to ER that
is to ZQ; so is the square of BC that i^ the square of RI, to the square of TO,
tha^ is, as the parallelogram BF, is to the Triang FEB; so is the
parallelepipedon made of the square of BC and Altitude BE, to all the squares
of TO, but the Triangle FBE is of the parallelogram BF; Therefore the
parabolical conoide will be of the cylinder of the same Base and Altitude.



Thus in Numbers.
Let AB, 10; BC, 10; Therefore AC, 20; Let BE, 30; the square of AC, 20; is
400, which being multiplied by EB, that is by 15; the Product is 6000, equal to
all the squares in the conoide AEC; but if it be made as 14: 11:: 6000: 4714 ^
the solidity of the conoide AEC.

PROPOSITION. XIV. To find the solidity of a Hyperbolical Conoide.
LEt ZRHX be a semihyperbola, and OF parallel to ZK, AR the Transverse
Diameter, RX the intercepted Axis, the point H in the Hyperbolical Line by the
11 Proposiion it is, as AXR to AFR, so is the square of XZ, to the square of
FH, that is, as the parallelepipedon made of the Rectangle RXZ and the Altitude
AX, is to the prisme made of the Rectangle ARX and the Altitude ^D, more the
pyramide made of the square ^f ZD and Altitude DR; so is the parallelepipedon
made of the square of ZK and Altitude XR, to all the squares in the conoide
^HRK.

But as the parallelepipedon made of the Rectangle RXZ and Altitude AX, is to
the prisme made of the Rectangle ARX and Altitude RD, more the pyramide made of
the square DZ and Altitude DR; so is the Line AX to the Line BR (that is AR)
more of the Line RX, by the 8 Proposition; Therefore by the 11. 5. it will be
as the Line AX, is to the Line BR, more of the Line RX, so is the
parallelepipedon made of the square of ZK and Altitude XR, to all the squares
in the conoide ZHRK; then as 14: 11, so are all the squares in the conoide
ZHRK, to the conoide ZHRK.



In Numbers thus.
Let AX be 150; RX, 54; ZX, 90; AR, 96; BR, 48; the parallelepipedon whose Base
is the Rectangle of RXZ and the Altitude AX is 729000.

The prisme whose Base is the Rectangle ARX and Altitude RD is 233280.

The pyramide whose Base is the square of RX and Altitude RD is 87480.

The parallelepipedon whose Base is the square of ZX and Altitude XR is 437400.

Then 729000: 233280 more 87480, that is, 320760:: AX, 150: BR, 48, more of RX,
18; that is 66:: 437400: 192456 equal to all the squares in the of the conoide
ZH RK; but if that last number be multiplied by 4, the Product will be 769824
equal to all the squares in the conoide ZHRK, then 14: 11:: 769824: 533433 ^
the solidity of the Hyperbolick conoide ZHRK.

PROPOSITION XV. To find the solidity of a whole Sphere, or a portion thereof.
LEt ADEF be a Plane and the Semicircle DQIQE be in that Plane, Let the Planes
ABCD and CDE be at Right Angle with the Plane ADEF; Let DC, AB and OF each of
them be equal to DE; Let the Planes KHXR be parallel to the Base of the prisme;
namely, parallel to AB CD. The Rectangle DRE is equal to the square of RQ, by
353, that is, the Rectangle comprehended of IR and RX, for RX is equal to RE,
and IR is equal to RD, therefore all the squares in of the Sphere E QIQD are
equal to all the Rectangle in the prisme CDFE, the like in any part; Therefore
the prisme RXHKFE, less the pyramide OIKHF shall be equal to all the squares in
the portion of the Sphere QER. Then as 14: 11, so the prisme XRIOFE to the
solidity of the portion of the Sphere QER.

In Numbers thus.
Let AB, AF, FE, AD, DC, BC each of these be equal to DE, and DE be equal to
204: from E to the first R be 54, and from that first R to D be 150; KR, 204
multiplied by RX, 54; is XK, 11016; which being multiplied by RE 27; the
Product will be 297232, equal to the prisme KHXR OF; FK, KH, HO, and IK, every
of them equal to 54; Therefore the pyramide KHO IF will be 52488; then KHXREF,
297 232; less KHOIF, 52488 there will remain IOXREF, 244944; equal to all the
squares in the portion QER; that is, all the squares in the portion of of a
Sphere,

PROPOSITION XVI. To find the solidity of a whole Spheroide, or a portion
thereof.
LEt FADE be a Plane, the Ellipsis EQ D be in that Plane; Let AB and DC each of
them be equal to DE, the Planes K RXH parallel to the Base of the prisme AB CD.
Find the Line FE by the 10th. Prop. by the said 10th. Prop. the Rectangle IRE
will be equal to the square of RQ; but the Rectangle IRE is equal to the
Rectangle IRX, because DC is equal to DE, therefore RX is equal to RE,
therefore the Rectangle IRX is equal to the square of RQ; therefore the prisme
XHKREF less the pyramide KHOIF will be equal to all the squares in the portion
QER.

In Numbers Thus.
Let DE the longest Diameter be 36, the Conjugate or shortest 18, therefore FE
will be 12, for it is 36: 18:: 18: 12. Let from E to the first R be 9, then FE,
12, multiplied by R X, 9; XK will be 108; which being multiplied by of ER, that
is 4 the Product will be 486, equal to KHXREF; for the finding of KI, work
thus, AF, 36; to AD, 12; so is FK, 9; to IK, 3; then IK, 3, multiplied by KH 9;
the Product is 27, that is, HI; this last number being multiplied by of KF,
that is by 3; the pyramide KHIOF will be equal to 81, which being subtracted
from the prisme KHXREF there will remain 405 the prisme IOXREF equal to all the
squares in the portion of the spheroide QER.

PROPOSITION XVI. To find the solidity of a hyperbolical Conoide.
LEt MAEL be a Plane, and the hyperbola be in that Plane; to that Plane let the
Planes BAM, CEL and DEL be perpendicular; Let DE, CF and BA be each of them
equal to AM; Let the Planes KIXH be parallel to the Plane ABDE the Base of the
prisme ABDELM; find the Lines ML and MG by the 11 Proposition, the Rectangle
IKM, is equal to the square of KZ, but the Rectangle IKM is equal to the
Rectangle IKHX, because AB is equal to AM, therefore HK is equal to KM;
Therefore the Rectangle IKHX, is equal to the square KZ; Therefore the prisme
ABDELM, is equal to all the squares in the conoide AMZ.

In Numbers thus.
Let GM the Transverse Diameter be 18; MA, 12; AE, 10; ML, 6; AB equal to AM
multiplied by AE, 16; the Product is 72 equal to ABCF, which being multiplied
by AM, that is, 6, the Product is 432 equal to the prisme ABCFLM; FE, 4;
multiplied by FC, 12; the Product is 48, equal to FCDE, which being multiplied
by of FL, that is, 4; the Product is 192, equal to the pyramide FCDEL; this
pyramide being added to the prisme before found, the whole prisme ABDELM, will
be 634, equal to all the squares in the conoide AZM.

PROPOSITION XVIII. To find the solidity of a Conoide parabola.
LEt AVHP be a Plane, the parabola PO RA be in that Plane, Let VC and AB each
of them be equal to AP; Let the Planes QG, QF, and QE be parallel to the Base
of the prisme ABCV. By the 9 Proposition the parallelogram HQ is equal to the
square of QO, but the Plane HQ is equal to the Rectangle QZGI, because IQ is
equal to HP and QZ is equal to QP; Therefore the Plane QG is equal to the
square of QO, the like in the rest; Therefore the prisme AB CVHP is equal to
all the squares in the conoide RPA.



In Numbers thus.
Let AP, be 10; AV, 8; Therefore AC will be 80; which being multiplied by AP,
10; that is, by 5, the Product will be 400, equal to the prisme ABCVHP; that
is, all the squares in of a parabolical conoide whose Altitude is AP, 10; and
semidiameter of the Base is AR.

In these 4 last Propositions it ought to be ^ade, as 14: 11; so are all the
squares in the ^ortion to the portion it self.

PROPOSITION XIX. To find the Area of a segment of a Circle or an Ellepsis.
LEt AGE be a semicircle, the area HGF the segment required; Let there be given
AC, 13; HR, 12; CR, 5; then, as 14* 11, so is the square of 13, that is, 169,
to the area of of the Circle, 132 11/14, the area AGC. In the Triangle HRC,
there i^ given HR, 12; CR, 5; and the Right Angle CRH; therefore there is given
the Angle CRH; thus, 5: 12:: 100000: 240000, the Tangent of 67 Degrees 23
Minutes, again, as 90 Degrees, that is the Angle ACG, is to 67 Degrees 23
Minutes; so is the area ACG, 132 11/14; to the area of the Sector HC G, 98::
88; the Triangle HCR, 30; being taken from the Secto^, leaves the Segment HRG,
68:: 88; by the latter part of the 10 Proposition it will be as AC: BC:: IO:
ZO, Therefore as AC: BC, so the segment of the Circle HRG, to the segment of
the Ellipsis ZRG; Let BC be 10, then as 13: 10:: 68:: 88: 52:: 98 the segment
of the Ellipsis.

PROPOSITION XX. To find the solidity of a Circular or Elliptick Spindle.
LEt ABCOHP be a Circle, HB and PVO be two Diameters at right Angle ^t Z; Let
AK and GC be parallel to HB, ^he Lines PO parallel to PVO; Let GC ^qual to AK
be the axis, VO the Diameter of the Spindle. Suppose there be Solid whose Base
shall be the segment KHG ^BA and Altitude the segment APK; such a Solid is
equal to all the squares in of Sphere whose Diameter is AK; for the Rect angle
ORP is equal to the Rectangle AR^ 35, 3, and by the same 35, 3, the Rectangle
ARK are equal to all the squares In of Sphere whose Diameter is AK.

If from the Solid whose Base is KHG^ CBA and Altitude APK, there be take a
Solid, whose Base is KGCA and Altitud^ AKP there will remain a Solid whose Ba^
and Altitude is equal to the segment GO^ or APK; equal to all the squares in
the o^ the Spindle.

By the 15 Proposition find all the squares in of a Sphere whose Diameter is AK.

By the 19 Proposition find the segment A PR which multiplied by KG makes a
parallelepipedon, which being taken from of the forementioned Sphere, leaves
all the squares in of the Spindle, this being multiplied by 4 gives all the
squares in the Spindle; Then, as 14: 11, so are all the squares in the Spindle,
to all the Circles, that is the Spindle it self.

Further, as the whole so the parts are calculated; find the segment of a
Sphere by the 15 Proposition, and the segment of the Circle KRP by the 19
Proposition, this segment KRP multiplied by KG, which taken from the
corresponding part of the Sphere, leaves the corresponding part of the Spindle
GOI.

Let BOHP be supposed to be an Ellipsis, HB and PZO its Diameters; the Area K
PA may be found by the last part of the 19th. Proposition: find of a Spheroide
that has KA for one of its Diameters, if the square of ZP be lessened by the
square of ZR, there will remain a square whose Root shall be half the other
Diameter; find all the squares in of such a Spheroide by the 16. Propos. then
proceed as in the Circle, as well for the parts as the whole.

PROPOSITION XXI. To find the solidity of the second Sections in: Sphere or
Spheroide.
LEt DABRCMNLFQ be of ^ Sphere cut by two Planes, viz. the Plan^ RXDGZQ and
MXAPZT being a^ right Angles, their Intersection XZ. MA Equal to MZ; RD equal
to RZ; CN equal to CB the semidiameter of the Sphere MX and XR being known, the
rest may be found thus.



1.
The Areas ZXD and ZXA may be found by the 19th. Proposition.

2.
The Spherical Superficie of BDZQ is equal to a Surface whose Base is equal to
the Line FLN and Altitude RB.

Or,

The Spherical Superficie of RDZQ is equal to the Area of a Circle whose
Diameter is equal to a Line drawn from B to D.

The like for the Spherical Superficie of NA ZT. Archimedes 36. 1. of the
Sphere and Cylinder.

3.
Let RDGZQ and MAPZT be Quadrants of lesser Circles of the same Sphere, RD and
MA their Semidiameters; CBZL and CNZE Quadrants of great Circles of the Sphere;
AOZ and DIZ Arches of great Circles of that Sphere, the Arch NZ equal to the
Arch NA, and the Arch BZ equal to the Arch BD; the right lined Angle DRZ equal
to the Spherical Angle DBZ, the Angle ZMA equal to the Angle ANZ.

4.
As 90 Degrees, is to the degrees and parts of a Degree in the Angle DBZ; so is
the Spherical Superficie BADGZQ, to the Spherical Superficie of the Triangle
BADGZ.

5.
In the Triangle IZBDI; there is given the Arches BD and BZ, and the Angle D
BZ; Therefore there are given the Angles BDZ and BZD. The like in the Triangle
OZNAO for the Angles NAZ and NZA; by the third Case of Oblique angled Spherical
Triangles.

6.
In the Triangle AOZID, there is given the Arch AD and the Angles ZAD and ZDA;
Therefore there is given the Angle AOZID, by the 8th. Case of Oblique angled
Spherical Triangles.

7.
In the Triangle AOZID there are given the three Angles, Therefore the Area may
be found, thus. As 180 Degrees, is to the excess of the three Angles over and
above 180 Degrees; so is the Area of a great Circle of that Sphere to the Area
of that Triangle, Foster, Miscel. page 21.

Or,

It may be found by that method which is delivered by that Learned
Mathematician Mr. John Leek, in page, 116, of Mr. Gibsons Syntaxis Mathematica,
Which is this. If the excess of the three Angles above 180 Degrees be
multiplied by half the Diameter of the Sphere, the Superficies of any Spherical
Triangle is thereby produced.

By this Rule and by what Mr. Gibson delivered in that 116 page, I found this
way to resolve this Proposition.

8.
By this last Rule we are to find the Areas of the Triangles BDIZ and NAOZ: the
difference between the Areas of these, and those found by the 4. of this
shows the Areas of the two Figures, viz. GZID and OZPA, which added to the
Area DIZOA gives the Superficie of the mixed Lined Triangle APZ GD.



9.
In the 9th. Chapter of the forementioned Syntaxis Mathematica there is given
some Rules about some solids; but when it was time to treat of these second
fragments, that Author breaks off thus; There may be other parts of a Sphere
besides those which are here called Fragments, (not to speak of those which are
irregular and multiform) which are either Cones or Pyramides, whose Bases lie
in the superficies of the Sphere, and their vertices at the Center, the
solidity of one of these is found by multiplying the third part of the Base by
the Altitude (which here is the semiaxis) the product is the solidity: these
Fragments are those which are usually called Solid Angles. Thus fa^ Mr. Gibson.

In the Diagram, Let the Triangle AZF, be equal to the Triangle ZPADG in the
last Diagram, the Spherical Superficie of that Triangle multiplied by one third
of the Semidiameter CA, CF or CZ produces the Spherical pyramide ZFAC.

This pyramide may be divided into three solids, viz. a pyramide whose Base is
the segment ZFX and Altitude ZB, the pyramide whose Base is the Area ZAX and
Altitude XE; and the solid AZXF the solid required. But the pyramides are
given, because the Areas ZXF and ZXA may be found by the I of this, and the
Altitudes XB and XE are given to limit the Proposition; Therefore the pyramides
ZXFC and ZXAC taken from the pyramide ZFAC leaves the solid FXAZ.

10.
Let ABD HFCT be ^ of a Spheroide, OXVIABD HF^T, be of a Sphere. Unto the
Planes and LO XC, Let there be Planes at right Angles as QDH, QBF and AC. OIDH,
IBF and XIAC. From the points L parallel to C draw the Line L E, because the
Line LE is parallel to C, Therefore the Line T is equal to LT, and the Line T
is equal to TI, Therefore the Quadrants of the Circle T and TLI are equal. In
these Planes, viz. QDH, QBF and AC, Let there be Lines drawn, viz. P comma, and
QN, parallel to H. P comma, and QN parallel to F. comma, and N parallel to C.
The points PQD, PQD and A in those Ellipses, the points OVID, VIB and XV IA in
those Circles.



C: XC:: H: OH, by the 10. Prop.

C: XC:: E: LE,

H: OH:: E: LE, 11. 5.

H-OH: OH:: E-LE:LE, 17. 5.

O: OH:: L: LE, 19. 5.

F: E:: F: LE, 10th. Prop.

F-E: E:: F-LE: LE, 17. 5.

R: E:: Z: LE, 19. 5.

TO: E:: ZOZ: LE, 12. 5.

E: LE:: C: XC,

C: XC:: TO: ZOZ, 11. 5.

C: XC:: Area R: Area ZOL,

Again.

H: E:: (QN) OH: IN, 10. Prop.

H-QN: QN:: OH-IN (ZH) IN, 17. 5.

O: OH:: OZ: ZH, 19. 5.

P,: QN:: V,: IN,

P,-QN: QN:: V,-IN: IN, 17. 5.

P.: QN:: V,: IN, 19. 5.

OP.: QN:: (E)OZVI:IN; (LE,) 12. 5.

OP.: E:: OZ + VI: LE,

C: XC:: E: LE,

C: XC:: OP.: OZVI, that is,

C:XC:: Area OQP: Area ZIVO. the Plane.

PQBF or any other drawn parallel to these, shall have the same qualifications;
which makes us conclude that the whole Section ILTX shall be to the whole
Section T as XC is to C, and as XC to C so the segment ILZO to the segment Q O,
the second Section in the Spheroide.

PROPOSITION XXII.
IF four Numbers be in proportion, that is, as the first is to the second; so
is the third, to the fourth. It will always be, as the first, is to a
Geometrical mean proportion between the first and second; so is the third, to a
Geometrical mean proportion between the third and fourth.

Let it be,

A: B:: C: D, multiply the two first terms by A, and it will be, as AA: AB::
C: D, 17. 7. If the two last terms be multiplied by C, it will be AA: AB:: CC:
CD, then, as A: AB:: C: CD, 22. 6.

In Numbers thus.
4: 9:: 16: 36.

16: 36:: 16: 36.

16: 36:: 256: 576.

4: 6:: 16: 24.

PROPOSITION. XIII. To find the Relation of one Hyperbola to another.
LEt FLBC be a semihyperbola, its Transverse Diameter FH, its intercepted Axis
FC. Let GMBC be another semihyperbola, its Transverse Diameter KG, its
intercepted Axis GC.

Let it be made, as,

1.
KG: GC:: HF: FC, KGGC: GC:: HFFC: FC, 18. 5. KC: GC:: HC: FC KC: HC:: GC: FC,
16. 5. KC: HC:: GC: FC, 17. 7. 2 2

KC: HC:: GF: FE

KF: HE:: GF: FE, 19. 5.

KC: HC:: KF: HE, 11. 5.

GC: FC:: GF: FE, 11. 5.

KCG: HCF:: KFG: HEF, 23. 6.

KCG: KFG:: HCF: HEF, 16. 5.

HCF: HEF:: CBC: ELE, 11 Pro.

KCG: KFG:: CBC: FMF=ELE, 11. 5. 11. Prop.

Therefore FM is equal to the Line LE, and for as much as GC is divided in F,
in the same Ratio as FC is in E, Therefore,

GG: FC:: GF: FE, 17. 7.

GC: FC:: FC: EC, 19. 5.

GC: FC:: MD: LD,

GC: FC:: area CBG: area CBF, 12. 5.



2.
From the Vertex of the Hyperbola CBF, Let there be a Semihyperbola as CAF; FH
its Transverse Diameter.

Then as,

HCF: HEF:: CBC: ELE, 11. Prop.

HCF: HEF:: CAC: ENE, 11. Prop.

CBC: CAC:: ELE: ENE, 11. 5.

CB: CA:: EL: EN 22. 6.

CB: CA:: area CBF: area CAF, 12. 5.

3.
Let CVQ be of an Ellipsis, its Transverse Diameter FV, its semiconjugate CQ,
Let CGQ be of another Ellipsis its Transverse Diameter EG, its conjugate CQ.

Let it be made, as,

FC: EC:: CV: CG, FC: EC:: CV: CG, 17. 7. 2 2

FC: EC:: CG: CD, 17. 7.

FC: CG:: EC: CD, 16. 5.

FC: FCCG:: EC: ECCD, 18. 5.

FC: FG:: EC: ED, 18. 5.

CV: GV:: CG: DG, 17. 7.

FCV: FGV:: ECG: EDG, 23. 6.

FCV: FGV:: CQC: GLG, 10. Prop.

ECG: EDG:: CQC: DHD=GLG, 10. Prop.

Therefore DH and GL are equal, Because the Line CV is divided in G in the same
ratio as CG is in D.

Therefore, as,

CV: VG:: CG: GD,

CV: CG:: CG: DC, 19. 5.

CV: CG:: IL: IH,

CV: CG:: area CQV: area CQG,

4.
From the vertex of the Quarter of the Ellipsis CGQ; Let there be of another
Ellipsis, as CGR, its Transverse Diameter EG the semiconjugate CR,

Then, as,

ECG: EDG:: CQC: DHD, 10. Pr.

ECG: EDG:: CRC: DKD, 10. Pr.

CQC: DHD:: CRC: DKD, 11. 5.

CQ: CR:: DH: DK, 22. 6.

CQ: CR:: area CDQ: area CGR, 12. 5.

5.
Let CGB be half a parabola, its Diameter CG, its Ordinate CB. Let CVB be half
of another parabola, its Diameter CV, its Ordinate CB.



Let it be,

CV: CG:: CV: CG, CV: CG:: CV / 2: CG / 2,

CV: CG:: GV: GD,

CG: GD:: CBC: DND, 9. Prop.

CV: GV:: CBC: GTG=DND, 9. Prop.

Therefore GT is equal to DN; because the Line CV is divided in G in the same
ratio as CG is in D.

Therefore,

CV: CG:: CG: CD,

CV: CG:: AT: AN,

CV: CG:: area CVB: area CGB, 12. 5.

6.
From the vertex of the semiparabola CGB; Let there be another semiparabola, as
CGZ,

Then, as,

GC: GD:: CBC: DND, 9. Pr.

GC: GD:: CZC: DOD, 9. Pr.

CZC: CBC:: DOD: DND, 11. 5.

ZC: BC:: OD: ND, 22. 6.

ZC: BC:: area ZGC: area BGC, 12. 5.

7.
Hence,

It follows that the areas of hyperbolas, Ellipses and parabolas may be
increased or decreased in any proportion assigned; either according to their
Transverse diameters or Ordinates: or both together.

It follows also,

That the areas of hyperbolas, ellipses and parabolas of the same bases are as
their Altitudes.

And also,

That the areas of hyperbolas, ellipses and parabolas of the same Altitudes are
as their bases.

Further it follows,

If there be two hyperbolas, namely, A and B; if the Transverse diameter of A,
be to the Transverse diameter of B; as the conjugate diameter of A, is to the
conjugate diameter of B; if the Transverse diameter of A, is to the Transverse
diameter of B; as the interpreted diameter of A, is to the interpreted diameter
of B: if the conjugate diameter of A, is to the conjugate diameter of B; as the
Ordinate of A, is to the Ordinate of B. Then such hyperbolas are called like
hyperbolas.

And the area of A, will be to the area of B; as the Rectangled Figure of the
Transverse and conjugate diameters of A, to the Rectangled Figure of the
Transverse and conjugate diameters of B.

Or,

The area of A, will be to the area of B; as the Rectangled Figure of the
interpreted diameter, and Ordinate of A, is to the Rectangled Figure of the
interpreted diameter and Ordinate of B.

8.
Here note,

In the byperbolas CFB, CFA and CGB the Lines CB, EL; and CA, EN; and CB, FM,
are called Ordinates.

In the Ellipses, CGQ, CGR and CVQ; the Lines DH, and DK and GL are Ordinates;
the Lines CQ and CR conjugate diameters.

In the parabolas.

CGB, CGZ and CV. B; the Lines CB, DN; and CZ, DO; and CB, GT are called
Ordinates.

9.
In the hyperbola CFB; CF, OF, CB and EL being given, to find the Transverse
dameter FH.

Let FE=A. FC=B. CB=D. EL=E. Z=HF. Therefore HE=ZA. HC=ZB.

Therefore,

DD: EE:: ZBBB: ZAAA, 11. Prop.

ZADDAADD=ZBEEBBEE, 16. 6.

-ZBEE -AADD.

In Words thus.
The difference between the square of B in the square of E, and the square of A
in the square of D; being divided by the difference between A in the square of
D and B in the square of E; the Quotient is the value of Z.

10.
In the Ellipsis CQG; CQ, DH, and CD being given, to find the Transverse
diameter EG.

Let CQ=A. DH=B. CD=D, GC=Z. Therefore ZD=ED. Z-D=DG.

ZZ: ZD in Z-D:: AA: BB, 10. Prop.

ZZBB=ZZAA-DDAA. 16. 6.

DDAA=ZZAA -ZZBB

In Words thus.
As the square Root, of the difference between the square of A and the square
of B, is to A, so is D, to Z, the semitransverse diameter. 22. 6.

11.
In the parabola CGB; CB, CD and DN being known, to find the diameter DG.

Let CB=A. DN=B. CD=C. DG=Z. Then

CZ=CG. AA: BB:: CZ: Z, 9. Prop.

AAZ=BBCBBZ 16. 6.

-BBZ

In Words thus.
As the difference betwixt the square of A and B, is to the square of B; so is
C, to Z,

Or thus.

AA: BB:: CZ: Z, 9. Prop.

AA-BB: BB:: CZ-Z: Z, 17. 5.

12.
Yet further, it may be made manifest, that by the points of B and F there may
be infinite hyperbolick lines pass: the area of the least, shall not be so
little as half the parallelogram, whose base is BC, and Altitude CE: nor the
area of the greatest, so great, as three fourths of the said parallelogram.

PROPOSITION XXIV. Of all manner of cylindrick hoofs.
1.
LEt MACFTP be half a parabolick Cylinder, the base MAC parallel, equal and a
like to the base FTP. Let C and F be the vertices of the parabolas ACM and TFP,
CM and FP their diameters. Let this cylinder be cut by the Plane HVKB parallel
to the Plane FPMC, the Line HB in the superficie of the cylinder. Let it be cut
by another Plane, as HGRB parallel to the Plane PTAM, the line HB in the
superficie of the said cylinder. Let it be cut by the Plane OADQM, the line AOD
in the superficie of the cylinder, and the line DQM in the Plane CFPM; the
Ordinate AM the common Section of the Planes ABCM and AODQM. Further, Let it be
cut by the Plane AIELM, the line. AIE in the superficie of the cylinder and the
line ELM in the Plane CFPM. From K, to O and I let lines be drawn, and also
from M to D and E: from the intersection of GR and ME, that is from L, to the
intersection of the lines HB and AE, that is to I, let there be a line drawn,
as LI; and likewise the line QO; then the line LI and QO will be equal and
parallel to the line RB. Because the Planes AODQM and AIELM, cut the Plane GFPM
at right Angles* and the points B, O, I, H, are in the superficie of the
cylinder and in the lin^ BH.

Betwixt the Planes ACM and AODQM there is a solid made, as ABCMQDOA; also
betwixt the said base ABCM and the Plane AIELM there is another solid made as
AB^ MLEIA: such solids are called cylindric^ hoofs, and they take their
particular name^ from such cylinders as they are part of; viz. if the base ABCM
be half, or a quarter of a circle, it may be called a circular cylindrick hoof;
If half or a quarter of an ellipsis, then an elliptick cylindrick hoof. If the
base be half, or a whole parabola, then a parabolick cylindrick hoof. If half,
or a whole hyperbola, then a hyperbolick cylindrick hoof; the like for any
other.



2.
To prove that the Section AODQM is of the same kind and degree as the base
ABCM.

The Angle BKO is equal to the Angle RMQ; because BK and RM are parallel, equal
and in the Plane ABCM, the Lines OK and QM are parallel, equal and in the Plane
AODQM, also the Lines BO and RQ are parallel, equal and in the Plane BHGR;
Therefore the Triangles BKO and RMQ are equal and a like.

Because it is, as, CM: CR:: MAM: RBR. 9th. Prop. as MC: MR:: MD: MQ. 4. 6. but
AM is common to both and OQ equal to BR; Therefore by the 5th. of the 23.
Propos. as, DM: DQ:: MAM: QOQ. Therefore the Section AODQM is a parabola by the
9th. Proposition.

3. To find the relation of one hoof to another.
The Triangles MCD and MCE are upon the same base MC, Therefore they are as
their Altitudes CD and CE. 1. 6. Again, the Triangles KBO and KBI are upon the
same base KB, Therefore they are as their Altitudes BO and BY, 1. 6.

Further, the Triangles KBO and MCD are alike, and also the Triangles KBI and
MCE are alike, therefore their sides are in proportion. 4. 6.

The Triangle MCD: Triangle MCE:: CD: CE. 1. 6.

The Triangle KBO: Triangle KBI:: BO: BY. 1. 6.

But BO: BY:: CD: CE. 4. 6.

The Triangle KBO: Triangle KBI:: CD: CE. 11. 5.

KBOMCD: KBIMCE:: CD: CE. 12. 5.

Hence it follows,

That the solidities of hoofs upon the same base are as their Altitudes, that
is, the hoof ABCMQDOA, is to the hoof ABCMLEIA; as CD, is to CE.

Further it follows.

Because it is BO: BY:: CD: CE, Therefore the superficies of hoofs, upon the
same base are as their Altitudes, that is, the superficie CBAOD, is to the
superficie CBAIE; as CD, is to CE.

4. To find the solidity of cylindrick hoofs.
The Triangles MCD and KBO a^ alike, Therefore as, as KB: BO:: MC CD, 4. 6. and
KB: BO / 2:: MC: CD / 2, by the converse of 17. 7. then as, KB, to a
Geometrical mean proportion between KB and ha^ BO, so is MC, to a Geometrical
mean proportion between MC and half CD, by the 22. Proposition. Let MX be made
equal to the last term in the last Proportion, viz. the Geometrical mean
proportion between MC and half CD. Then will KZ be equal to a Geometrical mean
proportion between K^ and half BO, and AZXM will be a semiparabola by the 5th.
of the 23: Propsition: that is, as CM: XM:: BK: ZK. Further* the area of the
Triangle MCD is equal to the Product of MC in half CD, that is, a Square whose
side is a Geometrical mean proportion between MC and half CD, that is, equal to
the Square of MX. Also the area of the Triangle KBO is equal to the Product of
KB in half BO, that is, equal to a square whose side is a Geometrical mean
proportion between KB and half BO; that is equal to the Square of KZ.

5.
Hence it follows.

That the solidity of the hoof MQDOA BC is equal to all the squares in one
eighth of a parabolick Spindle whose semiaxis is AM and semidiameter is MX; but
all the squares in a parabolick Spindle is to a parallelepipedon of the same
Base and Altitude; as 8, is to 15. Bonav. Caval. Exerc. quer. page 282.

6.
It further follows.

As all the squares in the whole solid AZXM are equal to the whole hoof MQDOAC,
so are their parts equal, if the axis be cut by a Plane at right Angle.

Example.
The Plane BKO cuts the axis AM in K at right Augle, that is, the Plane KBO is
parallel to the Plane MCD, the part of the Spindle AKZ, is equal to the part of
the hoof AKOB.

7.
If the hoof ABCMQDOA be cut by a Plane QON parallel to the Base ABCM, the part
QOND may be found thus.

First, take away the part KABO equal to the part of the Spindle KAZ: then take
away the prisme KBRMQO; Lastly, take away the parabolick Semicylinder RBCNOQ
there will remain the little hoof QOND.

8.
If ACM be a semihyperbola its Transver^ diameter Crum, the hyperbolick
cylinder may be MABCFHTP: this cylinder being c^ by Planes according to the
First of this Proposition, the Sections AODQM and AI^ LM will be
semihyperbolas, DS and EW their Transverse diameters by the First of the 23d.
Proposition. If between Mrum and ha^ rumS there be a Geometrical mean
proportion found, suppose it M, and if between M^ and half DC there be taken a
Geometrica^ mean proportion, suppose it MX: And also if a Geometrical mean
proportion be taken between KB and half BO, suppose it KZ; the Plane AZXM will
be the area of a hyperbola its Transverse diameter X; by the 22d. Proposition
and by the First of the 23d. Proposition all the Squares in one Fourth of the
hyperbolick Spindle AZXM taking AM for its axis, will be equal to the
hyperbolick hoof ABCMQDOA, by the 4th. and 5th. of this Proposition. The
relations of the solidities and supersicies, by the Third of this.

9.
If ABCM be a quarter of a Circle, the circular cylinder will be ABCMTHFP; this
cylinder being cut by Planes, according to the First of this, the Sections
AODQM and AIELM will be quarters of Ellipses by the Third of the 23d.
Proposition. If a Geometrical mean proportion be taken between MC and half CD,
suppose it MX, and also a Geometrical mean proportion be taken between KB and
half BO, suppose it KZ. The area AZXM will be one quarter of an Ellipsis by the
22d. Proposition, and by the Third of the 23d. Proposition.

All the squares in one fourth of the semispheroide, taking AM for its
Semiaxis, and MX for its semidiameter, will be equal to the circular cylindrick
hoof AODQMCBA, by the Fourth and Fifth of this Proposition. As the whole, so
the parts, according to the Sixth and Seventh of this Proposition. How to find
all the squares in any Sphere or spheroide is taught Proposition the 15th. and
16th.

Here Note,

If the Altitude of the hoof be equal to four diameters of the base, that hoof
will be equal to all the squares in a Sphere adscribed in that cylinder.

If the Altitude be less than Four diameters of the base, that hoof will be
equal to all the squares in a spheroide whose longest diameter shall be the
axis.

But if the Altitude be greater than Four diameters of the base, then that hoof
will be equal to all the squares in a spheroide whose shortest diameter shall
be the axis.

10.
If ABCM be a quarter of an Ellipsis, the Elliptick cylinder will be ABCMTHFP;
this cylinder being cut by Planes, according to the First of this, the Sections
AODQM and AIELM will be quarters of Ellipses by the 3d. of the 23d. Proposition.

If Geometrical means be taken between MC and half CD, and also between KB and
half BO, suppose them to be MX and KZ, Then will AZXM be a quarter of an
Ellipsis by the 22d. Proposition, and by the 3d. of the 23d. Prop. all the
squares in one Fourth of a semispheroide taking AM for its semiaxis and MX for
its semidiameter, will be equal to the Elliptick cylindrick hoof AODQMCBA by
the Fourth and Fifth of this Proposition. The parts KABOBCRQON and QOND are
found as in the Sixth and Seventh of this.

A Table of Squares and Cubes.
Roots. Squares. Cubes. 1 1 1 2 4 8 3 9 27 4 16 64 5 25 125 6 36 216 7 49 343 8
64 512 9 81 729 10 100 1000 11 121 1331 12 144 1728 13 169 2197 14 196 2744 15
225 3375 16 256 409^ 17 289 4913 18 324 5832 19 361 6859 20 400 8000 21 441
9261 22 484 10648 23 529 12167 24 576 13824 25 625 15625 26 67^ 17576 27 729
19683 28 784 21952 29 841 24389 30 900 27000 31 961 29791 32 1024 32768 33 1089
35937 34 1156 39304 35 1225 42875 36 1296 46656 37 1369 50653 38 1444 54872 39
1521 59319 40 1600 64000 41 1681 68921 42 1764 74088 43 1849 79507 44 1936
85184 45 2025 91125 46 2116 97336 47 3209 103823 48 2304 110593 49 2401 117649
50 2500 125000 51 2601 132651 52 2704 140608 53 2809 148877 54 2916 157464 55
3025 166375 56 3136 175616 57 3249 185193 58 3364 195112 59 3481 205379 60 3600
216000 61 3721 226981 62 3844 238328 63 3969 250047 64 4096 262144 65 4225
274625 66 4356 287496 67 4489 300763 68 4624 314432 69 4761 328509 70 4900
343000 71 5041 357911 72 5184 373248 73 5329 389017 74 5476 405224 75 5625
421875 76 5776 438976 77 5929 456533 78 6084 474552 79 6241 493039 80 6400
512000 81 6561 531441 82 6724 551368 83 6889 571787 84 7056 592704 85 7225
614125 86 7396 636056 87 7569 658503 88 7744 68147^ 89 7921 704969 90 8100
729000 91 8281 753571 92 8464 778688 93 8649 804357 94 8836 830584 95 9025
857375 96 9216 884736 97 9409 912673 98 9604 941192 99 9801 970299 100 10000
1000000 101 10201 1030301 102 10404 1061208 103 10609 1092727 104 10816 1124864
105 11025 1157625 106 11236 1191016 107 11449 1225043 108 11664 1259712 109
11881 1295029 110 12100 1331000 111 12321 1367631 112 12544 1404928 113 12769
1442897 114 12996 1481544 115 13225 1520875 116 13456 1560896 117 13685 1601613
118 13924 1643032 119 14161 1685159 120 14400 1728000 121 14641 1771561 122
14884 1815848 123 15129 1860867 124 15376 1906624 125 15625 1953125 126 15876
2000376 127 16129 2048383 128 16384 2097152 129 16641 2146689 130 16900 2197000
131 17161 2248091 132 17424 2299968 133 17689 2352637 134 17956 2406104 135
18225 2460375 136 18496 2515456 137 18769 2571353 138 19044 2628072 139 19321
2685619 140 19600 2744000 141 19881 2803221 142 20164 2863288 143 20449 2924207
144 20736 2985984 145 21025 3048625 146 21316 3112136 147 21609 3176523 148
21904 3241792 149 22201 3307949 150 22500 3375000 151 22801 3442951 152 23104
3511808 153 23409 3581577 154 23716 3652264 155 24025 3723875 156 24336 3796416
157 24649 3869893 158 24964 3944312 159 25281 4019679 160 25600 4096000 161
25921 4173241 161 26244 4251528 163 26569 4330747 164 26896 4410944 165 27225
4492125 166 27556 4574296 167 27889 4657463 168 28224 4741632 169 28561 4826809
170 28900 4913000 171 29241 5000211 172 29584 5088448 173 29929 5177717 174
30276 5268024 175 30625 5369375 176 30976 5451776 177 31329 5545233 178 31684
5639752 179 32041 5735339 180 32400 5832000 181 32761 5929741 182 33124 6028568
183 33489 6128487 184 33856 6229504 185 34225 6331625 186 34596 6434856 187
34969 6539203 188 35344 6644672 189 35721 6751269 190 36100 6859000 191 36481
6967871 192 36864 7077888 193 37249 7189057 194 37636 7301384 195 38025 7417875
196 38416 7529536 197 38809 7645373 198 39204 7762392 199 39601 7880599 200
40000 8000000 201 40401 8120601 202 40804 8242408 203 41209 8365427 204 41616
8489664 205 42025 8615125 206 42436 8741816 207 42849 8869743 208 43264 8998912
209 43681 9129329 210 44100 9261000 211 44521 9393931 212 44944 9528128 213
45369 9663597 214 45796 9800344 215 46225 9938375 216 46656 10077696 217 47089
10218313 218 47524 10360232 219 47961 10503459 220 48400 10648080 221 48841
10793861 222 49284 10941048 223 49729 11089567 224 50176 11239424 225 50625
11390625 226 51076 11543176 227 51529 11697083 228 51984 11852352 229 52441
12008989 230 52900 12167000 231 53361 12326391 232 53824 12487168 233 54289
12649337 234 54756 12812904 235 55225 12977875 236 55696 13144256 237 56169
13312053 238 56644 13481272 239 57121 13651919 240 57600 13824000

PROPOSITION XXV.
LEt AYDG be a Sphere, GY its axis, C the Center of the Sphere, the Lines AD
and BY be at right Angles, and at right Angles with the axis GY.



Let this Sphere be cut by a Plane through the axis GY, and the Base AD; the
Section makes the Circle AYDG.

Let the Sphere be cut by another Plane, viz. as by the Plane CBHSI; HC its
diameter, BY its diameter of the Base. In the inclining Solid whose diameter of
the Base is BY, and diameter of the Section CH and the altitude CZ or HN, that
is the inclining Solid BHSIC is equal to the Zone AHFD, less the Cone HWFQC, or
the inclining Solid BHSIC is equal to the Excavatus part of the Sphere ACHFCD.
Let the plane KSE be parallel to the plane AID; RS the common section of the
planes KSE and CHI: OE, OS and OK are equal; the square of OS is equal to the
squares of TO and RS. 47. 1. Therefore the Area of the Circle who
semididiameter is OS, is equal to the Areas of the two Circles whose
semidiameters are OR and RS, that is, the Area of the semicircle OKSE, less the
Area of the semicircle OR is equal to the armille RKSE, that is, the Area of a
semicircle whose semidiameter is RS. Wherever the plane KSE be drawn parallel
between the two parallel planes AID and HWF it will have the same qualification
by the 47. 1.

Whence it is manifest the inclining Solid BHSIC is the difference betwixt the
Zone AHFD. and the Cone HWFQC. Further this inclining Solid BHSIC is equal to ^
hemispheroide whose axis is HN, the altitude of the section BHSIC, and the
semidiameter of the Base of the hemispheroide is CA* By the 10th. of the 6th.
of Euclid, and by the 3d. of the 23. Proposition.

2.
Let AKD be a Hemisphere; the Plane AKD and the Plane L F cutting one another
at right Angles their common section the line LF. From the points L and F draw
the Lines as LG and FM parallel to the line AD; also from the points L and G,
to the points F and M let there be lines drawn as GM and LF their common
section the point Z. From the point L, to the line MF let there be a
perpendicular line as LE. Let YP be equal to; then will the Spheroide whose
axis is EL and its conjugate diameter YP be equal to the Excavatus part MZLGZF
of the Zone MLGF; or the Zone MLGF less the cones GZL and FZM will be equal to
the Spheroide EYLP. By the 47. of the 1. of Euclid, and by the 10th. 6th. of
Euclid, and by the 3d. of the 23d. Propos. Here note, Z is the vertex of the
two cones. Here also note, that L is equal to F. Further note, the lines IO,
and BO are supposed to be at right Angles with the line LF.



3.
Let AGE be a Hemisphere; the planes AGE and GIE cutting one another at right
Angles; their common section the line GE. Let GZ be equal to ZE; and also RL
equal to ZI; then will the Hemisphere AGE less the cone whose diameter of the
Base is AE and Altitude CG, that is the Cone AGE, be equal to a Spheroide whose
axis is CG and conjugate semidiameter is RL. By the 47th. 1. and 10th. and 6th.
and by the third of the 23d. Prop.

4.
Let AGE be a Hemisphere; the Planes AGE and G Q cutting one another at right
Angles; their common section the line GB. Let G be equal to B being continued
till it meets with the Circle GYA being continued; Let TO be equal to. Then
will the Hemisphere AGE, less the cone whose diameter of the Base is BD and
altitude CG, that is the cone BGD, be equal to the frustum spheroide whose axis
is BP and conjugate semidiameter is OR. By the 47. 1. and 10. 6. and by the
third of the 23d. Proposition.

This holds true not only in the Sphere, but also in both the Spheroides; as
well in the cone as also in both the Conoides, not only when the cutting plane
cuts the axis, but when it is parallel thereunto; but when it is parallel to
the axis, there will be a cylinder instead of these cones. The Excavatus parts
in the sphere and both the spheroides, will always be spheres or spheroides, or
parts thereof their demonstrations by the 47. 1. 10. 6. and by the third of the
23d. Prop.

5.
The Excavatus parts of a frustum cone, will have relation to the hyperbola,
ellipsis and parabola; Their demonstrations from the 47. 1. 10. 6. and from the
first, third and fifth of the 23. Prop.

6.
The Excavatus parts of a hyperbolick conoide will have relation to all the
three sections, viz. the hyperbola, ellipsis and parabola; their demonstrations
by the 47. 1. 10. 6. and by the first, third and fifth of the 23. Prop.

7.
The Excavatus parts of a parabolick conoide, will have relation but to the
ellipsis and parabola, their demonstrations from the 47. 1. and 10. 6. and from
the third and fifth of the 23. Proposition.

8.
The solidity of every frustum cone, is equal to a cylinder whose Base is the
lesser Base of the frustum, and its altitude the altitude of the frustum, more
a hyperbolick conoide whose Base is equal to the difference of the Bases of the
said frustum, and its altitude the altitude of the frustum; the Transverse
Diameter of the hyperbolick conoide will be a line intercepted, betwixt the
continuation of the other side of the frustum cone, and the intercepted
Diameter, being continued.

9.
The solidity of every frustum parabolick conoide, is equal to a cylinder whose
Base is the lesser Base of the frustum, and altitude the altitude of the said
frustum, more a parabolick conoide whose Base is equal to the difference
betwixt the Bases of the said frustum, and its altitude the altitude of the
frustum.

10.
The solidity of every frustum hyperbolick conoide, is equal to a cylinder
whose Base is the lesser Base of the frustum, and altitude the altitude of the
said frustum; more a hyperbolick conoide whose Base is equal to the difference
betwixt the Bases of the said frustum; and its altitude the altitude of the
frustum.

This latter hyperbolick conoide, is like to that hyperbolick conoide, of which
the frustum is a part.

11.
A Sphere being cut by two parallel planes, both of them equidistant and
parallel to a plane passing through the Center of the Sphere; includes a part
of the Sphere, which for distinction sake may be called a middle Zone.

The solidity of every middle Zone of any Sphere, is equal to a cylinder of the
same Base and altitude as the Zone; more a Sphere whose diameter is equal to
the altitude of the Zone.

12.
A Spheroide being cut by two parallel planes, both of them equidistant and
parallel to a plane passing through the Center of the Spheroide and cutting the
Axis of the said spheroide at right Angles, includes a part of the spheroide,
which part for distinction sake may be called the middle Zone of a spheroide.

The solidity of the middle Zone of any spheroide, is equal to a cylinder of
the same Base, and altitude as the Zone; more a spheroide whose Axis is equal
to the altitude of the Zone.

The ellipsis which generates this last spheroide is like to that ellipsis
which generated that spheroide of which this middle Zone is a part.

13.
The solidities of hyperbolick conoides upon the same Base, are as their
altitudes. Here the Transverse Diameter is increased or decreased in the same
proportion as the intercepted Diameter. By the first of the 23d Proposition.

And also,

The solidities of hyperbolick conoides under the same altitude, are as their
Bases. Here the conjugate Diameter is increased or decreased in the same
proportion as the ordidinate. By the second of the 23d. Proposition.

The solidities of like hyperbolick Conoides, are in a triplicate ratio of
their corresponding terms, that is, their Transverse Diameters, or their
intercepted Diameters, their conjugate Diameters, or the Ordinates.

14.
The solidities of hemispheroides upon the same Base, are as their Altitudes.
By the 3d. of the 23d. Prop.

The solidities of hemipheroides under the same Altitude, are as their Bases,
by the 4th. of the 23d. Prop.

The solidities of like spheroides, are in a triplicate ratio of their
corresponding terms.

15.
The solidities of parabolick conoides upon the same Base, are as their
Altitudes. By the 5th. of the 23d. Prop.

The solidity of parabolick conoides under the same Altitude, are as their
Bases. By the 6th. of the 23d. Prop.

The solidities of like parabolick conoides, are in the triplicate ratio of
their corresponding terms.

An Example thus.
Suppose there be two parabolick conoides, A and B, the solidity of A, will be
to the solidity of B; as the Cube of the axis of A, is to the Cube of the axis
of B.

Further, as the parabolick conoide of A, is to the parabolick conoide of B; so
is the Cube of latus rectum of A, to the Cube of latus rectum of B.

Yet further, if these conoides both equally incline, it will be;

As the conoide of A, is to the conoide of B; so will the Cube of the Diameter
of A, be to the Cube of the Diameter of B. The like in the rest.

If there be two parabolick conoides unlike, suppose A and D. Then,

A will have that proportion to D, as is composed of the Base and altitude of
A, to the Base and altitude of D.

In parabolick conoides, as A and B.

If the conoide of A be equal to the conoide of B, then their Bases and
altitudes are reciprocal, and if their Bases and altitudes are reciprocal;
those conoides are equal.

Thus.

As the Base of A, is to the Base of B; so is the altitude of B to the altitude
of A.

These are said to be reciprocal, and their magnitudes are equal.

The like in hemispheroides, but not in hyperbolick conoides; for there may be
infinite hyperbolick conoides, yet having the same Base and altitude; the least
not so little as a Cone, no^ the greatest so great as a parabolick conoide of
that same Base and altitude. In this condition the semidiameter of the Base,
and the altitude are supposed to be equal.

16.
Spheres of equal Diameters may be added together, their sum will be a
spheroide, whose axis will be equal to the Diameter of one of the spheres; But
the area of that Circle which passes through the Center of this spheroide, and
cutteth the axis at right Angles; will be equal to the areas of so many great
Circles of those spheres, as there are spheres in number. Suppose there be six
spheres to be added together, the axis of the spheroide will be equal to one of
their Diameters; but the area of that Circle, that passes through the Center
of that spheroide, and cutteth the axis at right Angles, shall be equal to the
areas of six Circles whose Diameter is equal to the Diameter of one of the
spheres. The areas of the Circles are added, or subtracted, by the 47th. of
the 1. of Euclid.

Spheres and Spheroides of the same axis, may be added to, or subtracted from
each other, their sum, and difference will be spheres or spheroides.

17.
Hyperbolick conoides of the same axis may be added too, or subtracted from
each other, their sum and difference will be hyperbolick conoides. Here you are
to take the sum of the Bases, for the base of the sum, and the difference of
the bases, for the base of the difference. Further, We are to take both the
parameters for the parameter of the sum, and the difference of both the
parameters for the parameter of the difference.

18.
Parabolick conoides of the same axis, may be added too, or subtracted from
each other, the sum and difference will be parabolick conoides, using the
former rules for their bases and parameters,

Here note, the line PZ in the Diagram for the 9th. Propos. the line PN in the
Diagram for the 10th. Propos. the line NH in the Diagram for the 11th. Propos.
are called parameters.

19.
If the axis, Transverse and conjugate Diameters of a hyperbolick conoide be
equal one to another; and the axis equal to the axis of a Sphere: this
hyperbolick conoide and Sphere being added together, they make a parabolick
conoide; its Base and altitude equal to the Base and altitude of the
hyperbolick conoide, its parameter the double of the Diameter of the Sphere.

If there be a hyperbolick conoide, A; and a Spheroide, B; their axis equal: If
the transverse Diameter of A, is to the parameter of B; as the parameter of A,
is to the parameter of B. Two such conoides being added together, they will
make a parabolick conoide; its Base the same as the hyperbolick conoide; its
parameter equal to the parameters of the other conoides, being added together.

If there be a Cone, whose axis is equal to the Diameter of the Base; and a
Sphere whose axis is equal to the axis of the Cone; this Cone and Sphere being
put together, makes a parabolick conoide; its Base equal to the Base of the
Cone, its parameter equal to the Diameter of the Sphere:

20.
Parabolick Conoides, may always be added to, and sometimes subtracted from
hyperbolick conoides of the same axis; that sum will be a perbolick conoide,
and that difference when a difference may be, will be a hyperbolick conoide,
the sum of their Bases for the Base of the sum: and the difference of their
Bases for the Base of their difference: the sum of their parameters for the
parameter of the sum, and the difference of the parameters for the parameter of
the difference.

Here note, when the parameter of the hyperbolick conoide is greater than the
parameter of the parabolick conoide then a difference may be: but if it be
lesser, then no difference can be taken.

The Demonstrations of these are in Prop. 15, 16, 17 and 18, compared with
Propos. 9, 10 and 11. of this Book.

The Application.
THe first Proposition is to find the solidity of pyramides and Cones, or
frustum pyramides and Cones, and may be applicable to the measuring of all
solids or Vessels in that form, whether whole or in part, or gradually, that
is, foot by foot, or inch by inch.

The second Proposition may be applied to the measuring of irregular solids,
and may be useful for the exact measuring of all sorts of Stone and Timber:
also for the exact measuring of all sorts of elliptick, parabolick and
hyperbolick irregular solids, or Vessels that are made in that form: for such
solids may be cut into parallelepipedons, prismes and pyramides, and then
reduced to their own nature, by the proportion of the parallelogram adscribed
about those Figures to the Figures themselves, Thus.

The proportion of parallelograms of the same Base and altitude with the areas
of parabolas are as 4 to 3, Therefore,

As 4, is to 3; so is any such solid to any such parabolick irregular solid.

By the help of a Table of Squares and Cubes any such solids may be calculated
foot by foot, or inch by inch, without any great trouble, as is showed in the
third case of the third Proposition; This second and third Propos. are the
general use in such kind of solids.

In the fourth Propos. with its several cases, there is the measuring of
frustum pyramides when their Bases are not parallel.

In the fifth Propos. there is the relation of the Sphere and Spheroide to the
cylinders of their bases and altitudes, as well of the parts as the whole.

In the sixth Propos. there is the measuring of the middle Zone of a Sphere and
Spheroide; the middle Zone of a Spheroide, has been taken generally for the
Figure representing a Cask; so, the measuring of one, the other is measured.

In the twelfth Propos. there is the measuring of a portion of a Sphere, which
may be applied to the measuring of the inverted Crown of Brewers Coppers, or
several other uses.

In the thirteenth Propos. there is the measuring of parabolick conoides, which
may be taken for a Brewers Copper, the inverted crown.

Sometimes it may be a portion of a Sphere, or Spheroide, but sometimes the
portion of a paetbolick conoide; other times the portion of a hyperbolick
conoide, they ought to be taken as discretion seems convenient.

In the fourteenth Propos. there is the measuring of a hyperbolick conoide,
which may be token for a Brewers Copper.

In Propos. 15, 16, 17, and 18. there is the measuring of a sphere, spheroide,
parabolick conoide and hyperbolick conoide, as well the whole as their parts.

If the parabolick or hyperbolick conoides be taken for Prewers Coppers, with
the help of the Tables of Squares and Cubes, they may easily be calculated foot
by foot, or inch by inch according to the third Prop.

In the twentyeth Prop. there is the masuring of Circular and Elliptick
splindles.

The middle Zone may be taken for a Cask.

In the twenty first Propos. there is the measuring of the second Section in a
sphere and spheroide.

The use may be to measure the middle Zone of a spheroide, cut by a plane
parallel to the axis; that is, when the superfice of the liquor cuts the heads
of the Cask.

In the twenty fourth Propos. there is the meesuring of right cylindrick hoofs,
viz. Circular, Elliptick, parabolick and hyperbolick; and may be used for the
measuring of Brewers leaning Vessels.

If a Brewers Copper be taken to be of that Figure that parabolick or
hyperbolick conoides are, and they stand leaning, the measuring of them is
almost the same as though they did not lean.

Here I ought to have showed the making, and use of an Instrument for taking
the leaning of such Vessels; But my business calls me off; However, they may be
had of Mr. John Marks Instrument maker, living at the Sign of the Ball near
Somerset House in the Strand, who was formerly Servant to that incomparable
Instrument maker Mr. Henry Sutton.

Here note, the Table of Squares and Cubes is very ready and useful in finding
the portions of a sphere, spheroide, parabolick and hyperbolick conoides.

To find two such numbers, that their Product being added to the sum of their
squares, the sum shall be a square, and its Root commensurable.
LEt one of the numbers be A, and the other Z. The product may be AZ; the sum
of their squares ZZ + AA; the sum of their squares and product may be ZZ + ZA +
AA, equal to a square whose side is, Z + 2 that is the square ZZ -- 4Z + 4,
therefore ZZ + ZA + AA = ZZ -- 4Z + 4, that is, ZA + AA = -- 4Z + 4; Let A be a
unit, then 5Z = 3, that is, Z = ^, that is, Z is 3, and A, 5. These two numbers
make good the question, for 3 in 5, is 15; the square of 3, 9, and the square
of 5, is 25; their sum is 49, whose Root is 7. Albert Girad observes from this
seventh Propos. of the 5th. of Diophantus, That if there be a Triangle made of
3 such numbers, the Angle opposite to the greatest side will be 120 degrees. It
may be further observed, that if there be 2 right angled Triangles made of
these 3 numbers, the sum of the hypotenuse and base of the one, will be equal
to the sum of the hypotenuse and base of the other; and also the area of the
one shall be equal to the area of the other.

Thus,

7 49 7 49 5 25 3 9 74 58 The sum of their Squares. 24 40 The difference of
their Squares. 70 42 Their double Rectangles. 98 89 The sum of their sides. 840
840 Their Areas.

Here note, the double Rectangles are taken for their Altitudes.

Here note,

In Progressions from a Unit, the sum, of the sum and difference of the
greatest number in that progression, and any one number betwixt the greatest
and Unity, is equal to the sum, of the sum and difference of that same greatest
number; and any other number betwixt Unity and that greatest.

Further note,

This seventh Proposition is a Lemma to the eighth, to find three Triangles of
equal areas; therefore the areas are equal, and the hypotenuse and base of the
one, is equal to the hypotenuse and Base of the other.

A general Theorem for the finding of two such numbers; Take the square of any
number, from which take a Unit; take the double of that number, to which add a
Unit; that sum and difference will be the two numbers required. Thus,

The number taken is 3, its square 9, less a unit is 8; the double of 3, is 6
more, a unit is 7; these two numbers makes good the question.

For 56 + 64 + 49 = 169, whose root is 13.

Two right angled Triangles being made of these three numbers, viz. 7, 8, 13.
according to the former method, will have that same qualification.

This Proposition was publicly proposed i^ PARIS in the year 1633, which
Renatos de Carts resolved, and Francis Schooten published in Sect. 12. Miscel.
encumbered with a squar^ adfected equation, with surds.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 17, line 3, for Ecliptic read Elliptick. p. 25, for Excavetu^ r.
Excavatus. p. 29, l. 12, for, r.. In the same line, for B^ BFE; r. BCBFD p. 30,
l. 22, for ZB, r. ZC. p. 32. l. 19* for NR, r. NP. p. 39, l. 13, put; after
Line. p. 46, l. 21 for 634, r. 624. p. 53, l. 3, for APR, r. APK. p. 48, l. 25*
for ZB, r. XB. p. 60, l. ult. for R, r. R. p. 61, l. 6, for V, r. VI. p. 64, l.
4, for GG, r. GC. p. 66* l. 18, for CDQ, r. CGQ. p. 70, p. 71 l. 5, put, after
D* p. 74, l. 4, for GFPM; r. CFPM. p. 80, l. 21, put: before all. p. 82, l. 25,
after KABO put,

Imprimatur.
Tho. Tomkins R. Rmo in Christo Patri ae Domino Dno. GILBERTO Divina
Providantia Archiep. Cant. a Sac. Dom.

Ex Ad. Lamb. Aug. 25. 1668.

