AGAINST BABYLON AND HER MERCHANTS IN ENGLAND; One Groan more, From under the
Altar, breathed forth from the grief of the Spirit, for the Sufferings of the
Saints, by reason of her Cruelties and Abominations, and the filthiness and of
her Fornications.

Under the burden of Gods wrath against the present Rulers, Priests and People
of England, that repent not and give glory to God; that have drunk of her Cup,
and Refuse to come out of her at Gods Call, but remain in the false Church and
Worship still, that is not taught by Gods Spirit.

With a Warning to all such, that they prepare to meet the Lord in the Way of
his Judgments; and as they have partaken with her in her sins, that they
expect also to partake of her plagues which are ready to be poured forth from
the Lord God, who is mighty that judges her, and will certainly avenge the
blood of the Martyrs on her, for Babylons Destruction is Gods Determination in
England, and the world.

Behold your Day is past and the Night comes, and Gods fulfilling Day draws
nigh.

Therefore let all the Lords People hasten out of Babylon, in which all men are
that follow not the Light of the Lamb, that are not guided and led by the
present Teachings of Gods Spirit, and let them that are faithful in the Land,
be faithful still to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, for its given to
him and his Followers to overcome.

Written by one that travels in spirit for Sions deliverance, JOHN ANDERDON.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins near Aldersgate, 1660

To those of the present RULERS PRIESTS and PEOPLE OF ENGLAND, That repent not
and give glory to God.
Cain has slain his Brother Abel, because he was more Righteous than himself;
Therefore thus says the Lord,
WOe to that bloody City, to that rebellious house, whose Tents are the
coverings of Antichrist, whose deeds out-pass the deeds of the wicked, whose
habitations are the habitations of cruelty, which murder the just and shed the
blood of the innocent, whose iniquities cover the Earth, as the waters cover
the Sea; whose abominations are gone up to Heaven, that the holy God of Heaven
and Earth is provoked to anger against you; who yet say in your hearts, is not
our strength great, and is it not our right to Reign, and is not this great
Babel that we have built? wherein you intend to make you a name, that you may
not be scattered in the Earth, as a people driven out from the presence of the
Lord: And the arm of flesh is your confidence; as if the strength of Sodom and
Egypt should keep you from the wrath of the God of Israel; and that great Whore
Mystery Babylon the Mother of Harlots, that rides on the scarlet-colored
Beast, that decks her self with fine Linen, Purple and Silk, whose Merchandise
is on Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, on Wine, and Oil, and fine Flower,
and Wheat, and Beasts, and Sheep, and Horses, and Bodies, and Souls of men, who
has drunk the blood of the Saints, now says in her heart, Am not I a Queen,
and shall see no sorrow? And her Merchants and Tradesmen of all sorts, ranks
and orders, cry aloud, great is Diana of the Ephesians, because of their crafts
which brings them their gain from their quarters; her Prophets prophecy
falsely, her Priests bear rule by their means, and the people love to have it
so; who say unto them that despise the Lord, ye shall have peace, and to them
that walk after the imaginations of their own heart, none evil shall come upon
them; so that they are Prophets of lies, deceit and falsehood, that say, the
wicked shall prosper: And a horrible thing is committed in the Land, the whole
head is sick, the whole heart is faint, that from the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head there is no soundness in you, but full of wounds and
putrefying sores, full of corruption, which stink in the nostrils of our God;
yea, and your ways are become wholly corrupt and abominable before the Lord;
So that Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and true Judgment are not found amongst
you; but cruelty and oppression lodges within you; for by Swearing, and Lying,
and Killing, ye break out, and blood touches blood; So that the Lord God is
come down and will surely visit for these things, he has taken view of all
your actions and evil deeds done under the Sun, which grieve his Spirit all the
day long, that his Soul is weary to bear your abominations which are great in
the Land, for ye have not done the thing that is right in the sight of the
Lord, but have provoked him more than any that have gone before you, having
again set up the abominable thing in the Land which makes desolate, and have
not regarded the Counsel of the Lord, to walk in his ways, and to bring forth
Righteousness and Truth in the Earth, which the Lord expects; that Christ's
Kingdom might be known amongst the sons of men, whose right it is to Reign,
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

But you would not have this man to Rule over you; but have gone a whoring
after the gods of the Heathen in false ways and worships, after the corrupt
lusts and wicked imaginations of your own hearts; ye have stumbled also at that
Stumbling-stone and Rock of offense, CHRIST JESUS the Light of the world, and
the only way to the Father, upon which many have fallen and are broken; And
what think ye, that they on whom the Tower in Siloe fell, were greater sinners
than any that dwelt at Jerusalem? Nay verily, ye also that repent not shall
know, that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Gods Judgments than for you, who have had so much and large experience of the
Lords ways and dealings toward you and the people of these Nations, of what
the Lord required at your hands in the day of your visitation, which ye have
not regarded, but have cast the Lords Counsel behind your backs, and would not
come to him who is the New and living Way, the Truth and the Life; CHRIST JESUS
the Light of the world, the rightful King and Lawgiver of Nations, that ye
might in him have found peace and rest in the Land of your Nativity; that ye
might have eaten the good of the Land, and prospered as the glory of Nations;
but ye have revolted and rebelled against the God of Heaven yet more and more;
and though he has smitten you, ye have not regarded, but have forgotten him
days without number; and though he has waited long also to be gracious unto
you, to have gathered you, but ye would not, but are gone back again into Sodom
and Egypt, into your bad old ways of Sin and Iniquity, Superstition and
Vanity, in the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and pride of life; that
your wickednesses and abominations are abounding in the Land more than ever, as
if ye had said in your hearts, that God sees you not, and that the Lord has
forsaken the Earth, because his Judgments are not speedily executed upon such
evildoers as these are, that sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play,
and commit Whoredoms, and say, to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant; as if your Return and all the strange Arts and Works of Wonder which
the Lord has wrought and brought to pass in this Nation, were even to this
very end, that you might live at ease in the flesh in your pleasures, pride and
vanities, and in cruelties and oppressions, to triumph over the just on your
old dregs and lees of corruption, settled as if ye could not be moved.

But blindness and security in judgment is happened unto you, that ye having
eyes might not see, and hearts, and might not perceive, that the Lord God
Omnipotent rules and reigns in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them unto
whomsoever he will, that in the Clouds he is come to judgment, Yea and he will
arise and plead the cause of the innocent, and by no means acquit the guilty:
He will make Inquisition for the blood of the slain, and certainly avenge the
blood of the Righteous, which cries loud from the Earth for vengeance upon Cain
that has slain his Brother, and his cruelty shall not pass unpunished, but he
that has done this wickedness in the Land, with Gods Mark is he Marked, and
shall become a Fugitive and Vagabond in the Earth, and shall seek to hide
himself from the avenger of blood, but sin shall lie at his door, and Gods
Righteous Judgments shall overtake him wheresoever he flies, because of his
Brothers innocent blood, that cease not to cry Day and Night for Justice to
be done upon the Murderer, that has slain the Just; Yea and God shall multiply
his Plagues and Judgments upon them that have shed Innocent Blood in the Land,
and no Coverings shall hide them from the fierceness of Gods wrath; neither
shall the City that Cain has built with Blood, nor the Towers of Babel, though
never so lofty be able to shelter the wicked from the terrible stroke of Gods
anger and just Judgments which hasten to be accomplished in this Nation; for
they are a Rebellious and Gainsaying people, with whom the Love and Mercies,
the Patience and Long-Suffering of our God prevails not: But ye have hardened
your Hearts, and stiffned your Necks even for a Day of Slaughter, that the Lord
is weary to bear Your Iniquities, and to suffer with your sins any longer; And
therefore has determined to cut short the work in Righteousness for the
Elects sake, who are made as the dung of the Earth, and offscouring of all
things; but the meek of the Earth the Lood will exalt, and the High and Lofty
ones he will bring down from their Seats; the wicked will he scatter in their
imaginations. And all your Carnal confidences shall fail you in the day of
great distress, perplexity and anguish that is coming upon every soul that obeys
not the Light, the Gospel of God, by which ye might have been gathered, and so
have been honorable by doing the Lord service in the day of his love to you,
if ye had known and considered the things that belongs to your Peace, and the
Kingdoms happiness.

But now the Day is gone over Yourheads, Your Time is past, Your Glory shall be
turned into shame; Your Sun shall let at noon day, and the Night is come upon
You, that Ye shall not see to work any more for the Lord; but shall grope in
the dark, to fulfill the measures of Your Iniquities, and Treasure up wrath
against the Day of wrath, and Revelation of Gods just Judgments, until the
overflowing Scourge of Destruction come upon You, for the Abominations that are
gone forth into all the Land; And who is there amongst all the Lords Servants
in the Land, that shall say, Lord spare them? against whom Gods wrath is
kindled, and upon whom he purposes to pour out the Vials of his sore
displeasure; because they have rejected his Son from being their King and
Lawgiver in these Nations, unto whom all Principalities and Powers must bow;
whose Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness, in which the establishment of
Gods Government is for ever. And whither think ye to fly, and what think ye to
do in the day of Your Calamity, who are covered over with the tents of the
wicked, with sin and iniquity, as with a Garment, in that day when the Lord
shall strip off all false coverings, and search and try you to the uttermost of
his Judgments? That as Gods Patience and Long-Suffering has appeared more
abundant to you than others, so shall his judgments and execution of his
fierce wrath be more swift and sudden upon you: And as your Return has been
more wonderful in the eyes of the Nations, than those Noble Acts the Lord has
done before in the Land; by so much the greater astonishment and Judgments,
Terror and Amazement shall you be smitten: Yea and the nearer Isreal's
deliverance out of Bondage is at hand, so shall the Plagues of Egypt increase
upon Pharaoh and his Host, who will not let Israel go to serve the Living God.
And the Nations shall know that our God is the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, which works Wonders in the deep, and makes war
with Amaleck from Generation to Generation; and who shall prosper that is
against the Lord and his anointed ones, the chosen Generation that are blessed
with Gods presence? And who is there amongst all the mighty Host of the
Uncircumcised, that shall lift a hand against the Sword of the Lord, and of
Gideon, and prosper? for its Gods determination that Christ's Government in
Righteousness and Truth shall be established in this Nation; And blessed are
that remnant that know it and are made subjects thereof, though all the World
band against them, yet the Faithful followers of the Lamb shall prevail and
reign with him on Mount Sion for ever and ever; for God has blessed them, and
who shall curse them? And they that have been the envy of Nations in Gods work,
shall be the Glory of Kingdoms; and they that have been as it were not a
People, shall become a great and mighty Nation, as they are Chosen, Faithful
and True in the Lambs War of Righteousness, in which Victory and Dominion over
all shall stand for ever, without Sword or Spear; for the Lord God will work
wonders in the Earth, and accomplish his great work in this the day of his
Power; the which ye will not believe, though a man declare it unto you: Behold
therefore ye Despisers and wonder, when the day of Your misery comes upon You,
as a Thief in the Night, when there shall be none to deliver You, though You
then cry to the Rocks and to the Mountains to fall upon You, and cover You from
the wrath of the Lamb, who must reign until all his Enemies are subdued, and
who shall withstand his Spirit or resist his Power, that he should not ride on
Conquering, and to Conquer, until he has accomplished Gods great work of
Salvation in the Earth? In which Reformation, Liberty and Freedom to the Sons
and Daughters of Sion, is known, and perfect Peace and Establishment in Gods
Covenant of Light and Life witnessed; against which the Gates of Death and Hell
shall not prevail; Though the people rage, and the Heathen imagine mischief in
their hearts, Yet the Lords work shall go on and prosper in the Land, to the
shame and confusion of all the opposers thereof, who take not warning by the
downfall of others that have gone before them. But here is our Rock that splits
all the Powers of the Earth, even that Rock of Ages, of which Israel drank in
the Wilderness, out of which flows the Waters of Life for ever: But ye have
hewn out unto your selves broken Cysterns that will hold no water, and will
not come to the Lord the Leader of Israel, and Fountain of Living Waters, that
Your Souls might live; So that Your Rock is not as Our Rock.

The Lord has often Declared and Proclaimed Repentance to the Rulers, Priests
and People of this Nation, from time to time, by his Servants the Prophets that
have been sent forth in the Power of his Spirit, and that he expects a Worship
in Spirit and Truth (and a Government in Righteousness) in this Nation to be
established in his own way; No longer in the oldnesse of the Letter, but in the
newness of the Spirit; and that he requires such to worship him, and that he
will no longer be served with the abominations of the Egyptians, which sit in
Darkness and under the Power of Death, and come not to the Light of Life in
which God is well pleased; but this Seed of the Kingdom that is likened to a
Grain of Mustard Seed, is that which all the wise Builders in the worlds wisdom
have stumbled at, and rejected as a thing Common and Unclean, and too mean and
foolish for them to take Counsel of; and so all their wisdom has been
confounded and turned into foolishness, because they would not become fools,
that they might be wise in the way of Gods Salvation; for it is a Righteous
thing with the Lord, to stain the Glory of all flesh that has been exalted
above his Fear in the Earth, and that that which has boasted and gloried above
the Cross of Christ, should now be abased and ashamed, yea and shame shall
cover the Faces of the Wicked, and all Vizards shall be taken off from all
Faces, and every man shall appear to be as he is in the Day of the Lords Search
in the Land; and all the deceitful Coverings of Antichrist, stolen from the
words of the Prophets, of Christ and the Apostles (without the Life and Power
of God in Christ Jesus) shall be stripped off, and found too narrow to hide from
Gods wrath, as these that have gone before you, and exceeded you therein, finds
true by sad experience, that its not Words and Pretenses, but Truth and
Righteousness, (the Coverings of Gods Spirit) that saves and delivers (...)
People in the time of Straits and Distress of Nations.

And though you or others could now after so many Years experience, beget a
Reformation and Worship (of which there is little Hopes and less appearance)
that you could make your Image speak, even with the Tongue of Men and Angels,
and come not into the right Spirit, to know the Voice of the True Shepherd
Christ in you, all your Labors, Services and Performances of Worship (as you
may call it) would be no better than the cutting off a Dogs Neck, or offering
of Swines Blood, which is altogether abominable in the sight of the Lord: For
men have so long talked in words of Religion, Righteous Laws and Just
Government to be set up and established, that the Lords Spirit has been long
grieved therewith, and he has cast them out as unprofitable Servants, because
they came not to the Light, to Gods Righteous Witness and Principle in
themselves, which teaches men to do Justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly
with their God; for Gods Government is a Righteous Government, and its said on
Christ; And can men reasonably expect, that Ministers of unrighteousness, and
Servants of sin and Satan, should set up a Righteous Government for God, as
they stand in that Ground and Nature which is condemned by Gods Righteous Laws
for ever? Can he that is not Born of God, do the Will or Work of God to his
Praise? Or can any evil Tree bring forth good Fruit? no not one.

It Is high time for men (if ever they will) come to the Light, to the Root and
Ground of things in themselves that is good, that they may know of what Spirit
they are of; for most men in this Nation will confess (I believe) that there is
a Spirit of Truth which does the Will of God, and there is a Spirit of error
which is of the Devil, and against God in the World; Now that Spirit (as the
Scriptures testify) that confesses that Christ is come in the flesh, is true,
which is the Power of God that destroys the works of the Devil in the Creature,
in the Root and Ground that is evil, from whence all wickedness proceeds, even
out of the heart of man where Satan's seat has been; And so this same Spirit
that reproves the world of sin, and condemns sin in the flesh, leads us and
those that follow it, out of sin and transgression, and mortifies lust in the
Root, and leads us into all Truth, and teaches us to deny ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to walk Righteously, Soberly and Godly in this present
World, no longer in the oldnesse of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, according to the Rule of the new Creature, Christ in us the hope of
Glory, which changes and reviveth us in the Spirits of our Minds, whereby we
are enabled unto every good word and work, according to the measure of his
eternal Spirit working in us, in which we are taught to deny our own wills, and
to do Gods will in Earth as it is in Heaven; the enmity in the carnal Mind,
being destroyed by the Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God unto
Salvation, unto all them that believe; From which all people and Nations that
turn away, they crucify Christ, and do but cast lots about his Vestment, and
retain at the utmost, but a form of godliness without the Power; and so
worship a God in their imaginations ignorantly, and come not to witness and
feel the Word of Life in themselves, which begets the Creature again into the
likeness of Gods Image, by destroying and casting out that which is begotten in
man by the Seed of the Serpent, which is Gods and the Creatures enemy. And so
as the enmity is destroyed in the Root and Ground, and the cause of Separation
from God done away, so the word of Reconciliation comes to be known and
witnessed; for there cannot be Peace and Reconciliation with God, so long as
that stands, even Sin and Iniquity which Separates from God, against which his
wrath is for ever; and there can be no Communion between Light and Darkness, no
Fellowship between Christ and Belial, for he that is joined to an Harlot, is
one with the Harlot, and he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, unto
which no unclean thing can be joined; Therefore he that will be joined to the
Lord, and know his Maker to be his Husband, must first know a Separation from
sin and Satan, by the Word of God which purifieth the Heart, and cleanses us
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; And this is the Blood of sprinkling
which cleanses the conscience, the Life of Christ made manifest in us, in the
measure of his Eternal Spirit given every one to profit withal, in which we
come to know the Father and the Son, whom to know is eternal Life, without
which in the presence of the Lord, all people and Professions are yet dead in
sins and trespasses, and not come again out of the fall into Gods Creation
which is blessed, but remains under the Curse, Enemies in their minds to God
and Christ, by reason of wicked works.

And as the Spirit of Truth draws the mind to within, to the knowledge of God
in the heart, and works contrary to the will of man; so the Spirit of
Antichrist works with the will of man contrary to the Will of God in all
things, and draws the mind forth into Airy conceptions, into vain Notions and
Imaginations, of worshipping an unknown God afar off; and he that is led by
this spirit seeks self in all things, honor and praise of men; delights to
live in words, in the talk of Gods Work, Kingdom and Glory to come, and cannot
endure to sit still to wait to feel the present work of Gods Power, and
Enjoyment of Gods presence within; for that destroys the Devils kingdom, root
and branch; for if lust by Gods Power be mortified in the heart before sin be
conceived there, from whence shall it be brought forth? For out of the heart
proceeds Hatred, Malice, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, and all manner of
sin and uncleanness; So that there can be no hopes of better fruits, until the
Tree be changed, until a new heart be known, wherein the Righteous Law of God
is written, and the Light shines; that so out of a good heart, the good
Treasures of life may flow forth, and fruit to the praise of God brought forth:
And he is true indeed, that seeks not his own, but the glory of him that sent
him, which is Christ's work for ever, who is sent of the Father to do his Will
in us, and we in him, according to the measure and operation of his Spirit in
us, which works both to will and do according to his good pleasure; in which
as we wait and abide we are blessed for ever, and the body is kept in unity,
and every member in its proper place and office, which is the Order of Saints,
and Government of the Church in God, in which is peace and safety.

And now ye Wise Men, Rulers, Priests and People of England, who will not be
instructed by Gods Spirit, that ye might learn Righteousness, and live: All ye
that refuse to come out of Babylon at Gods Call, that reject the Light of the
Lamb, in which the Nations of all them that are saved must walk; ye that will
not cease to do evil and learn to do well, that will not break the bonds of the
Oppressor, and let the Oppressed go free, but daily add sorrow to the
afflicted, and grieve the upright in heart in the Land; whose fear toward God
is not taught them by the precepts of men, whom the Lord regards and tenders as
the Apple of his Eye, who have eaten his Passover with bitter herbs, and the
Lord will spare them as his choice Jewels in the day of his fierce wrath upon
the wicked; after so many years experience of the grace, favor, patience,
long-suffering and goodness of our God, which should have led you to
repentance, if you had obeyed Gods Voice, and followed his Counsel; What have
you now to plead for your selves before the Lord, whose wrath is turned against
you, and the Testimony of a good Conscience ye have not, and who shall plead
for you? And what may be said on your behalf, that have neglected so great
Salvation, and kept Christ Jesus so long out of his Right and Kingdom; Why the
Lord God whose ways are equal and just, should not arise in his fierce wrath,
and in his hot displeasure sweep you away with the besom of destruction, and
give you your portion in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone; and as
ye have drunk of the Whores Cup which has made all Nations drunk with the
Wine of her fornications; and as ye have partaken with her in her sins, why ye
should not according to Gods Righteous Decree and Judgment, partake of her
plagues: Consider these things, and show a reason if you can? and who shall
deliver you in the day of her judgments, from her plagues and torments which
hasten, and in one day shall come upon her? And the Spirit says, Spare her
not, but give her blood to drink, yea, fill to her double according to the
measure of her abominations, for she has drunk the blood of the Saints, and is
worthy to drink the Cup of the Wine of Gods fierce wrath and indignation,
without mixture; And in the hour of her torments, when the Ten Horns, the
Executioners of Gods vengeance on her, shall strip her naked and make her
desolate, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, who amongst all the
Lords people in the Land shall pity her or plead for her? But rejoice over her
to see the smoke of her burnings, and give Praise, Honor and Glory to the Lord
God Almighty, whose Judgments are Righteous and True, for that he has avenged
on her the blood of the Saints their fellow Servants, that have suffered and
been slain for the Testimony of Jesus; yea, and my spirit says, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, and give her the Cup of the Fathers fierce wrath to drink,
for she has corrupted the whole Earth with her fornications.

And now thus have I written, that all the Lords People may hasten to come out
of Babylon, and drink no more of her Cup; and that all that remain in her, may
expect to partake of her Plagues: And let all the faithful in the Land be
faithful and watchful still, that a spirit of security and drowsiness, which is
the shadow of death, come not over them while Judas the Traitor sells his
Master, and betrays the Son of man into the hands of sinners. But I say, watch
and pray, and keep to the Word of Gods Patience, that ye may be all kept in
the hour of temptation and trial that is coming upon all flesh; for wickedness
abounds, and the flood is nigh; I say, be faithful unto death, and ye shall
have a Crown of life; and account your lives of no value, that Gods glory may
be made known amongst the sons of men; and quit your selves like men, and
faithful followers of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, to whom its given to
overcome, and ye shall be blessed for ever, and more than Conquerours, through
him who is the Captain of our Salvation, in whom we are the called of the Lord
in Truth and Righteousness, the redeemed Ones of the Earth, that shall reign
with our King on Mount Sion for ever and ever; where Salvation is for VValls
and for Bulwarks, into which the enemy cannot enter, but is shut out into utter
darkness, where is weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, torments day and
night, in that lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched, in which the wicked and ungodly shall live
for ever, which is the second death.

Prepare therefore ye People of England, to meet the Lord in the way of his
Judgments, for his mercies prevail not with you, and your iniquities are
almost full; therefore the Lord has a just Controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Land, and will plead with all flesh touching his heritage; for with much
Patience and Long-suffering has he tried you all, and given you a Day and Time
to Repent and Return, that ye might have brought your deeds to the Light, and
the Transgressor to judgment in your selves, where Satan's seat is, and so have
escaped the wrath to come; but ye would not, but have chosen darkness rather
than light, because your deeds are evil; so that ye sit down in confusion in
Babylon that is for destruction, and reject the instructions of Gods Spirit that
has called you, and would have brought you out of her; And what can ye there
expect in her, but to fall and perish together with her, whose Downfall
certainly draws nigh in this Nation of England first the figure of Nations;
for the Saints sufferings are daily increased (as the Goals bear witness, and
their manifold other grievances and cruel oppressions in the land) by her
Sorceries, Whoredoms and Abominations; and the Lords Spirit is grieved, which
shall sink her down, even to the nethermost Hell, as a Millstone with violence
by Gods Power cast into the bottom of the Sea, that shall never rise again: Let
him see that can see, and read what the Lord is doing in England, as the first
of the Nations in the Earth, wherein the wonderful works of the Lord declare
themselves in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, in this the Day of his Power; and
let him that escapes the Judgments of the first Woe, repent and give glory to
God before the second Woe come: Amen, Hallelujah.

The 5th of the 9th Month, 1660. JOHN ANDERDON.

THE END.

