RELIGION AND LOYALTY MAINTAINED Against all Modern Opposers; IN A TREATISE ON
The 29th of May, 1681. being Trinity-Sunday, and Anniversary Day of His
Majesty's happy Birth, and King and Kingdoms Restoration.

By HENRY ANDERSON, M.A. Vicar of Kingsumborne in Hampshire.

(...).

Fear God: Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Will. Abington near the Wonder-Tavern in
Ludgate Street; and Will. Clark Bookseller in Winchester. 1684.

TO THE High and Mighty MONARCH CHARLES II. By the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith.
Most Dread Sovereign,
AMongst the multitude of Sacrifices which daily offer themselves to your
Sacred Majesty, of the richer sort, if this mean Oblation of a Turtle find your
Royal Aspect, speaks only the Grandeur and Heroic Greatness of England's
Monarch, who darts the diffusive beams of your Goodness (throughout your
Realms) on your Liege People by your auspicious and most gentle Government,
being cherished by the gracious Rays of Sovereign Power, as the obscure parts
of the Earth are by the radiations of the Sun. These happy Influences (like the
Dew of Hermon) descend upon all that are not guilty of Disloyalty, and trample
not on Regal Power in abstracting their Allegiance; for such are no longer
Subjects, but Rebels, that despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities,
contemning the bright and splendid Crown of Sovereignty. Sacred and Divine is
Royal Majesty, as it is a reflection of that above, and it is the Glory thereof
to protect things Sacred; therefore it looks so high, and prefixes so mighty a
Name, which can give a sufficient value to things in themselves both mean and
worthless, however imperfect, your favor is able to supply, and give it life,
if the production be not unworthy you Royal Patronage: yet it is not improper
to lay it at the feet of Majesty, because the Holy Trinity, that Theological
Mystery, is the Article of our Creed, and it cannot take a more revered
Sanctuary for its safety than the Defender of the Faith, whose prudent and
Princely Conduct crowns all our Felicities with a calm Tranquillity in Church
and State; therefore let us serve the Lord our God and Charles our King, whom
he has raised up unto us. Long, long may you flourish with a Crown of Glory on
your head, and a Scepter of Triumph in your hand, bathing your feet in the
blood of your Enemies, and live to be, as you are, the delight and glory of
your People, and we trust under your shadow, being not only to Moses a
Protection, but to all the Tribe of Levi that wait at the Altar; and the great
Argosie, the Ship Royal of the Church, would have dashed against the rocks, and
been swallowed up by the quick Sands, or by the malignity of cross and contrary
Winds (of a pretended Religious Crew who delight in Blood and Treason) unless
your Sacred Majesty, who as a Guardian Angel, that sits at the Stern, by some
propitious gales from Heaven, had guided and conducted her to the fair Havens
of Peace. As Protection, so it humbly craves Acceptance, because goodness is
the honor of Greatness, and that Persian Monarch was not more famous for
accepting a little water from the hand of a loving Subject, than your Sacred
Majesty is renowned through Britain's Orb for your gracious Clemency to all,
and particularly to the Offerings of the Sons of Aaron, though this Piece
blushes at the confidence of its Dedication, as not worthy the approach of
Royal Presence, or Majesty's judicious Eye, being like the straw and brick of
Egypt, very inconsiderable in regard of the polishing, carving and Cedar-work
of the Temple, performed by a Bezaleel and Aholiab, that can curiously work in
Gold; yet I contribute my Mite, and cast my little into the Treasury, but with
such humility presented as speaks Loyalty, and not presumption, showing the
World in all expressions of a grateful mind, and emanations of the greatest
affection, where Duty binds me to pay the Fealty and Homage of my Obedience:
Celebrating the Memory of this Day May 29.
with ebullitions of Joy and Satisfaction, as it carries the propitious Star of
Royal Birth, with a Constellation of Blessings to the Kingdom in a happy and
peaceable Restoration. Almighty Goodness settled us on our old Basis, and by a
Miracle of Providence restored to us our Prince, Religion and Government, for
which Mercy we magnify the Glorious and Eternal Trinity, humbly beseeching the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to continue to your Regal Majesty a long and
prosperous Reign over us, with an affluence of Health and Wealth, Triumphs and
Conquests here; and when you shall put off the Glories of a Temporal
Sovereignty, and lay down your mortal Diadem, you may exchange it for an
immortal Crown eternal in the Heavens, being incircled with the Rays of Glory
and Happiness in a Life that never pays Tribute to Death. So prays

Your Majesty's most humble, obedient and Loyal Subject, Henry Anderson.

THE HOLY TRINITY ASSERTED, AND MONARCHY MAINTAINED Against all disloyal
Opponents, in a Treatise on the 29th of May, 1681. being Trinity-Sunday, and
Anniversary Day of His Majesty's happy Birth, and King and Kingdoms
Restoration.
Psalm. 73. verse. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee.


COntentment is the universal Center to which all the thoughts, actions, and
contrivances of Men tend; the point to which they are all directed, is
satisfaction. This is the great spring to all the various motions of Mankind:
and however distant and contrary their ways and courses, their inclinations and
constitutions are; yet here they all meet and concenter in this one reconciling
object. Contentment and satisfaction is that which the Learned seeks to obtain,
in his industrious quest after Knowledge. This Jewel the Merchant seeks in his
dangerous Voyages, the ambitious in his passionate pursuit of Honor, the
covetous in his unwearied heaping up of Treasure, the wanton in his pleasing
Charms of Beauty, the Conqueror in his earnest desires of Victory, and the
Politician in his deep Designs. But alas! the misery of Man is, That he would
find that in the variety of the Creatures, which is no where to be found but in
the unity of the Creator, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. For absolute
content dwells not here below. It is not in Granaries filled with plenty, in
ambitious Haman's state and grandeur, in Samson's lovely Dalilah's, in
Nebuchadnezzar's Rule over the World; it must arise from no other spring but
God the Holy Trinity alone, who is the only Principal of Being, and Fountain of
true content. And King David draws a right line to the immovable Center, and
directs the Soul to the true Zenith of happiness, God himself, Whom have I
Heaven but thee? God alone is the purest Truth, the chiefest Good, and final
End of intelligent Beings, which speaks the excellency of Christianity, in
reference to the (...) or sublimity of its object, which is not the (...), the
Universe, or boundary of the World; but God the (...) and (...), from whence
all goodness flows, the rest, repose and tranquillity of all Creatures.
Aristotle in his Metaphysics says, That God is vivens, aeternus and optimus,
a living, eternal and transcendent Good. Plato in his Book de Legibus says,
That God is bonus, and causa bonorum omnium, good, and the cause of all good
things. And Cicero contemplating God in the happy fruition of himself, says,
Ea est Dei vita qua nihil beatius, nihil omnino bonis omnibus affluentius
cogitari potest; nihil enim agit, nullis occupationibus est implicatus, nulla
opera molitur, sua potentia and virtute gaudet, habet exploratum fore se semper
tum maximis tum in aeternis voluptatibus: i. e. Such is the life of God, than
which nothing is more happy, nothing in the world can be thought to abound with
more good things; he is implicated in no busieness, he undergoeth no labor,
but enjoys his own power and virtue, and knows certainly that he shall be
always in transcendent pleasures. God is the Haven of Eternal Felicity, where
till we arrive in ou^ Spirits, we are mazed in endless wanderings, tortured on
the rack of self-vexation Cor humanum in desiderio aeternitatis non fixum,
nunquam stabile potest esse, sed omni volubi^itate volubilius, de alio in aliud
transit, quaerens requiem ubi non est. In his autem caducis and transitoriis,
in quibus ejus affectus captivi tenentur, veram requiem invenire non valet:
quoniam tantae est dignitatis, ut nullum bonum praeter summum bonum, ei
sufficere potest. S August.
, our desires know no shore or bottom. And there is no man but feels his Soul
too big for terrestrial things, too noble to glut it self with base corporeal
pleasures, and the Understanding too sublime a faculty to subject it self to a
brutish appetite; these things are never able to fill its vast capacities, but
only the glorious Trinity, its Maker, and leaves no room for sorrow to creep
in. For the heart of man is triangular, which the whole circle of the world
cannot fill (as Mathematicians say) but all the corner, will complain of
emptiness for something else. Nothing can fill the heart o^ man but God.
Nothing can satisfy it but the Divinity it self. There is no thing can give
rest to the Soul, but only him that made it; for the heart of man i^ like the
Needle of the Compass, it hat^ a natural trembling to the Pole, even the
fruition of bliss. And then will the Soul be pleased, when it lies down in the
lap of Eternity, and the Triple Angle of man's heart satisfied, being united to
God, the fountain of happiness, where the Angels sun themselves for ever: and
the Mystery of the Sacred Trinity shall be in full revelation, and that
inconceivable joy shall be opened to you, which changes not as the Moon,
eclipsed as the Sun, nor set as the Stars. Holy David having trave^^ed and
coursed the whole world in his thoughts, for a resting place (like Noah's Dove)
finds not amidst the swelling Tides of this world, whereon to stay his feet,
returns back again to the Ark with this Olive Branch in his mouth, Non est
mortale quod opto. He finds no sanctuary but in Heaven, no safe repose but in
the Almighty, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that
I desire besides thee. The Royal Prophet seems to be now under the storms of
grief and trouble, and placed as it were inter suspiria and lachrymas, between
sighs and tears; yet he anchors his hopes upon Providence, and cheerfully looks
up to Heaven, fetching comfort from thence with a full assurance of Divine
favor, and in all pressures or difficulties whatsoever takes himself to his
Harp, and plays this divine Anthem, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there
is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. The words being Musical, I shall
follow the Allegory, and in it observe these Two generals, viz. The disposition
of parts, and the opposition of the notes on both. The disposition of parts are
Aspiratum and Lene, high and low.

First, High in a rational expostulation, Whom have I Heaven but thee?

Secondly, Low in a positive determination, And there is none upon Earth I
desire besides thee.

In the expostulation there are these notes in a divine Climax.

First, Quem in Coelis? Whom have I in Heaven?

Secondly, Quem praeter te? Whom have I besides thee?

Thirdly, Quis mihi? Who is for me?

First, Quem in Coelis? Whom have I in Heaven? The Holy Trinity is the Ocean of
all true felicity, the comfort, the joy and bliss of Souls. How should we long
after thee, and the fruition of that happiness, which thou have laid up for
those that fear thee! In that most glorious state these operations are most
specially recommended, and spoken of by the Scriptures, viz. Vision, Dilection
and Fruition. They shall be possessed with such a sweet trinity of sight, love
and joy, that the Soul will confess, being in an ecstasie of wonder and
amazement, that it could not believe those things which now it sees with its
eyes, in that it can look no way but it beholds unspeakable glory. And the Soul
solacing it self with infinite content, cries out, Here will I dwell and abide
for ever. Psalm. 132.14.
Now whilst others lay up treasures on Earth, in Heaven is my Exchequer. Our
Souls will be irregular like the Planets in their Epicycles; and whilst we are
in the Sphere of flesh, and clothed with mortality, sailing in the Sea of this
world, there will be winds to create storms: but in Heaven there is a perpetual
calm, no tempest in it; the Soul will joy in Gods Everlasting rest. And this is
the divine elevation of David's spirit, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? It is
the glory and honor of the Soul, to be originally from Heaven. How suitable,
and how natural is it for the rational Soul which comes down from Heaven to
look thither, and tend toward the source and fountain of its Being! Os homini
sublime dedit, coelumque tueri jussit -- How hard a thing is it to keep the
flame from pointing upwards? And with what unwearied ^^^igence do the Rivulets
seek out (...) the main Ocean? Such an eager pursuit, such strong propensions
(nay far stronger) may be justly expected in the Soul toward Heaven, seeking
the (...), things above; To seek there (...), an habitation not made with
hands, (...), Eternal in the Heavens, in as much as the End is incomparably
greater, and the Agent more noble and active: for the heavenly Faculty having
capacities so wide, and mighty Energies, was surely not created to serve mean
or narrow designs; it was not given to scrape eternally in earth, or heap up
gold for private enjoyment, to weary our selves with servile toils, to distract
the mind with ignoble cares (this was not the Errand for which we are sent into
the World) but to find out happiness. We must not think God bestowed immortal
Souls upon us, that we might fix them on sensual objects, when we find that
they are capable of such riches and pleasures as fade not away. We must
suppose, that to do so, is the principal and supreme End of our Creation. And
it is an employment congruous to the native excellency of that Divine power
implanted in us, for God has made us for himself, and unquiet is man's heart
until it attains him; it longs for, Psalm. 42.2.
and thirsts after the living God: here is one of the sweet strains of David's
Harp, Whom have I in heaven but thee?

Secondly, Quem praeter te? Whom have I besides thee? Say thou, O Lord, unto my
Soul, I am thy Salvation, and it is enough to bless and raise me above the icy
hills of worldly joys. For the blessed Trinity is a Christians portion, he is
truly possessed of nothing but the Deity, Whom have I besides thee? How glorious
art thou in Heaven above! and what infinite happiness is there provided for me
in thee! One day in thy Courts, O Lord, is better than a thousand elsewhere in
the Palaces of sinful pleasures, or Tabernacles of wickedness. How then may I,
or can I take full content or delight in any thing that is here below? For I
envy not secular glory nor sumptuous habitations of the ungodly: because all
delicious enjoyments in this life without thee, will but make a Paradise
without a Tree of Life. King David weighed them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and did not only find them TEKEL too light, but (...), to speak in
the Epigrammatists Language, mere nothing to spiritual comfort. Psalm. 4.6.
The gleanings of Spirituals are better than the vintage of Naturals and
Morals, and the least spangle of happiness is above a globe of Temporals Da,
Domine, ut sic possideamus temporalia, ut non perdamus aeterna. S. Bernard.
; for when all the flashes of sensual pleasures are quite extinct, when all the
flowers of secular glory are withered away, when all earthly excellencies are
buried in darkness, when this world and all the fashion of it are utterly
vanished and gone, the infinite spaces of Eternity do yet remain; traffic
therefore with the Talent of time, Mat. 25.16. Luke 19.15.
for the unspeakable advantages of Life eternal, because all our enjoyments
under the Tropic of Mortality are fleeting and transitory. Some are (...),
Lovers of honors, and these are as a flux and reflux of the Sea, for the
ambitious man's joys and heightened delights, in which his Soul is steeped and
inebriated, his Music and Feasting, his ample Building, and Train of
Attendants, the Purple and fine Linen, and whole Pageantry Quid hac vana and
inani gloria fallacicius? quod si in hac vita praesenti vicissitudinem hanc
evadit, omnino mors veniens foelicitatem resecabit. Et quem hodie in foro magna
pompa comitabatur, and qui in carcerem conjiciebat, and super thronum
residebat, and inflabatur, and homines alios, quasi um bras despiciebat, is
subito postea jacebit mortuus absque spiritu, foetulentus, petitus innumeris
convitiis, and his, quos pridem injuria affecit, and quos nulla affecit
injuria: condolentibus tamen his, qui ab isto injuria afflicti suerunt. Quid
hoc miserabilius fuerit? Item collecta omnia saepenumero inimici and hosts
inter se partiuntur and distribnunt: peccata autem per quae haec coacervata
sunt secum aufert, de quibus diligens and accurata ratio exigetur. S.
Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in Genesis
of Greatness, has but a sad Echo, Obad. 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the
Eagle, and set thy nest among the Stars, thence I will bring thee down, says
the Lord. The ambitious man enlarges his desires as Hell, says the Prophet,
Hab. 2.5.
and is as death, and cannot be satisfied. Who can fill the bottomless pit? or
stop the unsatiable jaws of death? neither can the greedy humor of an haughty
Spirit, the aspiring insolency of a boisterous Nimrod be possibly stayed or
stinted, no not with the top and variety of highest honors, though he should
alone and absolutely be crowned with the Sovereignty of the whole Earth, and
command the felicities of the wide World; but though their excellency mount up
to the Heavens, says Job, Job 20.6, 7.
and his head reach unto the Clouds, yet they shall perish. Others are (...),
Lovers of money; and riches, says Solomon, Prove. 23.5.
make themselves wings and fly away: there is a gadding vein in money which
makes it ever and anon shift masters, (...), in Pythagoras Pythag. (...).
; and who would weary himself to pursue the wind? they can reap nothing but
vanity and emptiness; Eccles. 5.10.
therefore let us not sing a Requiem to our Souls, of safety and peace, and
anchor our hearts and hopes on an earthly Paradise, but in Jehovah, who is
everlasting Riches. Others are (...) (...), 2 Timothy 3.4. Incipit homini
occurrere talis jucunditas, qualem solet habere in poculis, in prandiis, in
avaritia, in honoribus seculi. Extolluntur enim homines, and laetitia quadam
insaniunt: sed non est gaudere impiis, dicit Dominus; est enim jucunditas
quaedam, quam nec oculus vidit, nec auris audivit, nec in cor hominis ascendit.
S. Aug.
, Lovers of pleasures, but alas! they quickly fade. A Painter who has made a
picture of a face smiling, on a sudden with no more than one dash of his Pencil
can make it seem to weep: the confines of joy and sorrow border on each other.
In the twinkling of an eye, in the turning of an hand, sadness may justle out
mirth; and deep sighs may be fetched from that breast whence loud laughter made
its eruption. Pleasure may die in the same moment that gave it its birth, and a
sudden succession of grief may turn its cradle into a grave. The tears which an
enlarged and vehement passion of joy had run over with, may in the middle of
their course find an Arrest, and be made to minister unto grief in the flight
of a minute, in the beating of a pulse; the dilating of the heart, by a
Diastole of pleasure, may be turned into a contraction by a Systole of sorrow:
So all worldly glory, wealth, or pleasures may well have that Inscription which
Plutarch tells us was upon the Temple of Isis, (...). We knock at every
Creatures door, but there is nothing within, no filling entertainment for the
Soul. The Father It is often in Homer, that God is the Father of Spirits,
(...), the Father of Angelical Beings, and of the Souls of men.
of Spirits has inspired into our immortal Souls an infinite appetite, that no
finite excellency, created comfort, or earthly thing can possibly fill. Gold,
Silver, Riches, Honors, Crowns, Kingdoms are no fit matter or adequate object
for such an immaterial and heaven-born Spirit to repose and feed upon with
delectation and contentment, but it would still be transported with a
passionate disquietness Non satiat animum nisi incorruptibilis gaudii vera and
certa aeternitas. S. August.
, until it fasten and fix upon an object infinite both in excellency and
endlesness, wherein is contained the whole latitude of Entity and Goodness, the
ever blessed and only adored Trinity. Which does convince men, That complete
happiness in this Life is a mere Speculation, and it is not to be had in the
valley of tears, but in the possession of superlative Felicities; let us
therefore besiege Heaven with our united forces, Mat. 11.12. Faith is
instrumentum ad scandendum coelum, and Prayer is clavis coeli, the Key that
opens the Cabinet where the Jewel lies, no other Artillery but this can batter
the Citadel of the great King, for Heaven it self cannot be proof against
Petitions often darted toward it, but the violen^^ will take it by force.
Faith and Prayer, and raise such batteries against Gods gates, that we may
break open those everlasting doors, and take the Treasures of Eternity. Livy
tells us, That the Gauls, when they had tasted the Wines of Italy, were so much
taken with the pleasantness and lusciousness of them, that they would not after
rest contented with a bare Commerce and Trade thither, but fixed their
resolutions by Conquest to get possession of the Land that brought it forth.
Thus the Antepasts of Glory do but provoke the desires, and erect the appetite
of the believing Soul: he is so far from being satisfied by foretastes or
comfortable intercourse, which it enjoys in part with the blessed Trinity, by
the Word, Sacraments, and other holy Ordinances, that they do but augment his
thirst after a plenary fruition out of the during Well-springs of Life and
Immortality; therefore his resolves are by a holy violence and conquest to get
a possession in that spiritual Canaan from whence these Grapes are brought as
Prelibations, that he may drink of that Wine of the Kingdom, and of those
Rivers of pleasure: Whom have I besides thee? Thou, O God, do far surpass all
the contents of Israel, as light does pitched darkness, thou art the joy of my
heart, and my portion for ever; aim then at delights which transport Souls,
ravish Angels, and force Seraphims into ecstasies.

Thirdly, Quis mihi? Who is for me? Who pleads my cause in Heaven? not any
Saint or Angel, nor yet the Holy Virgin The Church of Rome gives (...) to
Saints in Heaven, (...) more Worship to the B. Virgin: But the Church of
England, (...). For the glory of religious Worship is not to be given to any
Saint or Angel, though never so blessed and glorious. S. John falling at the
feet of the holy Angel, with an intent to worship him, Rev. 22.8, 9. met with a
timely prohibition, (...), See thou do it not: if that Spirit no less humble
than glorious bright, had not given him to know that he was hi^ fellow servants;
that honor belongs to our Master only, and not to me; worship God. Here let us
remember those excellent words of S. Austin, Tutius and jucundius loquar ad
meum Jesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum Spirituum Dei; I can speak safer and more
pleasantly, or cheerfully, to my Lord Jesus, than to any of the Saints and
Spirits of God. If praying to Saints, or Angels, or the Holy Virgin had been a
useful piece of Christian devotion, that during above 4000 years that God had a
Church in the World, not one example (says the Reverend Dr. B. in his Missale
Romanum) is recorded in Scripture, of any Holy man, who ever called upon any
created Saint or Angel: And how is it like or possible, that the universal
Church in after times should learn either new ways toward Heaven, or new ways
of true help and comfort, which neither Patriarchs, nor Prophets, nor Apostles
ever taught or knew? As the Pagans took the Idea of their (...), Demonology
from the Scriptures account of the true Messiah; so in like manner the Papists
received the original Idea of their (...), Saint-worship from this Pagan
Demonology; as it is evident from 1 Timothy 4.1. (...), rarely demonstrated by
Mede, in a Treatise called, The Apostasy of the latter Times.
, but thou, O Lord. And do not some dote on Images Lactantius says in relation
to Images, Dubium non est, quin religio nulla sit, ubicunque simulacrum est:
Wherever an Image is (meaning for Worship) there is no Religion; for it robs
God of honor, who will not have his glory given to another, nor his praise to
graven Images, promulgated by his own holy Law. The Greek Church speaks
emphatically, We do not forbid Pictures, the Art is noble, (...) -- but their
adoration and worship we detest, as forbidden by the Holy Ghost in holy
Scripture, Hab. 2.18, 19. lest we should ignorantly adore Colors, Art, and the
Creature instead of our Creator. They worship the Creature (says S. Paul, Romans
1.25.) (...), besides the Creator, so it should be read: if we worship any
Creature besides God, worshipping so, as the worship of him becomes a part of
Religion, is a direct Superstition; therefore it is good reason, that the
Watchmen who stand upon the Lords Tower, and tell what of the night should
decry the darkness of Idolatry and Superstitition, and warn the people, that
they may neither be taken into the whirlpools of danger, nor carried down the
stream of ungodliness; but walk in the ways of Scripture and Christianity,
contending for that Faith which forbids all worship of Images.
with the Romanists, and others on Imaginations with Factionists, who fall into
the heat of contention, the fire of Schism. How few are in the right way of
Gods prescriptions? which is (...) the Lord our God is one Lord. Unity is
written in the high Court of Bliss in Letters of Glory, and ought it not to be
in golden Characters or capital Letters here below to be seen and read of all
men, and be set as a Copy for others to write after? Christians should live on
Earth as Angels do in Heaven, not disagreeing among themselves. Many that would
be looked upon as living stones in the spiritual building, go about to demolish
so fair a structure, by bringing into the Temple the noise of axes and hammers;
and when they may be sharers in the Communion of Saints, and bear a chief part
in that spiritual consort, put all out of tune by Separation and Division Vos
ergo quare sacrilega separatione, pacis vinculum diripuistis? August. lib. 2.
de Bapt. cont. Donat.
. O tell it not in Gath, they who are of the Ministration, and should be
Ringleaders in Obedience and Conformity, are become pernicious Nurseries of
Fanatic Rage, Sedition and Rebellion, Factionum and discordiarum Duces, as it
was said of the Syndicks of Geneva. The dangerous malady of Faction made S.
Chrysostom with such zeal and fervor declare against it, (...) -- I say and
protest (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. Hom. 11.
to make Schism in the Church is no less evil than to fall into Heresy. Behold
therefore how good and pleasant a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity? It calls to mind that rich Perfume and costly Ointment, even those
precious drops of love, which fell from the head of the first Being to the
skirts of inferior Entities. The windows of Heaven are open to us in a glorious
Light, teaching us how to demean our selves in a state of Conjunction, as
Members of the Catholic Church, not to be swelled with rage and fury, but big
with Charity and universal kindness to the whole World, heaping those coals of
Love, Blessing and Prayer on our Enemies heads; Mat. 5.44.
for a Christian is not to hate his Enemy, but at the same rate and expense he
loves his friend. Would you be revenged? there is no way to compass this design,
but by the contrary methods of compassion and affection. If we would justify
our wrath, courtesy must be the Executioner overcoming evil with good.
Christianity takes away all malice and hatred, revenge and cruelty out of men's
minds; it calms the temper, and fills them with kindness and good will, even to
their very enemies. And it is most certain, that living in Religion and Fear of
God, in Obedience to the King, in Charities and Duties of Communion with our
spiritual Pastors, Guides and Curates of the Soul, in Justice and Love with all
the World in their several proportions, we shall not fail of a happy End: 1 Timothy 4.8.
For Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come; but
without Piety Principibus ad salutem sola satis vera est pietas; absque illa
vero nihil est vel exercitus, vel Imperatoris sortitudo, vel apparatus
reliquus. Zoz. Eccles. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 1.
there is no internal comfort to be found in Conscience, nor external peace to
be looked for in the World, nor eternal happiness to be hoped for in Heaven.
There is no man indeed can expect the favor of God on the service of an
historical and verbal Our Religion consists not in words, but deeds, says
Justin.
Piety, or without conformity of our affections to his Law. Our Consciences
tell us, It is not a Theory to talk only, but to be, makes Christians, says
Ignatius.

The sum of Christian Religion is to imitate him whom thou worshippest, says
S. Augustine.

Ye know these things (says our Savior to his Disciples) happy are ye, if you
do them: here is knowing and doing, like the two Cherubims, turning both their
faces to the Mercy-seat of Blessedness.


That it is no better than Blasphemy to praise his Wisdom, if we are not
governed by it; or his Goodness, if we do not imitate it. It is profaneness and
affront to look obsequiously with eyes and hands lift up to God in our
Devotions, whom we scorn and revile in our lives and actions. It is the special
glory of our Religion, that it consists not in barren Speculations, or empty
Formalities, not in fansying curiously, or speaking zealously, or looking
demurely; but in really producing the sensible fruits Humilitas in
conversatione, stabilitas in fide, verecundia in verbis, in factis justitia, in
operibus misericordia, in moribus disciplina, injuriam facere non nosse, and
factam tolerare posse, cum fratribus pacem tenere, Deum toto cord diligere,
amare in illo quod Pater est, timere quod Deus est, Christo nihil omnino
praeponere, quia nec nobis ille quicquam praeposuit charitati ejus
inseparabiliter adhaerere -- Quando de ejus nomine and honor certamen est,
exhibere in sermon constantiam, qua confitemur: in quaestione fiduciam, qua
congredimur: in morte patientiam, qua coronamur. Hoc est cohaeredem Christi
velle esse; hoc est praeceptum Dei facere; hoc est voluntatem Patris adimplere.
S. Cyprian de Orat. Domin.
of goodness. Religion, wherever it is truly planted, is certainly the
greatest obligation upon Conscience to all Civil Offices and Moral Duties,
which are the great bands of peace and unity among men; for Christianity in the
love and practice of it, is a Principle of truth and fidelity, of sobriety and
discretion, of humility and condescension, of pity and forgiveness. It teaches
us kindness and humanity, which are apt to subdue the most rugged dispositions,
and obliges the hearts and affections of mankind to the service of one another,
removing the occasions of passion and displeasure, corrects irregularities, and
mortifies all those lusts which are the cause of enmity and division. The
Christian Religion (says our worthy Diocesan in his Tracts Bish. of Win. in
his Sermon on the 5th of November. before the King, page 15.
) truly so called, is so far from being a cause of commotion or disturbance in
Kingdoms and States; that where the Christian Religion is truly taught and
truly practiced, it would be impossible there should be any dissension or
discord, any open Rebellion, or privy Conspiracy in a State Fulgentius says,
That no kind of Sedition can stand with Religion, cum pro nostra fide libere
respondemus, etc. When we answer freely for our profession, we ought not to be
taxed with the least suspicion of disobedience or contumely, seeing we are not
unmindful of the Regal Dignity, and do know, that we must fear God, and honor
the King, according to the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.17.
or Kingdom: because all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and all the
Precepts of Christian practice, tend unto peace. Charity, Love and Peace are a
sacred Trinity, and the great Characters of Christ's Disciples, though many in
this degenerate Age are Jews in Christian habit, not admitting Christ a Being
in their hearts, living in direct contrariety to his Life and Doctrine by
Irreligion and Atheism, and had they a power answerable to their wills, would
un-deifie their Creator. And if his Mercy were not as infinite as his Majesty,
his provoked Sovereignty might in a moment reduce them into their first
Nothing: Do they not call Christ their King by the same kind of Irony by which
the Jews called him theirs, when platting a Crown upon his head, and putting
upon him a Purple Robe, they bow their knees, and cry, Hail, King of the Jews?
Joh. 19.2, 3.
They cut down branches and spread them in the way, singing, Hosanna to the Son
of David, when they part his garments, and for his vesture cast Lots. And
whatever dress they put on, display them to be a spurious brood within the
pale, but no true Sons of the Church; were they so, their looks would not speak
smiles, whilst storms did surge in their breasts, who about the froth of their
own brains dare rent the peace and tranquillity of it, and war for the aerie
projections of their giddied heads, as if Heaven and Earth were little enough
to be mingled in the quarrel, tearing the seamless Coat of the holy Jesus in
pieces, causing Divisions and Schisms, that our holy Mother the Church is
forced to utter her unwelcome voice, (...), as Caesar said to Brutus, What thou
my Son? But we are of a strange disposition, we use not to regard the Sun or
Moon till we see them in Eclipse, Luna non aspicimus nisi laborante, says
Seneca. And that course of Aristotle with his Auditors best suits with our
Natures, before we are enamored with this holy concord, we must be acquainted
with its opposite vices It is a Rule in Logic, Contraria juxta se posita magis
elucescunt.
. And a little knowledge in Judicial Astrology will serve the turn to predict
the ill effects of the Serpents teeth division. An easy Observation can
foresee and foretell the sad Events of excentrick Motions and intestine Wars.
Peace and Unity, like light and fruitful showers, descend from above, from
Heaven, from God; but strifes and dissentions, like tempestuous Vapors and
fiery Exhalations, come from the Earth, from the devilish hearts, designs and
practices of men. The Orator said well, (...). Any rash hand or furious head
may inflict a wound, or kindle a fire, but it is God alone who can heal up the
breaches of a Church or State. Private grudges and contentions (like several
Cards in a Map, whose Lines are drawn infinitely crossing, cut and thwart each
other) must needs show us the way to public calamity. When humane Societies
become Cannibals to one another, the bands of love, which hold Mankind
together, must necessarily be dissolved, and we cannot but behold a very sad
Landscape of horror and confusion, because animosities and divisions feed on
envy and malice so long, till they break forth into a consuming fire, in ruin
and desolation by an open Hostility. The Earth grows wild and becomes a great
Forest of savage and cruel Monsters, and Mankind turns Beasts of prey one
toward another. When our united Force should encounter Babylon the common
Enemy Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda trophaeis. Lucan.
, we weaken our selves like those ancient Romans by mutual dissentions, and
perish by our own oppositions. If Christians would but take the Moralists
counsel, (...), to spend and derive their malice some other way; for many had
rather employ their time in picking and feeding quarrels in the Church at home,
than advance the unity of the Faith abroad; and how can any expect security
from their enemies, while they are at variance thus with themselves? Do any
hope to escape the fury of Aliens, while they are ready to sheath their Swords
in each others bowels? Ephesians. 4.3.
S. Paul, that great Patriot of Religion, and glorious Angel upon Earth,
persuades all to keep (...), the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. And
if he has but reason enough to make him a man, and so much Religion as will
name him Christian, I doubt not but he will hearken to S. Peter's advice, 1 Pet.
3.11.
to seek peace and ensue it: And will follow that which makes for peace, as S.
Paul would have us; Romans 14.19.
for whether it be a security from open Invasions, or an immunity from
homebred Oppositions, it is dulce nomen pacis, even to them that know no more
of it besides its name. The word (...) is a comprehensive term, and signifies
all prosperity or outward happiness in the Hebrew style; or (...) peace from
(...) to knit, being as 'twere the tie of men's affections; in either of these
respects, it is a thing delightful, under any notion it is amiable and lovely,
(...), etc. Nazianzen. It is a kind of sweet, divine and heavenly concent,
harmony or beauty of things subordinate one to another. In the economy of
Nature unity or peace is the combination of Creatures; by symbolical qualities
so contempered and disposed by the will and pleasure of the All-wise Creator,
that all agree to a perfect harmony of the Universe to make up one entire body,
the World. In the lesser Worlds of mixed Bodies, peace or unity is the equal
balance, or (...) due moderation and temper of humors and parts, which keep
their true place and proportion; Qua quodlibet corpus non minus appetit
unitatem suam quam Entitatem; therefore it preserves Unity as its Being. In the
Political World the State, peace or unity is the settling and due ordering of
things by just Laws of Government, so that Laws and Government are the Charter
of our Lives and Liberty, the Pillar and Basis of States and Kingdoms, and
Cement of all Societies; for the whole design of Civil Power or Authority is to
procure the private and public happiness of Mankind, to preserve men in their
Rights, against the insolent Usurpations and Outrages of murders, perjuries,
fraud and violence, and such like misdemeanors as would invade the World with
Anarchy and disorder, and bring the Politic Body to confusion. There is no one
thing, Religion excepted, that more secures and adorns the State than Justice
Jus and aequitas vincula civitatum. Cic. Parad.
does. It is both Columna and Corona Reipublicae (says a Reverend Father of
the Church) a prop to make it subsist firm in it self, Pietas and justitia duo
sulcra Reipub. columnae regni. Vbi non est pudor, nec cura juris, sanctitas,
pietas, fides, instabile regnum est. As is well observed by the Tragedian.
and as a Crown to render it glorious in the eyes of others. Truth, Order and
Justice are the only foundations of Peace and Unity in Church and State. In the
rational World as men, (who are (...), rational and sociable Creatures) Unity
is the conjunction of every man's powers and faculties in himself composing one
individual inclination, and then concurring to a general union of wills and
affections; for Truth is but one, as the Center, and draws all minds to an
unity which tend to it. In the spiritual World, as Christians, the Church is
not a name of division, but of unity and concord Ibi non est Ecclesia, ubi non
est unanimitas. Erasm. Paraph. in Act. 1.
, being conjoined together in one Communion and Fellowship in the mystical Body
of Christ. And we cannot be joined to Christ our Head, except we be glued with
charity one to another. For he that is not of this Unity, is not of the Church
of Christ, which is a Congregation or Unity together, and not a Division. The
Churches unity, which is by one Spirit from one Head, is but one in all: and
though many Members, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
yet but one Body. As Gregory Gregor. Mor. l. 19. c. 14.
speaks, Sancta Ecclesia sic consistit in unitate fidelium, sicut corpus
nostrum unitum est compage membrorum. In the structure of the natural Body all
its parts conspire for the good and benefit of the whole. There Is such a
Symmetry and proportion, as that the Members are joined by Nerves, Veins,
Arteries and Ligaments to their Head, from whence they receive strength and
sensation, and by virtue of this union to the Head, retain a Fellowship and
Community among themselves: So it is in the Body Politic, the King's Majesty
the Golden Head of our Land, the Honorable Council the Eyes of it, the Nobles,
Lords and Barons the Shields and Shoulders thereof, the Reverend Bishops and
Clergy the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel the Tongues of the Land, the Judges
(those grave Sages) the Hands of our Land for the Execution of Justice, the
flower of our Gentry and Commons the Feet of our Land, Head, Eyes, Tongues,
Shoulders, Hands, Feet: all, even all should concur for the general good and
public safety, and in both for Gods Glory and Worship, that we may lead
peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and honesty, because peace is the
foundation of happiness, and luster of any Government, and the fiercest Enemy
of peace is dissension in Religion; therefore unanimity is a work worthy of
every ones best endeavors, and of absolute necessity to the (...), the been
esse of the Church, it is the Life and Soul of it; Ecclesia nomen est consensus
and concordiae. And that multiplication of Unities, Ephesians. 4.6.
one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
us all, declare that we should be all of one mind in the Lord, all keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. It is a good thing when Unity and
Concord, Peace and Religion go hand in hand, two gentle Companions as full of
love as they are of innocence; and it is a great pity, that two of so near
alliance should suffer ever an injury of a Divorce, examine their descent, the
root of both signifies to bind. Religion is a bond between God and man. Peace
is a tie between man and man, Christian and Christian. And one would think the
very name of Christian should have a greater efficacy and power to still and
suppress disorders in the Church, than that of Quirites was presently to hush
and allay the commotions in Caesar's Army; because the Church is a spiritual
Building made up of Souls, cemented with love, (...), as S. Chrysostom speaks:
It is a Body compact and knit together in one and the same Orthodoxal Verity,
which was once given to the Saints in the holy Apostles days, and in all
Substantials maintained by the holy primitive Fathers, for which we ought, as
S. Jude tell us, (...), to contend earnestly, even all that own and profess
the same Faith in sincerity. The irrational prejudice of many Schismatical
Sectaries against the present Discipline would soon be removed, if they do
impartially weigh the purity and simplicity of the Doctrine of the Church of
England. A Church that teaches no other Doctrine but what Christ and his
Apostles delivered, derives none of its Principles from the impure Fountain of
vain and uncertain Tradition; but a sure word of Prophecy is that Spring that
sends forth all her Doctrines: So that all her Articles, all the parts of her
Worship, all her Canons and Constitutions are by derivation pure and holy. Add
unto this the innocence and decency of her Ceremonies, the regularity and
Decorum in her Offices and Administrations, the integrity and candor of her
Manners and Principles. It holds no Tenets, nor teaches Lib. Can. discip. Eccl.
Angl. and injunct. Regin. Eliz. Anno Domin. 1571. Can. de Concionatoribus.
any thing pernicious to Salvation, or dissentaneous to the rule of Faith, in
purity of life and holiness of conversation, every way consonant to the
Doctrine and Discipline of primitive times in the first and purest Ages of the
Church. And what Faith can be the foundation of a more solid peace, the surer
Ligaments of Catholic Communion, or the firmer Basis of a holy Life, and of
the hopes of Heaven hereafter, than the measures which the holy primitive
Church did hold, and we after them? Therefore we may conclude the Religion of
our Church certainly Primitive and Apostolic, and the best Transcript and
Original Copy of Christianity that is left in the World. And there needs no
better demonstration for bringing of men into the unity of Faith, and the
knowledge of the Son of God, or establishing a Community among us, than purity
of Doctrine and of Worship in the Service of God by Prayers The Liturgy of the
Church of England, or public Form of Divine Worship, though contemned and
depraved by its malicious Adversaries (out of a Spirit of contradiction and
singularity, who do preach or speak perverse things against the Discipline and
Government of our Church, out of their own Fanatical asseverations, (...),
says S. Basil, and the novel imaginations of their own brains) yet it is
notwithstanding religious and holy, and recommends to us the wisdom and
simplicity, purity and spirituality of Christian devotion. It is a compound of
Texts of Scripture, exhortations to repentance, Psalms, Hymns, Doxologies,
Lessons and Creeds. Forms for the Administrations of the holy Sacraments,
Comminations against impenitent sinners, all mixed and diversified with great
care to quicken attention, and stir up devotion.
, Praises and Sacramental Celebrations, which are the great characters and
confirmation of true Christians Communion with the blessed and glorious
Trinity, with God, with their Savior, and the holy Spirit, and by the Grace of
these with one another; for the holy Word of God, the Scripture of the Old and
New Testament which stream from the Fountain of our Savior, is the only
Standard The Authority of the holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed
and obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any man or Church, but wholly
upon God, 2 Pet. 1.19, 21. 2 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. (who is
Truth it self) the Author thereof, and consequently the Supreme Judge by which
all Controversies of Religion are to be determined, and all Decrees of
Councils, Opinions of ancient Writers, Doctrines of men, and private Spirits
are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest, can be no other but
the holy Spirit in the Scripture, Mat. 21.29, 31. Ephesians. 2.20. with Acts 28.25.
of true Religion both in Doctrine and Devotion, the foundations of Faith, and
the superstructures of Worship, by an humble obedience, holy fervency, and
unanimous harmony. For a sweet Chorus of well-tuned affections will cause the
goodly Fabric of the Church to go up with the voice of Eucharist, Acts 2.46,
47. shoutings and acclamations of joy, till it comes to the (...) of eternal
happiness and top of its spiritual glory. And there is no outward Conservative
of Ecclesiastical or Civil peace comparable to that of united Religion, says a
Reverend Prelate, whose Orb or Sphere is true Doctrine, its Center holy
Devotion, and its Circumference good Government, which Blessing we enjoy by
Divine Providence under our pious and religious Sovereign King Charles, for
which all good Subjects and Loyal Protestants say, O King, live for ever. God
grant Sedition may become a stranger in the Kingdom, and England be an object
of emulation of all foreign States in the admiration of her glory, and the
Protestant and Reformed Religion become the praise of the whole Earth in an
universal agreement in the public Worship of Almighty God. Nothing better
suits with Christianity, nothing more graces it, being like those good people
in the Acts, Chap. 4.32.
of one mind, and one Soul. To oblige us to this godly union and concord,
arguments may be drawn from the alliance of humane Nature, and bands of a
spiritual Consanguinity. First, we all sprung from one Original, Genesis 3.20.
one Blood derived through several Channels, Acts 17.26.
one substance by miraculous efficacy of the Divine Benediction multiplied or
dilated into several times and places. We are all fashioned (...). Arist.

(...). Greg. Naz.


after the likeness of our Maker, bearing the impresses of the Almighty; for
the Soul is (...), a branch of a Deity. We all conspire in the same essential
Ingredients, being of one Composition Cogita istum, quem servum tuum vocas, ex
eisdem ortum seminibus, eodem frui coelo, aeque spirare, aeque vivere, aeque
mori. Senec.
and elementary constitution; knowing therefore we all came from one, we should
love as one Dilectio sola discernit inter filios Dei, and filios Diaboli. Aug.
1. Joh. Tract. 5.
, Vt dum cognoscerent se ab uno esse omnes, se quasi unum amarent, says the
Master of the Sentences. It is a heavenly Mandate, the fruit of the Spirit is
Love (...). Greg. N^z.
, wherein the Image of God, the power of Godliness, and the Spirit of
Christianity truly do consist Vbi odium, ibi charitas esse non potest; ubi
charitas abest, ibi nil boni. Aug. super Matthew.
. Love as Brethren, says S. Peter; and Logic can teach us, Relationes non
egent locali contactu, Relative respects need not the union and touch of
parties, then as many as are scattered in the remotest Regions, whether
massacred in the Indies, whether strappado'd among Turks, or in that Hell of
Torments, the Inquisition of the Spaniards, though they live in as diverse
places as persecutions; yet if they conform with us in Orthodox Profession, no
distance can hinder their being our Brethren, neither can their mean estates
take away our tie of reference, (...), it is not the place, Coelum non animum
mutat, qui trans mare currit.
but quality of the persons that causes the unity of their affections. Though
Joseph be sold into Egypt, and there lie manacled in the injurious Prison, yet
he cease not to be Jacobs Son. Jonathan and David were still Brethren, and
faithfully united, when one was in the Cave, and the other at Court. Methinks
Abraham's prudential motive to Lot, to win him to a Treaty of Peace, is an
argument to the Christian World, Genesis 13.
we are Brethren. Strifes and Emulations might quickly be composed, if we did
not forget the alliance of humane Nature. Though sometimes the fiercest are
united, and show themselves Brethren; but it is with Jacobs addition, Simeon
and Levi, Brethren in iniquity. The Prince which rules in the Air makes use of
every stratagem to enlarge the Territories of his Kingdom, and he does it upon
this consideration, his time is as short as his Chain; therefore to be in
readiness at all hands, he has his unitatem farmorosorum, as S. Bernard calls
them, a Confederacy of zealous Accomplices that vow their furtherance at every
display of the Devils Ensign. Satan has enjoyed in all Ages the unhappy
benefit of such peremptory assistants. Were that Kingdom of Darkness once
divided, our Savior assures us, it could not long stand; therefore the Head
studies to preserve unity in the Members. These are that Combination in Gregory
Nazianzen, (...).
whose agreeing malice knits their hearts, and their conjoined hearts unite
their voice. If infernal Spirits are provident to maintain outward peace, where
there is no order, but all confusion, lest their Kingdom should come to an end,
this consideration should engage the most unnatural opposites of this Land (who
are Protestants bred up in the Principles of the same Religion, and walking in
the House of God as Friends) not to be teez'd on to as deadly feuds, as between
a Jew and Samaritan. They are most odious Christians who put on the glory of an
Angel in outward profession, that they may play the Devil more unobservedly;
therefore let us labor to bring as much wisdom and courage to confront, as the
Devils Agents cunning and malice to undermine the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and
glory of Christianity; then for shame, let us be, if not Christians, yet men;
if not ruled by Religion, yet persuaded by Reason, that we had need, as S. Paul
exhorts us, (...), to strive together with a full concurrence of all our might,
and combine in a holy Faction to withstand the fury of their united opposition.
For how can it choose but disparage our Cause, if jarring discord disperse our
Forces? And certainly while we divide our selves, our Enemies in the mean time
divide our spoils. Bodin. Rep. 4.
It Is registered in Story, That Mars had in old Rome certain Priests called
Salii, it was their office when Nations were together by the ears, to cast fire
among them and confound their Armies; therefore Antiquity named them (...),
Fire-bearing Priests. Who knows not that our modern Rome is as well furnished
for such a Stratagem? and that this fire might be Vestal, and never go out: she
has bequeathed unto the World a Society of Priests, whom she intends for
State-Salamanders, that should live in the fire of other men's contentions, and
by a slight of hand bandy it from one Kingdom to another. They carry with them
fierce Bulls, such as the Poet does mention, Vulcanum naribus afflant, and
breathe or speak nothing but in the fiery accents of desolation; of which
temper the Jesuitick Spirit seems to be which deceives the Nations with the Cup
of Error, setting out Truths in a painted and meretricious Bravery, nay
blending them with humane inventions, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of men. And there can be no greater Sacrilege in the World, than to put our
own Image upon the Ordinances of Christ.

(1.) Our Lord and Savior has commanded us to read the holy Scripture, Joh.
5.39.
and the Holy Ghost blesses them that delight therein. Psalm. 1.
But the Roman Church forbids the reading thereof to the Laity in the vulgar
Tongue Haeresin ^sse, si quis dicit necessarium esse ut Scripturae in vulgares
linguas convertantur. Sander. Visib. Monar. lib. 7.

Credo institutum hoc a Diabolo esse inventum. Peers. de Trad. part. 1. assert.
3. page 47.


, which, if they should be permitted the perusal of, would easily discover
their new Articles of Faith to be erroneous, their Image Worship to be
Idolatry, and their not erring Bishop to be a grand Deceiver. Pope Clement
VIII. in the Index of prohibited Books says, That the Bible published in vulgar
Tongues ought not to be read and retained, no not so much as a Compendium or
History of it. And Bellarmine says, That it is not necessary to Salvation to
believe that there are any Scriptures at all written. This is to blot out the
Canonical Scripture, and give us Apocrypha in the room of it, to make the
Divine Oracles to speak to the patronizing of their own interest, and would
suborn God for a Witness to their Errors. As Caligula dealt with Jupiters
Statue, taking off the head of it, and placing his own in its stead: So they
substitute the devices of their own Brain in the place of Gods Word, putting
that most excellent Candle under a bushel, to make the Decretals of the Pope as
authentic as holy Writ, and wholly rely on the Dictates of the Priest, setting
more by an old Tradition, than a Divine Precept. Thus these insolent Usurpers,
who seek not so much to oppress the bodies, as exercise their Tyranny over the
Souls of men, and pitifully inthral them to everlasting servitude. As the
wicked Shepherds of Midian would drive their Neighbors flocks from the
watering Troughs, and the Philistims would stop the Patriarchs Wells: So the
Emissaries of Rome use all Arts to keep the people from the use of the
Scriptures, the Wells of Salvation, hindering them from instruction. It is a
great glory to the Church of England, that the Bible The difference between
Pope Sixtus the Fifth, and Clement the Eighth, the one commanding one Bible
only to be used, the other another, under their Curses; whereby the Romish
Partisans are involved into a miserable necessity, being constrained not to
read any, or be liable to the Anathema of Pope Clement, if they use Sixtus's
Bible; or of Sixtus, if they use Clement's.
, which was shut up in an unknown Tongue from the generality, is now in our own
Mother Tongue, and Language of the Kingdom. And what S. Chrysostom spoke of
old concerning the British Islands, is verified at this day, every where a man
may hear the people discoursing of the Scriptures, strangers indeed in speech,
yet of the Household of Faith, in tongue Barbarians, but in conversation drawing
nearer unto Saints; for the Christian Laity in the Britannick Church (which is
not permitted in the Roman) walk in the most clear Light of the Gospel, and
drink their fill of the pure streams of the water of Life in Scripture It is a
weighty Saying of Tertullian, Adoro pl nit^dinem Scripturarum; for all
Scripture was given by Divine Inspiration. 2 Timothy 3.16. and profitable (...) for
doctrine, (...) for redargution, (...) for correction, (...) for instruction,
that the man of God may be perfected unto all good works.
. And we all have not only liberty by Proclamation to enjoy it, but several
Acts of Parliament to confirm our use of it, Religion and Liturgy. God grant
that which is so great a mercy and happiness to us, we make it not our misery,
by turning the cause of our thanksgiving into murmuring, repining and
dissatisfaction; for if ever Times were under cross and unluckly Aspects, if
ever there were a public Spirit of Frenzy and mischief in the World,
certainly this Lot is fallen upon ours, in contending for Mint and Cummin,
disagreeing in the lesser Disunanimity and disuniformity are a breaking not
only of the King's but of God's and the Churches peace. It causes distraction,
hinders devotion, and indisposeth men unto Religion, and clouds the
understanding in the disquisition of Truth, and consequently hinders that
blessed light which clarifies the Soul of man, and predisposeth it unto the
brightness of eternal felicity.
only, when they all agree in the substance and in the greater as matters of
Faith and Articles of Belief, viz. to believe in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, one Divinity of equal Majesty in the holy Trinity. It were to be
heartily wished, that in matters that truly concern so much the glory of God,
the honor, peace and welfare of the Church and Commonweal, that all
prejudicate Opinions (varnished with plausible error through pride and
ambition) might be laid aside, and in the zeal of affection not forget our
Duty, and the Unity that should be among Christians.

(2.) Christ administered to his Disciples both Species of the Sacrament of
Eucharist, and his Command stands in Sacred Record, Mat. 26.27.
(...), drink ye all of this, Mark 14.23.
and they all drank of it, says the Canon of Scripture. Christ ordains it, but
the Church of Rome forbids it, as if they were wiser than our Savior, setting
their mouths against Heaven, and correcting his holy and divine Institution.
For in the Council of Constance Et similiter. quod licet in primitiva Ecclesia
hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub utraque specie; tamen haec
consuetudo ad evitandum aliqua pericula and scandala, est rationabiliter
introducta, quod a conficientibus, sub utraque specie, and Laicis tantummodo
sub una specie suscipiatur, etc. Constable. Sess. 13.
, they altered the Testamental Legacy and Ordinance of Christ himself, in
taking away from the Laics the Chalice of the Sacrament, the holy Symbol of
Christ's Blood, styled by the Apostle, (...), the Cup of Blessing; for the
Eucharistical Elements are not Theories or empty Signs, but Seals to confirm,
and Instruments to exhibit Christ with all the benefits of his Passion, and
blessings of Heaven unto every believing Christian; therefore the Romish Church
does great injury to Christendom in her half Communion, the deprivation of the
Chalice. Quomodo Testamentum nuncupant, qui mortem Testatoris negant? Quomodo
libertatem usurpant, qui negant sanguinem, quo redempti sunt? Ambros. ep. 73.
lib. 9.
S. Ambrose says, That he who receives the Mystery otherwise than Christ
appointed, i. e. in one kind, when Christ has appointed two, is unworthy of the
Lord, and he cannot have devotion. Its innovation and novelty is clearly
manifest, if we look into the Glass of Antiquity, but from the beginning it was
not so Mat. 19.8. See the Reverend Dr. Pierce in his primitive Rule of
Reformation.
(as our Savior said of Divorce) which is a sufficient confutation. Cassander
Ecclesia Orientalis in hunc usque diem; Occidentalis vero sive Romana mill
amplius annis continuis, non aliter quam sub duplici specie in conventu
Ecclesiae Sacramentum hoc Dominici corporis and sanguinis administrasse,
legitur, etc. Consult. de utraque Spec.
says, That the Eastern Church to this day, and the Western or Roman Church,
for more than a thousand years, did exhibit the Sacrament in both Elements to
all the Members of Christ's Church. S. Chrysostom, (...), one Body and one Cup
is given to all.

Pope Calixtus Peracta consecratione, omnes communicent, qui noluerint
Ecclesiasticis carere hominibus; sic autem etiam Apostoli statuerunt, and
Sancta Romana tenet Ecclesia. De Consecrat. did. cap. 2.
speaks fully, When the Consecration is finished, let all communicate that will
not be thrust from the bounds of the Church; for so the Apostles appointed, and
so the holy Church of Rome does hold.

Pope Gelasius Comperimus quod quidam, sumpta tantummodo corporis sacri
portione, a calice sacri cruoris abstineant: Qui (pro culdubio, quoniam nescio
qua superstitione docentur astricti) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur, quod divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi non sit
sacrilegio. De Cons. did. cap. 2.
, Some taking (says he) a portion only of the sacred Body, do abstain from the
Chalice of the sacred Blood. I know not by what Superstition they are obliged,
let them either receive the entire Sacrament, or be kept from the whole,
because the division of one and the same Mystery cannot be without grand
Sacrilege. Nothing can be a greater cause of wonder and amazement in the
consideration of it, than that the Church of Rome should seek to obscure the
light of Truth, shining as clearly as the Sun in its Meridian beauty and
splendour, arrogating to themselves a Dominion over our Faith, and introducing
such Doctrines and Practices as are contrary to the Rules of Christ, and his
Apostles, and the purest Ages of the Church. As Lawgivers, setting themselves
down in S. Peter's Chair, as they pretend, and magisterially decree Si quis
dixerit ex Dei praecepto, vel de necessitate salutis esse, omnes and singulos
Christi fideles, utramque speciem Eucharistiae sumere debere, Anathema sit.
Council. Trident. Sess. 5. Can 1.
Laws and Constitutions diametrically opposite to the Divine command, and
Christ's holy Institution. When the Lamp of Reason is darkened and obscured, the
Soul presently embraces a cloud, and courts a shadow, the blackest errors and
most palpable wickedness must needs cover the face of those Souls that start
back and apostatize from their God, and their Reason. To preserve therefore its
luster and integrity in the memories of all those who bear any true love to
substantial Truth, the ancient Light established and received in the Church of
England, is a secure Guide to direct us, not to be weary of old Truths,
forsaking the ancient paths to espouse new and fond Opinions; that we neither
incline to the cunningly composed Charms of Popery on one hand, or ignorant The
Separatists and Papists have been playing at Tennis, and the Government and
Hierarchy are the Balls they toss. The Separatist strikes them into the Popes
Hazard, calling them Antichristian Prelacy. The Papist with vehemence rackets
them back again as Schismatical (but the Roman Church are the Schismatics in
renouncing al^ communion with all Christian Churches in the World, except their
o^^^) and i^l it is with us, which soever wins the game. The one b^^^^s down
the wall of Sion, by disturbing the peace of the Reformed C^^^ch; ^he other
builds up the ruins of Babylon in superstitious Vanit^^ And they are so fast
linked and tied together (like Samsons F^^^^) with Firebrarnds of Sedition,
that if they be not quenched by th^^^ w^r of Majesty, they cannot choose (when
the means are fitted to th^^ Plot) but s^t the Church on fire, and the State in
an uproar.
Sectarians, and men of unstable minds on the other, who crumbling into
Conventicles, are ready to join with every Enthusiastic Sect, and so making
Gods Israel to become a speckled Bird of several colors, Jer. 12.9.
of all varieties of Religion. S. Paul has a term for them, 2 Timothy 3.8.
if they like it, (...), men of sick brains, as well as of corrupt minds. And
such is the arrogant disposition of some transported humors, being under the
torrid Zone of unruly passion, that rather than they will acknowledge their
errors (though never so apparent) the very State and Law it self must be
condemned, and condescend to their distempers, being led more by their own
pleasing Fancies than right Reason, or the sacred Rules of Piety and Truth, who
have labored to sow the Tares of Dissension in the Vineyard of the Lord,
disquieting the Unity of Gods Church. Division is the only musical note that
sounds harmoniously in the ears of our Zimries. And it is a Truth undeniable,
That these later times have produced a doleful Scene of various transactions,
and consequently discovered and brought to light the unparalleled designs and
execrable intentions of Fanatical zeal, or Democratical fury; for the
Dissenters in this Age have conspired together to untye the knot of Christian
Charity, and produce an unhappy Schism in the Church; what else mean those
strange whispers, mysterious workings, and grand plotting, who would not only
uncover the roof, and take down the Pyramids and Battlements of venerable
Episcopacy, but like the rough Sons of Edom, raze it even to the ground? And
under hypocritical disguises contrive the sad prodigy of Treason, whereby we
see that Apostates to Atheism, and Revolters to Schism are Monsters of
ingratitude, or Fiends incarnate (who could imagine mischief against so much
Mercy, and sin against so great Goodness) requiting the Protection of a
gracious Prince with traitorous Machinations See His Majesty's Declaration
concerning the Treasonable Conspiracy against his Sacred Person and Government,
read in all Churches and Chapels within this Kingdom, September. 9. 1683.
, and under the mask and specious pretenses of Religion bring to ruin the
Government of the Kingdom, as it is by Law established in Church and State.
Loyalty, like fresh and fragrant odours, breathes forth sweetness in the
nostrils of all those who hold Fidelity to the Scepter to be the best
cognizance for the Coat of a Subject. But for the ungodly Principles and bloody
Practices of implacable men and barbarous Miscreants plotting unnatural and
hellish Conspiracies against the Person, Crown, and Dignity of Sacred Majesty,
let them be as Oreb and Zeb, Zeba and Zalmana that perished, or else remain as
Pilate in the Creed a curse to all posterity. Discontented Pride has made more
Schismatics than Conscience; if this has slain its thousands, that has
killed its ten thousands. Many are zealously affected to Truth, but for want of
sound knowledge, or meek and humble hearts, they are full of violence, their
capacities are over-cast with a cloud of ignorance, that intercepts their view,
and blunts the point of the brightest ray their understanding sends forth to
discover any Error of the Church, but breaks out in a clamorous storm of
passion Clamoris plena doctrina Haereticorum, quae non in sensu, sed in
multiloquio and clamore versatur. S. Hieron.
. Here I may recite the words of S. Austin against the Letters of Petilian the
Donatist, changing Evangelium into Ecclesia quae mitius pertuli^ Regum flammas;
The Church better endured the flames of Tyrants, than the tongues of
Schismatics. Nam illis incendentibus unitas mansit, vobis loquentibus manner
non potuit; for while the^ burned, Unity remained; but while these rail, the
Church must needs be divided; for Schisms and Divisions set up the Kingdom of
Satan, the Prince and subtle Commander of the Air, the potent Adversary of
Mankind, who holds his Supremacy and Dominion by Variance and Enmity, and all
his Agents subordinate to him, Nihil spei nisi per discordias habent, as
Tacitus speaks. No Logic or Reason can batter down the (...), strong Holds of
prepossessed false Opinions, neither the determination of general Councils, nor
unanimous consent of Primitive Traditions; nay the Scripture it self must
strike Sail to their Judgments, as if the Oracle of the Word would only admit
of their corrupt Glosses and false Annotations, which Irenaeus Advers. Haeres.
l. 4. c. 43.
joins together, scindentes, and elatos, and sibi placentes, Schismatics,
proud Matter omnium Haereticorum superbia. Aug. de Genesis contr. Manich. l. 2. c.
8.
and self-pleasing men. This was one of the Originals of Arrius his cursed
Heresy, his pride and envy against Alexander the good Bishop of Alexandria, as
Theodoret Theodor. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 2.
reports. Pelagius also and his Associates, who though they did acknowledge the
name of Grace Gratiae vocabulo frangens invidiam, offensionemque declinans.
Aug. de Great. Christ. l. 1. c. 37.
, to decline envy, and avoid the curse of the great Council of Carthage, yet
still they did but shelter their proud Heresies under Equivocations and
Ambiguities. What store of this Coin is minted at Rome, to advance and support
the Grandeur and Greatness of the Papal Monarchy (who dams up the clear waters
of Antiquity The Reverend Bishop Tailor in his Disswasive from Popery, page
124. says, The Roman Emissaries endeavor to prevail amongst the ignorant and
prejudicate by boasting of Antiquity, and calling their Religion, the old
Religion, and the Catholic: So by insnaring others by ignorant words in which
is no truth, their Religion, as it distinguishes from the Religion of the
Church of England, being neither the old nor the Catholic Religion, but new
and superinduced by Arts known to all who with sincerity and diligence have
looked into their pretenses.
, and opens the sluice to the puddles of Novelty) is visible by Indulgences and
Pardons, consecrated Grains, and Prayers for the Dead. Pope Primus
indulgentiarum nundinas, primus in Purgatorium extendit indulgentias. Agrip. de
Vanit. Scientiarum, cap. 61.
Boniface VIII. (who lived in the Reign of King Edward the First of England)
was the first that instituted the Merchandise or Sale of Pardons, and extended
them to Purgatory; for the Doctrine of Purgatory is the Mother of Indulgences.
The vast Treasure issuing Sixtus the Fourth was wont to say, Papae non deerunt
pecuniae quamdiu ipsi manus erunt and calamus; The Pope could never want money
so long as his hand could hold a pen.
thence is solely possessed by the Pope, and no other Patriarch in the World.
It is a matter of mere interest and advantage, and if these Silver Shrines were
not, the Crafts-men of Rome would quickly fall. If there were no gain (says a
Reverend Prelate) to be reaped from them, their chief Champions would be
ashamed of the great Diana that they worship. When the Truth of God, and the
Death of Christ, the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Fire of Hell, the Souls of Men,
and Salvation of the World, shall be made basely serviceable and contributary
to the boundless pride and ambition of the Pontificality and See of Rome, who
seeks to abuse Antiquity, and to patronize their own Errors, subjecting
Religion into Maxims of humane Policy All their Policy tends to maintain their
archieved Majesty and Greatness, whereby his Holiness shall be estated not only
in the City of Rome, but also in the Seigniory of the whole West, not in
Spiritualibus only, as Vicarial Head, but also Lord Paramount in Temporalibus,
as Monarch of the Church, in having all power upon Earth at his will, and the
Crowns of Kings to stand or fall at his pleasure.
, and the ancient integrity of the Apostolic Faith into Innovations and a new
Belief, as Gregory Nazianzen Gregor. Nazian. Orat. in Arianos.
said of the Arians their refined Doctrines, mere Novelties, new-broach'd
Heresies. For at the Council of Trent they adjoined new Articles of Faith to
those twelve which the Apostles set down for a sufficient Summary of sound
Doctrine, whilst the Sacrifice of Mass, Corporeity of Presence, the Doctrine of
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, and the like, were
commanded to be embraced and received with the same pious affection and
reverence as the holy Scripture, under no less penalty than Damnation, and to
be believed for fear of Anathema.

O Roma Rome once the Emporium of the World, and Mart of Christian Faith, when
it enjoyed all the happiness this life is capable of, it grew exorbitant. That
State which seemed above foreign casualty, labored with its own happiness, and
from its height and glory found way to ebb again: Roma diu titubans variis
erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.

a Roma quantum mutata vetusta es?
Nunc caput es scelerum, quae caput orbis eras.
For a Nation or People to receive Christianity and true Faith from Christ
himself or the Apostles, matters nothing, unless they do still retain the same
Theological and Divine Principles. Some can talk over the series and descent of
all times, with such a perfumed breath, and richness of Language, as if they
were made with the first Adam, speak of the Dictates of the Patriarchs, and
Testimonies of the Prophets; but in vain do any boast they are descended from
Abraham, since he is not a Jew who is one outward in the flesh, bur inward in
the Spirit, as our Savior told the Pharisees vaunting of Antiquity, Joh. 8.
except they did the works of Abraham, and abide in the Truth. Truth then is
the Child of Time; and as there is Antiquity of Time, so also of Truth and
Doctrine. And so long as the Romish Church continued in the profession and
practice of Apostolical purity, i. e. of Faith and Doctrine which was once
given to the Saints, all other Christian Churches held Communion with her; for
the Church of Rome did not anciently, in former Ages, hold all these Doctrines
which now she owns. The ancient Church of Rome was but a Member of the
Catholic Church of God, of which Jesus Christ was Head: But the now Roman
Church does (at this day) what S. Augustine De Unit. Eccles. cap. 6.
told to the Donatists, enclose the Catholic Church within their own circuits,
and usurps it wholly to her self, of which the Pope is Head. And the Papacy
will have their Pope, by reason of the Kingdom of Christ, to be the Head and
King of the Church in ordine ad Spiritualia, and consequently the Supreme Civil
Power over the Monarchs of the Earth in ordine ad Temporalia, to be the Head
and King of the Church. Such a Church was never in Rome; for many hundred years
after our Savior, no Bishop Gregory Bishop of Rome: Ego fidenter dico, quia
quisquis se universalem Sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione s^a
Antichristum praecurrit. Pope Pelagius distinct. 99. Vniversalis autem nec
etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur. Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople: (...).
did assume Christ's Title to be the Head of the Church, till Boniface the
Third, who not contenting himself with his Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, and
fullness of Spiritual Power, but his towering Ambition aspires yet higher, and
with much contention obtained of the Rebel Phocas about the year 604. (who
murdered Maurice the Emperor) the Title of Universal. The Pope looking for
Primacy on Earth, is very unlike his heavenly Master, whose Vicar he pretends
to be. Christ paid Tribute unto Caesar; Luke 20.25.
but the Pope, that Prevaricator of the Apostolic See, exacts it from them,
and Caesar pays unto him. Our Savior washed his Disciples feet; but the Bishop
of Rome (in these days) with imaginary Supremacy causes the greatest Princes,
and mightiest Emperors do him Homage and swear Allegiance Clement the Fifth
called a Council at Vienna, An. 1311. in which it was ordained and decreed,
That the Emperor his Lord should give his Oath of Allegiance to the Pope; for
being not content with his Primacy, abused Religion into Policy; and casting
off all moderation, the Pope devoured the Emperor. Thus the Head of the Church
degenerated into a Monster, and in reaching at Temporal Sovereignty, he broke
the Spiritual Unity.
, contrary to the Divine Authority and Majesty of the Scripture, Let every Soul
be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. and to the King as Supreme, 1 Pet.
2.13. As Heathen Rome under the Emperors, Domitian and others, would be adored
as Gods, though never so impious: so Rome Christian falls under the (...) of
the Apostle, Sitting in the Temple of God as God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
and exalting himself above all that is called God Zacharias Papa ex
authoritate Sancti Petri Apostoli mandat populo Francorum, ut Pepinus qui
potestate Regia utebatur, etiam nominis dignitate frueretur. Ita Hildericus
ultimus Merovingorum, qui Francis imperabat, depositus est, and in monasterio
missus est. Marian. Scot. Hist. lib. 3.

Lambertus Danaeus in his Response to Bellarmine the great Master of
Controversy, contending that Childerick was lawfully deposed by Pope
Zacharias: Can Zachary (says he) have Authority in France, being a Stranger?
Can he depose the public Magistrate, being but a private person? (though he
were Bishop of Rome) or transfer that Principality to Pepin, that he has no
Right unto? and commit so many Sacriledges and Impieties, stealing from
Childerick, and giving to Pepin another man's Right? Authorizing Subjects to
violate their Oaths, which they had sworn to their King? Transposing Kingdoms
from one man to another, whereas it does only belong to God to depose Kings,
and dispose of Kingdoms? Thou may see (Bellarmine) how many outrages this
thy Zachary has committed. Resp. Danae. ad Bellar. lib. 2. cap. 17. page 316.


in a superlative Greatness, and that not of order and precedence only as to
Ecclesiastical Regency, stretching his Diocese over all Bishops and Churches in
the Christian World, but of absolute Authority, claiming universal Jurisdiction
in a Monarchi^al Superintendency or Regality over all Christendom, with a Power
to depose Kings, and dispose of Crowns and Kingdoms for the benefit of the
Church, is a Title only of Usurpation without any ground of Scripture or
Antiquity. First, Christ was no Temporal Monarch, but an Eternal King to rescue
us from the thraldom of sin, the sorcery of the flesh, and the Curse of the
Law. Christ was no earthly King, and left no Regal Power to S. Peter; therefore
the Pope can have no Civil Power or Temporal Dominion as the Vicegerent of
Christ, and consequently overturns and destroys the Doctrine of Supremacy. The
Lawgiver himself, even Ipse Ille, that bare rule in Heaven, the incarnate and
crucified Messiah, Joh. 12.36.
says, My Kingdom is not of this World. Whereas that Sect of Politicians, the
Romanists, turns the Kingdom of Christ into outward Pomp and Bravery, and they
to have the Managery and Government of it, as if the now See of Rome should be
known to be the most Christian Bishop, not in having with Christ no
Temporalties, but an absolute Sovereignty to depose Kings, and dispose of
Kingdoms, which is nothing less than a strange Usurpation; for the Son of God
did never impose such a hard duty and condition to Kings that were to become
Christians, as to forsake their Imperial Crowns and Diadems, except in their
hearts and affections, and in comparison of the Kingdom of God. O Eternal Word,
(...), Light of Truth, inspire the Universal Church with the Spirit of Truth,
Unity and Concord, and grant that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may
agree in the Truth of thy holy Word, and live in unity and godly love.
Secondly, View it in relation to the Apostles, who were the Patriarchs of the
Church. And the Evangelists make special mention of their Names, as those to
whom we owe great honor and veneration, being conversant with Christ, and
daily instructed by him, who continued with him unto his Passion and
Crucifixion; and after his Resurrection he applied himself especially to them,
to enable them for the high Mysteries of the Gospel, and service of the Church
by the reception of the Holy Ghost, Joh. 20.22, 23. Mat. 18.18.
and a power of binding and loosing sins. And Christ having founded his Church,
he left it in the hands of his Apostles; therefore let us look into this pure
stream of Antiquity, and primitive Age of the Church.

In the first Synod there is no prelation of one, or subordination of another,
but all the Apostles have equal vote and choice in the Substitution or Election
of Matthias. Acts 1.


In that other about Circumcision, all decree, send and judge alike, Acts 15.
It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us. By which it is evident, there is no
Preeminence or Superiority, but an Unity and Identity of Power, according to
that excellent Saying of S. Cyprian Hoc erant utique caeteri Apostoli, quod
fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis, sed exordium
ab unitate profici^citur. Lib. de Unit. Eccles.
, The other Apostles are the same that S. Peter was, to let us know, that they
and their Successors are pari authoritate, pari consortio, endowed with an
equal fellowship of honor and power.

The Apostles now considered in their Apostolical dignity, order of Priesthood,
and Authority of Preaching, the light will display it self, and chase away the
darkness from us.

(1.) In Apostolic Dignity then is no Principality by the Law of Christ; for
as they were all sent together, Mat. 10. Acts 2.
so they were all inspired at once, the cloven Tongues like as of fire sat on
each of them, and they were all filled with the (...) and gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which argues equality, and that they are all Fellow-equals in
Apostleship. Rev. 12.14.
The wall of the City, says S. John, had twelve founda^ions, and in them the
Names of the Lamb's twelve Apostles, therefore no Primacy or preeminence of
dignity, being all Foundations of Evangelical Doctrine, upon which the height
of the Ecclesiastical Edifice is raised, and Militant Church is built. They are
all Foundations and Rocks after Christ, because they were all chosen to preach
the Gospel, and plant the Faith in every part of the World. They were all
immediately instructed by Christ; they had all most ample and universal
Jurisdiction throughout the whole Empire of the Church; all endowed with an
equal Authority, as S. Cyprian expresses it, of honor and power, which beats
down the Rampire of defense, and shows the Fortress of folly of the Romanists
in their new erected Fort, in challenging a Scepter of Supremacy, and condemns
the arrogant Usurpation of the Sea of Rome, who will be (...), a Bishop in
another man's Diocese, and in appropriating that to himself, which is common to
him, says a Reverend Prelate, with all the Bishops of Christendom.

(2.) As to the Order of Priesthood, there is no Supremacy of power to one
above another in the College of the Apostles, because they could all equally
consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ. And the greatest favors to lapsed
Mankind are the Sacraments, where the visible corporeal Elements are the means
by Faith to convey unto us spiritual Graces; nay, the whole Treasure of Christ's
Merits, acquired on the Cross, are made truly ours by a due reception of the
blessed Eucharist; for the holy Sacraments are the pledge of Glory, and earnest
of Immortality, and the consecrated Symbols are the seeds of an eternal
Duration, springing up in us to Life eternal, nourishing our spirits with
Grace, which is but the Prologue of Glory. In the Divine Mysteries there is no
Superiority as to Consecration, it being not personal, but public, not proper
to S. Peter only, but common to all the Apostles, and consequently speaks an
equal fellowship of honor and power as to order of Priesthood.

(3.) As to the Authority of Preaching, the Commission is equal, Joh. 17.18.
As my Father sent me, so send I you, which may extend not only to Jurisdiction
and Ordination, but Apostolical preaching. Our Lord and Savior being to ascend
into Heaven, commanded his Apostles, saying, Go ye teach all Nations, Mat.
28.19.
baptizing them in the Name of the (Sacred Trinity) Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. This commandment they put in execution, and it was fulfilled, Romans 10.18.
Their sound went into all the Earth, and their words into the ends of the
World: S. Peter to the Jews, S. Paul to the Gentiles, no division or limitation
of Jurisdiction, but a distribution to all Provinces, for the more commodious
preaching of the Gospel. Those ancient Worthies that first propagated
Christianity, had neither Diocese nor Parish, but the wide World before them:
then, all planting the same Doctrine, every man had a care of all the Churches,
they went forth and preached every where, Mark 16.20.

Eusebius and other Ecclesiastical Historians give us the recital and
specification of the Nations and Countries. S. Peter preached in Judea,
Antioch, Galatia, Cappadocia, Pontus in Asia, Bithynia and Rome. S. Andrew in
Scythia, Europaea, in Epirus, Thracia and Achaia. S. James the Son of Zebedee
in Judea and Spain. S. John in Judea and Asia the less. S. James the Brother of
our Lord in Jerusalem. S. Philip in Scythia and Phrygia. S. Bartholomew in the
farther India and Armenia the great. S. Matthew in Ethiopia. S. Thomas to the
Parthians, Medes, Persians, Brachmans, Hyrcanians, Bactrians and Indians. S.
Simon in Mesopotamia. S. Matthias in the higher Aethiopia. And S. Paul and
Barnabas in many Countries of Europe and Asia.


the Lord working with them. What mean now these domineering Nimrods of Rome,
absolutely out of the plenitude of their Power to lord it over their Brethren,
as if they were ^specially (...), Gods portion and inheritance, and all
Christian Churches were in a state of subordination unto them? whereas they are
only Fellow Laborers and Workers together with us in the Vineyard of Christ.
Are ye Ministers of Christ? so are we. The Clergy are Branches of an
Apostolical and holy Stock; therefore let all Aaron's Sons, who ascend the
(...), and are devoted to the Altar as Gods Priests, consecrate themselves to
God and Religion, that we and they may do the work of an Evangelist, and with
alacrity and cheerfulness (...), give our selves to prayer and the ministration
of the Word, showing the Divinity of our Function not in great swelling words
of vanity, in an affected Predominancy, Rule, and Superiority over the
Christian World, so much contended for by the Soldiers of the Camp of Rome.
This in the words of Nazianzen Nazian. Orat. 11.
, (...), to commend a goodly Statue from the shadow it casts, and to pass by
(...), those perfections which deserve our chief commendations, i. e. sanctity
and holiness of life which extol Gods praises, and then are we (...), living
Laws and Royal Examples of greatness to the World, when we do and speak (...),
so as not to disgrace, but adorn the Gospel, and consequently stop the mouths
of all gainsayers, by a controuling sanctity of actions, and all men be wholly
convinced or compelled to unity and obedience. It is expected then, whatever
habits are in fashion among others, that the Priests should be clothed with
righteousness, adorned with a decent conversation, and produce the fruits of
good works, these be the evidences of the Buds, Blossoms and Almonds of Aaron's
Rod, and denote its Supremacy. Nothing will restore the Church (says a Reverend
Prelate) to its pristine honor, love, and authority in men's hearts and minds,
but a serious setting themselves to the study, preaching and practicing of
truth and peace in a holy life. These were the Arts, these the Policies, these
the pious Stratagems by which anciently they gained peoples hearts to love God,
his Truth, and of themselves the witness of it, to such a height of honor and
ecstasie of love, that they received them as the Angels of God, and Ambassadors
from Heaven. God grant the Tribe of Levi may be like Jacob's Ladder, which he
saw in Bethel, Genesis 28.12.
whereon were Angels ascending and descending: so by our Office and
Ministration, Angels might in us ascend and carry up ours and the peoples
supplications unto God, and Angels by us descend to bring Gods Word and Message
to the people, that there may be the sweet contexture or agreement of Beings,
one espoused to another in faithfulness and truth, even a blessed Union betwixt
Prince and People, and a gracious accord too of the people among themselves (in
an united conformity and conjunction in the Service of God) being knit together
in the inviolable bonds of Loyalty and love, neither entoiled with Civil broils
within, nor infected with Hostile inroads from without; but all professing that
one eternal Truth, (which is both the Mother and Nurse of Peace) we may enjoy
such a tranquillity as in the days of Solomon, when Judah and Israel dwelt
safely every one under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to
Beershaba. Or as it was in the days of Constantine, when there was silence in
Heaven for the space of half an hour, and the prayers of the Saints ascended up
as a cloud in grateful odors. The prime perfection then and pleasure in this
life (second to that supernatual one, Faith in Christ, and Sanctification
through the Spirit) consists in the beholding Brethren to dwell together in
unity, which limns and shadows out the glorious Hierarchy of Heaven, the
Trinity in Unity, for Deus est unitas and omnis unitatis affector Dionys. Areop.
; let us therefore express this unspeakable concord by the Sacrifice of our
selves to a Spirit of Unity and Truth, and not a Spirit of Error and Division,
which causes the breach of Union, the disturbance of the Peace, and quiet of
the Church. As the unity of Faith joins us, so the bond of Charity tyeth us
fast together through one and the same Spirit to unity and godly love, because
Schism is the next way to Heresy, which is to be hated as a thing that leads
to destruction: And non semper servatur unitas in credendo, ubi non est unitas
in colendo; there will not always be unity of Doctrine in that Church, where
there is not uniformity of Discipline. Profane Writers can tell us, by concord
the weakest The Sunbeams dispersed are but of small force, but they gather
strength, if collected in a narrow glass. Scilurus the Scythian on his
deathbed (as story tells us) taught his fourscore Sons the force of Unity by a
Faggot of Rods; or, as it is in Plutarch, a bundle of shafts, while together,
are hardly broken; but if you divide them, it is quickly done. And thus it is in
Ecclesiae fasciculo, Hosea prophesies destruction, but this does usher it in,
Their hearts are divided, Hos. 10.2.
things grow strong, by discord the mightiest States are overthrown. Though
States differ, the Communion of Saints must be preserved, the Church should
keep at unity, and by united force repel Heresy. After all our unhappy
Divisions, what can be more seasonable to the Genius of our Times, than
cementing counsel? that all Gods Building may be raised up as of one stone, by
having cor unum and viam unam, Jer. 32.39.
one heart and one way, which was the Character of the Church, Christians
primitive Age; Acts 4.32.
for Division is a sad Prognostic threatening desolation, when the stones of
the building begin to fall off from one another, the house grows ruinous, Isa.
30.13.
and the breach thereof comes suddenly in a moment. May the number of those
increase that are friends of Sion, and the generation of those perish that make
it their design to lay waste the City of God, and bury her in her own ruins:
Did the godly Jews mourn for Judah? And shall not the English Nation for the
Land of our desires and Nativity? O that ever such an enlightened Goshen should
hatch or harbor such black Monsters, that would gnaw out the bowels of their
own Mother! That so many Judasses should be found amongst Christ's Disciples!
The Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 15.5. Chap. 16.7, 9, 11.
My heart shall cry for Moab, and bewail the vine of Sibmah: I will water thee
with my tears, O Heshbon, and my bowels shall sound like a harp for Kirharesh.
Is not England as dear unto us? and have not we as great cause to lament for
this Church and State, the Womb that bare us, and the Breasts that gave us
suck? Every one ought to bow down, and go heavily as one that mourns for his
mother, by reason of her Divisions No Church so fair in this World, as to be
without spot and wrinkle; none so happy, as to be wholly privileged from jarrs
and dissentions. The Jewish Church in Christ's time was full of divisions, there
were Pharisees, Sadducees, Essenes, etc. In the Church of Philippi, what
contestations and tumults, broils and factions were there? and that not
Oeconomical about meum and tuum, but Ecclesiastical, and in matters of Religion
by those of the Concision, those evil workers, as S. Paul calls them. In the
flourishing Church of Corinth, where there were so many Christians of the first
magnitude, eminent for Religion and Piety; yet even here are strifes and
divisions, inasmuch as S. Paul wrote his first Epistle to dissolve those
factions, and repress those dissentions that were amongst them. In the Church
of England (to come home to our selves) there is Presbyterian, Independent,
Anabaptist, and Quaker; and it may be said of our days, as in S. Paul's time at
Corinth, There are divisions among us. In Paradise there was (...), only in
Heaven there is (...), full and perfect harmony without any discord, but we
cannot look for a Church triumphant here below.
. What scandalous and irreligious Libels of factious Brains have been exposed
to the public view of all Athenian Gazers? What indiscreet and Satirical
Pamphlets have been dispersed by a malevolent Party to incite a dislike and
hatred of the Government in Church and State? For Sions sake then I cannot hold
my peace, but deplore the decay of Religion by the want of Union and Loyalty,
and the defect of the practice of this ancient and heavenly Duty of Unanimity
amongst us. Our Savior left to his Church the Legacy of Peace, Joh. 14.27.
it is (...), his Farewell gift, or, as S. Basil calls it, (...), a largess
dropped from a higher World, worth the keeping; therefore let us (in our several
stations) endeavor the unity of the Spirit, (...), in the bond of peace,
beating down all animosities, study of Parties, and obstinacy in Opinions,
which breeds disaffection, and this humor grows impetuous Animi inflammati
ebulliunt ad certamen.
, marching like Jehu, the Son of Nimshi, furiously, till it flames into open
contention, giving to the restless Emissaries Whatever the pretensions of Rome
are to love and concord among themselves, yet their want of unity appears in
their different Opinions, Schisms, cruel Wars, and in the contests between
their Popes, and Acts of their Councils contradicting one another. Bishop Hall
in his Tract of Rome, sets down 300 differences of Opinions, maintained in the
Popish Church, recited by Bellarmine himself, the Arch-pillar of the Roman
Synagogue. The many Schisms in the Church of Rome may be easily conjectured,
when there were several Popes at the same time, one fought against another, and
the greatest Conqueror wore the Triple Crown. The people were woefully divided,
and many thousands of Christians were slain in those bloody Battles between
Pope Urban and Pope Clement. This Schism continued almost fifty years, one
resident at Rome, another at Avignon. The want of concord and unity in the Sea
of Rome is also demonstrable in their cruel Wars between the Popes and
Emperors, called Bellum Pontificum; whereby all Europe at one time or another
has been divided by Feuds and Factions. And the Popes not only thundered out
their Excommunications against the Emperors, but also persuading their own
Subjects to levy War against them, as if Christ had ordained his Sacraments,
not to be Seals of Grace, and helps of our Faith, but hooks to catch Kingdoms,
and rods to scourge such Potentates as would not, or could not procure the
Popes favor, and consequently has embroiled the Christian World in discord and
dissension, in great and cruel Wars. It is a thankless work in the sight of God
to improve his Worship by the dint of the Sword, and to found his Church, as
Romulus did Rome, in blood. No such Sacrifices, no such Ambages of cruelty can
be acceptable to the God of mercy and Prince of peace and pity. The bitter
contention and envy of one Pope to another, speaks their privation or want of
unity, one disannulling all the Acts of another, as Pope Stephen VI. abrogated
all the Decrees of his Predecessor Formosus, and so of many others. The like
appears in their Councils, contradicting one another; the Council of Basil
decreed for the Council against the Pope, and the Council of Lateran under Leo
X. decreed for the Pope against the Council. The Council of Toledo did prohibit
the Worship of Images; the second Council of Nice commands it. And so our
Adversaries of Rome, who boast of entire Unity, may see their own vanity.
of the Church of Rome, and growing Sectaries, great advantage, and to Satan no
small occasion to laugh and triumph. It were well for us, if we would see or
suspect the policy of the Devil, or his Agents, who envy our happiness, and
take advantage either of our judgments depraved, or Natures corrupted, to make
us their instruments to break our blessed unity in Church or State. And so
while we are contending for shadows, we may be deprived of the substance, and
be brought into irrecoverable confusion; therefore let brotherly love and unity
be maintained in the World, standing fast in one Spirit, with one mind for the
Faith of the Gospel It is one evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
that Christ has carried it on by means contemptible against all oppositions
imaginable. Who could have thought, that a few illiterate Fishermen that had
neither skill in Grammar, or knowledge in Rhetoric, should carry on the Truth
in a Majestic simplicity? The Princes of the Earth being not only
non-assistants, but all the great Monarchs of the World opposing Christianity
in the infancy thereof, whilst it was in the cradle, Acts 4.26, 27. King
Herod's enraged jealousy burned so fiercely, that it sucked up the blood of
all the male-infants within the Coasts of Bethlehem. And had not an heavenly
inspiration diverted the Eastern (...) from the intended way of their return,
their blood also should have run among the ingredients, and made up the dose to
allay the fury of an angry Prince. Add unto this those fierce persecutions
continuing in their height and heat, with a rage reaching up to Heaven, for the
space of three hundred years, no storms could blow out the light of this Sun,
clouds might cover it, but never extinguish it, because the Gospel is from God,
the World cannot overthrow it, Acts 5.39. whereas all those Religions which the
Romans, Greeks, and all the Gentiles went a gadding after before the advent of
our Savior, are all come to nothing, and the rest risen since shall shortly be
destroyed with the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. therefore stand fast
in an united conformity, striving together for the Faith of the Gospel.
, as Members of one Body under one Head, Jesus Christ. Which leads me to the
second general: as the alliance of humane Nature, so the bands of a spiritual
Consanguinity engages us to holy concord. Gal. 3.28.
We are all one in Christ Jesus. Christ taught all alike to call God Father in
the Lords Prayer. All have the same filial Prerogatives, Gal. 4.26.
Jerusalem above is the Mother of us all. All as one man's children have the
same food provided them, like Aristotle's (...), such as are brought up with
the same milk, 1 Pet. 2.2.
the (...), as S. Peter calls it, of the Word. For all Christians are Children
of the same heavenly Father, Mal 2.10.
regenerated to the same lively hope, Romans 8.17.
coheirs of the same heavenly Inheritance, redeemed by a Savior that breathed
out nothing but Love, Isa. 63 9. Joh. 15 13.
sanctified and sealed by a Spirit of Unity. It is a Truth in the fourth of the
Acts, there were many bodies, and but one Soul. I wish unanimity may so combine
The language of Constantine to his Synod of Bishops, has been applied by the
Royal Charles of Great Britain, our most gracious Constantine, to his Senate at
Westminster, or several Houses of Parliament: I shall be as glad of your future
Union, as now I am of your welcome Meeting.
the people of this Realm, and knit together the hearts of this whole Nation,
as the heart of one man, in the defense of our King, our Law^, and our
Religion, that (as Aristotle taught in his Ethics) though they be many in
Body, yet they will be but one Soul, Crederes unam mentem in d^^^bus fuisse
divisam, as 'twas between Minutius Felix and his Octavius. God grant 'em a Soul
that is one in will, and one in desire, one in resolution, and one in Religion;
for united Spirits graciously consorting together by a sweet harmony of
affections, tend not only to the glory of our Jerusalem to be as a City that is
at unity in it self, but the Nature of our Religion specially requires it, and
the honor thereof exacts it from us, because the Lord our God is one Lord.
This Unity is Ointment which covering the head, and running down to the skirts,
makes the Prince glorious, and the Subject happy; for where it is, there the
Lord has commanded the blessing. As difference of Languages hindered the
erection of Babel, so disunion of minds the going forward of the second Temple,
whose foundation is laid in Love. Surely Sion can as ill be built with discord
of Hearts, as Babel could with discord of Tongues. God is not wont to be in the
Whirlwind of dissension, but in the still Voice, and that heavenly Dove, the
Holy Ghost, like the Halcyon only, builds his Nest in a calm. The garment of
the Kings Daughter, the Church, is of diverse colors, though there be variety
of Gifts, yet it should be like Christ's Coat, without seam, in vest varietas
sit, scissura non sit. Lines, the nearer they approach to the Center, the
nearer they are to one another; those then are at the greatest distance from
God, who are furthest off from one another in uncharitable differences. It was
the great business of our Savior's advent into the World, to make peace in
Heaven and Earth, to reconcile men to God, and to one another, to take away all
feuds, and to extinguish animosities, to bring to an agreement Tempers most
distant (says a Learned Divine) to make the Lamb and the Wolf lie down
together. He came not to kill and destroy, but for the healing of the Nations.
When the glorious Temple was built at Jerusalem, God would have but one Altar
there, to show, quod unum eundemque cultum inter omnes esse vellet; all that
sacrificed there should have one and the same Worship, but one Altar typifying
one Religion, one heart, and that it might be unto the people ut vinculum
sacrae unitatis, a bond of sacred union. And this is the noblest Argument that
can possibly be discussed to compose distractions, and allay the animosities,
which particular respects, private interests, and parties of Religion have
raised among us, (...), to be of one mind in the Lord; for it is not enough,
concordare, to agree, but we must, convenire, come together, and not only so,
but consentire, agree in Judgment, that we may be brought cohabitare, to dwell
together in unity. O how happy a thing it is to see the Churches Children
spread themselves like Olive-branches round her Table in a peaceable and
flourishing manner. Honor and Riches are insensibly multiplied upon a Nation
that seeks its glory by a dutiful submission to its lawful Prince, while it
looks upon Union as the best Accommodation and choicest Treasure, the Heavens
and Earth conspire to make it plentiful and abounding in all wealth and
opulency. Deuteronomy. 28.2, 3. 4, 5, 6.
As those Pigeons then which having drunk of the River of Life, held up their
Bill (...) jointly together in token of thankfulness: So let us all praise God
with one accord in the Temple, being of one heart and one Soul, mind and
judgment, because the Lord our God is one Lord. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Mark 12.29.
And what the Idea of the World could not, the sacred Pages and Volumes of holy
Writ have discovered of the Deity, the Co-eternity of the Son of God with the
Father, the procession of the Holy Ghost from both, the Unity of the three in
one uncreated Essence; 1 Epist. Chapter 5. ver. 7.
For there are three that bear record in Heaven, (says S. John) the Father,
the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Thou art my Creator, my
Redeemer and my Comforter, which makes the question past all question, and
needs no further disputation, I have none in Heaven but thee. The desire of
this Celestial place and state, causes the Royal Prophet to despise all
transitory flashes and sparks of earthly pleasures, which is the second part,
viz. Low in a positive determination, And there is none upon Earth that I
desire besides thee.

The Princes and Monarchs of the World, who are retinued with all the Equipage
of Greatness, and strange variety of delights; being liberally and abundantly
provided for; Silver, Gold, and Jewels are their's, and all Creatures in the
Earth, and the Air and Water are pressed for their service: yet all these
enjoyments are nothing without thee, None upon Earth I desire besides thee. Et
tecum non, the negation is personal, no man for his favor, no Creature for its
excellency that I desire in the least comparison of thee. For the treasures of
this world are but gilded Thorns and concealed Miseries; and yet how many
Shrines and Altars are there erected in men's hearts to this great Idol of the
World? Most scarce acknowledge any other God but this Golden Calf, to which
they pay their servile devotions. And when thoughts stream toward wealth,
Rivers are but draughts enough for them. Quod naturae satis est, homini non
est, as Seneca, that grave Moralist, speaks of Alexander, who had swallowed up
Darius and the Indies, and yet in those floods did thirst, and in that surfeit
was hungry. If the Earth were a Center of Diamonds, and did the Heavens shower
down Pearls into Diana's lap; and could we enjoy the Land with its Minerals of
Gold, and the Sea with the greatness of its Treasure, sending Ships to
Tarshish, and fetching Spices from the East in the Navy of Hiram; all these
things cannot satiate the desires of the Soul, but are miserable fruitions
without the glorious Trinity. Then when others lay up on Earth, Heaven shall be
my Treasure. For the favor of a Prince is but a pleasing snare without thee,
and therefore non est in terris, there is none upon Earth I desire besides
thee. The World is a Theater of sorrow, a warfare and a bondage, all are
prisoners, some in golden Chains, others in Iron; some slaves to poverty,
others to riches, some to honor, others to meanness: And all these are
interwoven with mixed varieties, as pain and grief, pleasure and sadness; so
that the greatest happiness that the world can afford, is not able to fill the
unlimited desires of the heart, but God only. For the world (the Fools
Paradise) is full of Vipers, the obscure print of unsound joys, a dreamed
sweetness, and a very Ocean of gall; and so there is nothing on Earth that I
desire besides thee. Mundo utamur, use we may, but not adore the Creature; we
may look upon fair this picture as the work of the Almighty, but not esteem it
for a Deity or a God, like the foolish Egyptians, or those Persians that gave
veneration only to the luster of their Jewels. The Christian account (as to
Divine Arithmetic) is cast up for another world, Psalm. 90.12.
to be a Denizen of the New Jerusalem, an Heir of Eden, a Peer of Paradise, a
Pearl of Virtue, a Star of Glory. Although we are Sojourners here A Christians
life is a mere pilgrimage, (...). We are all strangers and pilgrims, therefore
let your conversation be in Heaven; and well may I with S. Paul advise you so
to do, because it is the chiefest Principle in Christianity; for as the Stars
move in their several Orbs, and the Planets in their Circles, so a Christians
Sphere is above in Heaven, there he performs all his regular motions.
, however we are Muncipes Coeli, Freemen of Heaven, Inceptors in Happiness,
Probationers for Glory, and have the privilege to be called and owned by God
as (...), the Fellow-Citizens of the Saints; walk therefore worthy of this
honorable City, whereof you are Members, and worthy of the Parents from whom
you descended, (...), says Thucydides Thucydid. l. 4.
. A Christian is called (...), one that lives in the Confines of Heaven; so
that whilst he is here on Earth, he wants but the courteous hand of Death to
put him into possession, and give Livery and Seisin of that above. 2 Cor. 5.1.
Heaven then is my home, the Creator my Father, the Judge my Advocate, the
Spirit my Consolation; therefore there is nothing on Earth that I desire
besides thee.

The opposition of Notes on both (being the second general) now appears.

First, In primacy of Order, King David is the glass in which we may behold
Christian practice. In his thoughts Heaven takes the precedence of Earth, Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, O Lord? This is his first care to seek (...), the
Kingdom of God, here is the primum mobile that moves his heart, his will, and
his affections, Heaven: then the desire on Earth follows after; and it is
honor enough for this vile Earth to wait upon Heaven. Let us not now chaffer
Heaven for Earth (as sottish Indians truck away Ore for glass) and for the
gaudy nothing of this life, hazard our immortal Souls to everlasting flames,
and for the toys and vanities of this world lose an Eternal Kingdom, and for a
glorious mortality bid adieu to Heaven, which ought to have the precedence in
our heart and affection. Open our eyes, O Lord, that we may see those glorious
rays that stream from the Divinity, and so beautiful an object will be enough
to draw and attract our hearts unto thee, echoing forth the Anthem of the Text,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee.

Secondly, Take it in the sense of the Verbs, habeo and desideravi; habeo in
Coelis, I have in Heaven; desideravi in terris, I desire on Earth. Here we tire
our selves with a restless fancy, still wandering through the Creation, but
never finding any satisfaction; but in Heaven there are all things that may
delight us, and solace the faculties of our Soul. For God is a plenitude of
light to the understanding, a multitude of peace to the will, Eternal joy and
consolation to the memory. And in Heaven all our desires shall be satisfied
with fruition, and those excellencies will always supply new and fresh desires
to the Soul, which in the beatifical vision shall enlarge into that vast and
infinite satisfaction, that it shall be lost in the enjoyment, and most happily
plunged in that fruition which we shall never fully understand, but be still
more and more happy in having pleasures so great as to transcend our knowledge.
How glorious is that Sun that sets not! and how clear is that day that is not
chased by the darkness of the night! Heaven is that resplendent residence, and
of this bliss, there is such a fullness, that our heads are too thick to
understand it; or if we were able to understand it, yet our hearts are too
narrow to give it entrance; or if our hearts could hold it, yet our tongues are
too stammering to express and utter it Men's deficit, vox silet, non mea tantum,
sed and Angelorum. S. Ambrose.
. If the Heaven were fuller of Stars than it is, and if this lower World were
adorned and illuminated with as many Lamps as it is capable of, yet would they
never be able to supply the absence of one Sun. Neither can the sons of men,
with all their Lamps and Torches of Reason, make up the least shadow of Glory,
the least appearance of Heaven. There Is such depths, such Pleonasms, such
Oceans of perfection in a Deity, as it exceeds all intellectual capacity; for
it is such, as eye has not seen, ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of
man to conceive, what the Almighty, the great Being of Beings, has prepared in
Heaven for those that fear him. And though some vessels contain more than
others, yet all shall be full, there shall be no vacuity or want in any.

Lastly, Take it in the diversity of the prepositions, cum and praeter, nothing
with, nothing besides thee, O Lord! Heap up all the riches of the world into
one pile, till they reach the Stars, and charm all the delights of the world
into one Circle, and enjoy them freely; yet there is a desire in man, which
looks above them; for whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is nothing on
Earth that I desire besides thee. The Organ of a Christian Ear is not for
Earth, its music is mixed with too many discords, it is Heaven it aims at, the
Angels with whom it would consort, and the melody of the superior powers that
yields the most absolute concord. This is the Psaltery that King David sings
to, and is the true Ela of a Christian; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And
there is nothing on Earth I desire besides thee. How miserable are they then,
whose pleasures only divert them from God their Maker; and have no other
Apology for their Neglect of Heaven, than what Sin can make? that court the
World, and for a fading Embrace exchange a Diadem of Bliss, a Crown of Glory?

And here let us raise our Thoughts from Earth to Heaven, because the glorious
Trinity is a fairer Object for Contemplation: For in the Glass of the Trinity
we may behold all Felicity; it will be joy to man's Soul, health to his body,
beauty to his eyes, music to his ears, honey to his mouth, perfume to his
nostrils, whole happiness to every part. Therefore let us no longer dote upon
this Molehill of Earth, or prize its artificial complexioned Pleasures,
Structures of Cedar and Vermilion, Garments and Embroideries of Aholiab, Tables
of Delicacies, Couches of Ease and Ivory; all things here below are but
Bracteata Foelicitas, Copper leaved with Gold. If we do but behold the Pavement
of Heaven stuck with Stars, as so many sparkling Diamonds; how despicable and
mean is the stateliest Palace of the greatest Monarch? If the Hangings be so
precious, what must we think of the Room? If the Frontispiece be so glorious,
what are those better parts yet unseen? Magnum and mirabile sub tanta
Majestate. O think then what Treasures, what Riches, what Excellencies are in
those Courts above, where the Gates of the New Jerusalem are beyond the Orient
Majesty of Pearl, and Streets more splendid than pure Gold; where there is no
need of the clear Light of the Moon, nor the bright Beams of the Sun! What
ineffable Glory is in God, the Light of those heavenly Tabernacles? Consider
but the Eternal Joys of that place, and how heartless and dying is the best of
worldly pleasures? Nay, were the whole World turned into a Seraglio of Delight,
and every Region into an Arabia; could every Field become a Paradise, and every
Object that we meet with, bring with it a Magazine of pleasure; had we all the
Enjoyments this Life could triumph in, yet without God we should find them
dismal Fruitions. Heaven does as far surmount all these things, as the
Celestial Sphere does this Earthly Globe. And so the Proposition is made good,
That Heaven is a fairer Object than Earth for our Contemplation, even the
glorious and Eternal Majesty of the holy Trinity, that is enshrined in an Unity
of Essence. And Pythagoras, that old Samian Philosopher, made Unity the
Original of all Things, and the Cause of all Good in the World. And the Fathers
under the Allegorical vail of that Unity, discover an undivided Deity, (...),
as if That and God were so inseparably linkt together, that the thought of man
could not possibly part them asunder. It Is a pious Exhortation that S. P^ul
gives the Ephesians to holy Concord and unity of Spirit; Ephesians. 1.4.
and lays it down with a triple Argument, (knowing that a ^hreefold cord is not
easily broken) and admits of no separation at all, unless they would seem to
dissolve their Religion: There is one Lord, whom Christians obey, and therefore
no distraction by service; There is one Faith, whereby they believe, and
therefore no division by Creeds; There is one Baptism, whereby they get
entrance into the Church, and therefore no distinction by initiative Grace: and
these three are more peculiarly (...), that Trinity of Unities, wherein God by
the Ministry of the holy Apostle, appears to his Church as it were in the shape
of three Angels.

Silence now, ye warbling Birds, Consorts of the World be still, and hear the
Harmony of the Royal Prophet sung in an admirable Air, tune the Instruments of
your hearts unto it, Thou art my portion, thou art my riches. I love the beauty
of thine House, which is no other than thine own Essence, and the sole aim of
my desire is the place of thy Glory. The Diadems and honors of this world are
of a short standing, and nothing comparable to that Royalty which is
everlasting, and to that Kingdom which knows no end.

This World is an Ark wherein are clean and unclean Beasts; a Park where Goats
and Sheep live together; a Net where good and bad Fish are found: But in Heaven
nothing that is impure or imperfect can have entry there: In that fair place
Solomon's wisdom will appear folly, his knowledge ignorance; Absolom's beauty
shall be there deformity; Samson's strength shall pass there for feebleness,
and the riches of all the Kings of the Earth shall be there as poverty. The
longest term of life in our Forefathers will appear a death; for in Heaven it
is in triumph above the reach of dull mortality. A man may enjoy the light of
the Sun, and walk in its glittering rays, and now and then give a glance upon
it, though we cannot keep our eye fixed upon its globe to behold its glory; we
may behold its beams refracted through a cloud, but we may lose our sight by
gazing on it in its naked beauty; for according to an Axiom in Philosophy,
Excellens objectum laedit sensum. Pliny prying into the Mountain Vesuvius, to
discover the fiery irruptions of Natures Kiln, procured his death by his too
bold attempts into the mysteries of Nature. Surely it cannot but be dangerous
to be too inquisitive into the Mysteries of the Trinity, which ought rather to
be religiously adored than curiously searched into, and requires not the
natural Optics or Eye of Reason, but of Faith. Reason cannot ^ore delight in a
demonstration, than Faith does in revealed Truth. As the Unity of the Godhead
is clear to the Eye of Reason, so the Trinity of Persons, that is, three
glorious Relations in one God, is as certain to an Eye of Faith Faith is (...),
Heb. 11.1.
the evidence of things not seen, says the Apostle. It Is an Eye that can
behold an absent Object. A hand that can fasten upon what is not, can grasp
things in their first possibilities, and the bare will of the Deity to produce
any thing, and gives us the knowledge of that Theological and stupendous
Mystery, even the Trinity in Unity; or that the Deity, which is essentially
one, is substantially three See Zanchy, de tribus Elohim, and uno Jehova, lib.
1 cap. 2.
. The Soul imprisoned in a body, can but darkly conceive of spiritual Beings,
those that are (...) of the greatest apprehensions, do but (...), they have
some broken and scattered notions, which cannot represent heavenly Truths in
their proper Species, so vast is the disproportion between Divine Mysteries and
a finite Understanding; for humane Wit knows not things here below, how then
can it be satisfied in the search after Divinity? If he whom our Savior cured
of his blindness, saw men as trees walking, in what sh^^e shall they discern
Evangelical Truths, who have yet the scales upon their eyes? Now there is a
Curtain drawn, if we are so bold to lift it up, we may justly be struck with
blindness, even in those things which before were exposed to our view. It is
enough that God makes us of his Court, though not of his Council: That we may
be free, though not to rifle his Cabinet, yet to sit at his Table, no matter
whether on the right hand or left in his Kingdom. Why should we strive with
danger, for what we may be ignorant of with safety? In such things admiration
is better piety than apprehension. Nothing breeds more Atheists among us than
this (the first spawn of sin) Curiosity, which plucks still at the forbidden
Tree. The Arminians will find a reason in us of Gods Decrees. The Socinians
also will have a reason of his Mysteries, except they see, they will not
believe. Our sight now does disperse and lose it self in the immensity of the
extent; for who has beheld it, that he might demonstrate it? Not the Angels,
for they cover their faces, much less we that dwell in houses of clay, and have
that ignorance and guiltiness those glorious Seraphims are freed from, Isa.
6.2. that cried one to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy. One of the Ancients
glosses finely upon it, Vnum Jehovam celebrant repetendo unum and idem
(Sanctus) trinum agnoscunt ter repetendo quod uni tribuerunt: A Trinity they
acknowledge in that blessed Unity of the Godhead, whilst they repeat thrice,
Holy, holy, holy; three in one, and all three but one God. Many of Gods
incommunicable Properties and Works have (though most unjustly) been attributed
to false Gods, as Eternity O Pater, o hominum, divumque aeterna potesias. Virg.
Aen.
, Omnipotency Teque Omnipotens Neptune invoco. Cic. Tusc. l. 4.
, Creation Ovid. Met. l. 1.
of Heaven and Earth, Divine Providence Jovis nutu and arbitrio coelum, terra,
mariaque reguntur. Cic. de Fin.
, and the like. But it never came into the mind of any Idolater to think his
God to be three in one; therefore let us not furnish our heads only with
Speculations, but laying up Divine things within our hearts, and drawing them
out into our lives in order to practice, that we worship one God in Trinity,
and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the
Substance, as it is in the Creed of S. Athanasius.

The Deity is the ground of our Adoration; and as it is necessary for every one
to be established in this truth, that there is a God, so likewise that there is
but Vnitas Divinitatis Personarum pluralitate multiplex. S. August.
one God, and not a plurality, as the blind idolatrous Heathen imagine. We
ought then to make God the object of our highest admiration, and of our
greatest love, to offer Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises to him, in all our
ways to acknowledge him, and cheerfully do what he commands; to trust in him,
and depend upon him: for our life is lent us for no other end but to be mindful
of Eternity, and cast up our eyes to Heaven, our future happiness. Anaxagoras
being asked wherefore man was made? replied, To behold the Heavens. Psalm. 8.3.
For not a Star sparkles there, but is a Preacher and Herald to the Majesty of
its Maker. Empedocles likewise being demanded why he desired to live in this
world? answered, only to contemplate Heaven. Christianity is a kind of
religious Astronomy, the contemplation and study of Heaven. No Geometry or
measuring the Earth in the Christian Mathematics, unless it be that our Souls
might more easily take footing in Heaven. And as Philosophy describing Lines
drawn from the Center of the Earth, may go to the Circumference of the Heavens;
so, according to our comportment in these short moments, (wherein are comprised
the Lines of Life, which we are to live on Earth) shall be the definitive
Sentence of an Eternal abode. Our true happiness depends upon our well
management of our time here; and it highly concerns us to foresee what will be
our future state: For in this life we sow those seeds, whose fruits either of
misery or happiness, we shall gather in another World, and reap them in
Eternity.

Let the serious consideration how short our time is on Earth, enforce upon us
a care of redeeming it, and use it not to the maintenance of wickedness and
vice, but the promotion of true Religion and Virtue; that our future state may
be as happy, as it is sure to be lasting. There are but few that consider, that
their time here on Earth, is but a Prologue to an everlasting state. In this
vast Eternity you must live; why do you not let your thoughts be more upon it?
Your minds that love to count the days of this narrow life, extend themselves
unto Eternity, where there are no limits at all. Tell the torments of
everlasting Fire, the aching thoughts (if you can) of a burning Soul, that fryes
in the Wrath of God to eternal Ages: Then number the Joys of Heaven, tell the
Notes of that Celestial Quire, the Hymns of Praises that they sung; and though
thou had a head as big as Archimedes, that could tell how many Atoms of dust
were in the Globe of the whole Earth; yet all these were but as a single Atom,
in comparison of those endless joys or sorrows. And it is an Oracle of
infallible truth, and a promise that remains for ever to the righteous; Your
joy shall remain, Joh. 16.22.
none shall take it from you. Therefore Heaven is the most lovely, amiable and
most desirable object. The Enjoyments of Riches, Honors, Kingdoms, Feastings
with us in this World, are but short and transitory; but in Heaven there shall
be an eternal Feast: The Jubilation of the Lamb shall be for ever, and shall be
extended to the vast duration of Eternity: O my Soul, why do thou not aspire,
and mount up to the Center and Light of Glory, to the Fountain of Beams and
Brightness, from whence thou wast derived? How happy shall thou be, when thou
shall lay down corruptible rags of Earth, and being delivered out of the Prison
of this wretched Body, may be thought worthy to hear the sacred Songs of
that Celestial Harmony, and the Praises of the King Eternal of that glorious
Empire? How accomplished shall thy Honor and Glory be, when it shall come to
thy turn to sing a gracious Hallelujah? Join unto all this the pleasure there
is to live in the company of Angels; to enjoy the grateful conversation of all
those excellent and sublime Spirits, where Angelical Troops make ravishing
Music; and to behold Armies of Saints, more bright than the Stars of Heaven;
to contemplate the Sanctity of the Patriarchs, the Hope of the Prophets, the
Crown of Martyrs, the white and flowery Garland of Virgins. And as for the
Sovereign King, who keeps his Residence in the midst of that glorious People,
what tongue is able to speak his praise, O Israel! Now how goodly are thy
Tabernacles, how delightful thy Pavilions! Gardens watered with floods and
fountains are not so flourishing, nor are the fruitful Valleys so abundant. Let
us not then suffer our selves to be abused any longer with the delusive
appearance of this World, but fix our Eye on Heaven, because it is a fairer
object than Earth for our contemplation; joining with the Royal Prophet, as it
is in the Verge of the Text, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

All the Blessings that we do enjoy, are the sweet influences of Heaven upon
us, Spiritual or Temporal.

First, Spiritual Blessings in heavenly places, arise from no other Spring, and
are Irradiations of the Trinity, and the great kindness of Heaven to Mankind,
in relation to these Souls of ours. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have all
done their parts for them: The Father gave his only Son, the Son gave himself,
left his Glory, and endured the bitter Death of the Cross, merely to keep our
Souls from perishing. The Holy Ghost is become (as it were) our Attendant,
waits upon us with continual offers of his Grace, to enable us to do that which
may preserve them. These things all the Persons work equally and inseparably in
respect of the Cause and Effect. It is a Rule in Divinity, That all the Works
of the Trinity ad extra, are common to the whole Trinity, God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost do cooperate and work together, for what one does, all do; yet
in congruity we attribute a distinct Act in regard of the Order and Object.

(1.) The Father Creates, Genesis 1.1. In Order the original of Action is ascribed
to the Father, Joh. 5.17, 19. (2.) The Son Redeems, Gal. 3.13. The Nature and
Manner of Working, to the Son, Joh. 1.3. Heb. 12. (3.) The Holy Ghost
Illuminates, 2 Pet. 1.21. The Efficacy and Power to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor.
11.12.


The Father is to be adored, as altogether of Himself.

The Son to be glorified, as that Consubstantial Word.

The Holy Ghost to be magnified, as that Co-essential Spirit, eternally
proceeding from Both.

The Three Persons in the Trinity is the Object of our Faith, and we daily own
it in our Creed.

(1.) We believe in God the Father, who made the World. (2.) In God the Son,
who redeemed all Mankind. (3.) In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies all the
Elect People of God.
An Unity of Essence, and a Trinity of Order; Ordo Originis, though not
Regiminis; Co-ordinativus, though not Sub-ordinativus; of Priority, though not
Superiority; a First, a Second, and a Third, though not a higher, lower, and
lowest; Deuteronomy. 6.4. 1 Cor. 8.6.
for the Lord our God is one Lord; the Godhead or Essence of God, is one
undivided.

This Tradition of (...), was a point of great discourse amongst the Ancients;
it was the great Principle on which Parmenides founded his divine Idea's,
delivered by Plato: Platonicae ideae ortum habuerunt ex Parmenide, cujus magnum
principium fuit (...), one and many: one in the Architype Idea God, many in
their individual Natures; or otherwise it relates to the Unity of the Divine
Essence, and the Plurality of Persons; for the Platonists speak much of (...),
a Trinity.
Parmenides (who followed Pythagoras) is brought in by Plato, philosophizing on
that old Axiom, (...), One and Many; and determined thus, That God was (...),
i. e. one Divine Essence; he was (...), one immutable Being; he was (...), one
Eternal Being. This Plato discourses in his Philebus at large, showing how
(...) was (...), and (...), One, was Many, and Many, One. And it is not only
good Philosophy, but sound Divinity, the Godhead considered diversely; for the
manner of Being, is Three Persons in One Essence; the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7.

The Father is the First Person of the Trinity, having Foundation in none, of
Personal Substance.

(1.) (...), Not begotten to the Father.

The Son is the Second Person of the Trinity, having Foundation of Personal
Substance, of whom he is eternally begotten, Joh. 5.26.

(2.) (...), Begotten to the Son.

The Holy Ghost is the Third Person in the Trinity, having Foundation from the
Father and the Son; from both which he especially proceeds, Joh. 14.26.

(3.) (...), Proceeding to the Holy Ghost.

Here is a threefold Unity of Persons in one Nature, of Natures in One Person,
of Natures and Persons in One Quality.

In the First is one God. In the Second one Christ. In the Third one Spirit.
All this Unity is but to usher in a single Deity. S. Paul concludes all with
an (...), There is one God, Ephesians. 4.6.

And the Soul carries an Image of the Unity of the Godhead, and Trinity of
Persons, in that there is one Soul with three Faculties, of Understanding,
Will, and Memory. Let us all now lift up our heart and voice, and praise God,
chanting forth the Anthem of the Seraphims, for the Redemption of the World by
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the Trinity; concluding with S.
Basil's Liturgy, (...), O God our God, who have sent this heavenly Bread, the
Food of all the World, Our Lord Jesus Christ, to be to us a Savior, a
Redeemer. Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of Heaven,
we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory.

Secondly, As Spiritual, so Temporal Blessings are the product of Heaven. This
Day is a signal Instance, and carries with it the Pomp of Blaze and Splendor,
as it is the Anniversary of His Majesty's happy Birth and Nativity. And that
Divine Providence that brought him this Day into the World, has led him by the
hand of his visible goodness. Ever since he entered the porch of life, and
walked upon the pavement of the Earth, he has had the Royal Charter of Heaven,
and enjoyed the testimony of Gods special care, even a Writ of Protection; 1 Chronicles. 16.22.
Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm. His Life has been a
continued Series of Divine Favor. The Adversary has not been able to do him
violence; the Son of wickedness could not hurt him: but he has smitten down
his Foes before his face, clothed them with shame, and wounded them that hated
him. The great Majesty of Heaven was a Helmet of Salvation unto him, a strong
Tower of Defense against his cruel Enemies, Domestic and Foreign, at home and
abroad.

First, Cruel Enemies at home, who invested their Sword with the Authority of
Law, and made themselves after the Image of a King, and usurped the Seat Royal,
changed the Kingdom into a State, and Monarchy into a Commonwealth. This was in
the time of our late Troubles and Confusions, when Monarchy was shaken off,
Religion and Property were lost, and Laws and Liberty were with no small
violence invaded, (being as in the days of Jeroboam) whoever would, 1 Kings
13.33.
were consecrated Priests of the high places. And when Soldiers turned
Preachers, every act of Providence that seems to favor their Designs, shall be
the voice of God: Every opportunity to do mischief to such as they oppose,
shall be interpreted a Command from Heaven to do it. Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz was the Text, Rapine and Plunder the Comment and the Use. Wars
sounded as loud from the Pulpit as the Drum, as if it had been the task of the
Heavens to kill and slay, and for its Arms hung in the Zodiac Man's Anatomy,
to show they were born with those that arose o^ the Dragon's Teeth in the Poet,
Mutuis perire gladiis, to bleed to death on one another's Swords. And here I
may lead your thoughts to the unnatural Civil War in our British Isle, when
Tribe did rise against Tribe, Brother against Brother, Mart cadunt subito per
mutua vulnera fratres. Ovid.
And the sight of one Aceldama, one field of Blood will raise men's careless
thoughts to a due valuation and grateful apprehension of the comforts we enjoy
under our most Gracious Sovereign. He that has escaped with him, in Job, to
bring news of rapine and violence, can best tell us what it is to see a
flourishing Land become a Sea of Blood; because War plays Pliny's Cockatrice,
annoying whatsoever it does touch. He can tell us what it is to see the Horse
in equal state with its Rider, both of them weltering in their own gore. He can
show us what it is to see the obedient Son run over his slain Father to escape
the hands of his own Executioner. He can show us what it is to see the burning
of Cities, and the woeful Inhabitants martyred in the flames. Is not every Siege
the Funeral of a City? Quot obsidia, tot urbium funera; quot pugnae, tot
hominum lanienae; quot agmina, tot ruris supplicia; quot turmae and catervae,
cohortes and acies, tot suriae ad exitium agrorum and hominum armatae. Putean.
in stat. bell. and pacis lit.
every pitched Battle a Massacre? If a Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.33. hew Agag in
pieces: a David, in the heat of War, falls a cutting Ammonites, 1 Chronicles. 20.3.
Sin, Satan, and War have all one Name, Evil is the best of them. The best of
Sin is deformity, the best of Satan enmity, the best of War misery The Turkish
History makes mention of the Scythian Tam^rlane, when he walked amongst the
slain after a bloody Victory against the Muscovites; He accounted those Princes
unhappy, which by the destruction of their own kind, sought to advance their
own honor, protesting himself grieved, even from his heart, to see such
sorrowful tokens of his Victory.
. It is no wonder now to complain (as the Orator to the Athenians) whatsoever
they gain in their thrifty Peace, they are deprived of by those consuming
Tumults; for what Paradise is there under Heaven, which a lasting War will not
easily turn into a Wilderness? Many in this N^tion have witnessed the truth of
it with their eyes, and its horror with their tears: by these inconveniences
we may judge of the benefits of Peace, and may see what gracious opportunities
it does yield for the practice of Religion and Godliness. We may behold with
joy and thankfulness, that the Ark, the Testimony of Gods presence, which was
long held captive among the Philistines, is now returned and happily settled
among us; and that his Worship is duly performed in his Word and Sacraments.
Let his lungs waste in his breast, let his spirits decay, let his tongue
languish to a perpetual silence, that will not beseech God to establish this
blessing as firm as the days of Heaven, and wish its continuance. O then pray
for the Peace Pulchrius vomer quam ensis splendet, bidens quam hasta; melius
ferro vervacta agrorum, quam agmina agricolarum proscinduntur, says Puteanus.
of our Jerusalem that love her; and consequently, for the life and prosperity
of the Monarch of Great Britain, King Charles II. our dread Sovereign, the
light of our eyes, and the breath of our nostrils, Lam. 4.20. who causes
malignant vapors to vanish, and dispels those clouds of mischief by his
Princely power that would turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction,
cry up Privilege to invade Regal Prerogative, and under the notion of the
Preservers of our Peace, and Defenders of our Liberties, reach out their hand
to turn the stream of Royalty, and subvert an excellent Monarchy into a
Tyrannical Republic. The Fallacy having been put on the Kingdom, and Cheat
acted once before, it will not easily prevail with men of sober and rational
judgments, to renounce their Religion (the best in the world) or their Loyalty
and obedience to the best of Kings, whose Princely Goodness is not more tender
of the Imperial Crown and Dignity, than of the Peace and tranquillity of the
Subject. The one as it regards Royal honor, the other the care of his People,
to cause Religion happily to flourish, and Liberty, Laws and Property to be
safe and inviolable, (with the Blessings of Heaven) notwithstanding the subtle
insinuations and cunning stratagems of the old Enemies of Monarchy and the
Church, to throw us back into a relapse; which reminds us of the late
Rebellion, when men in Buff durst proclaim themselves the only Legal Authority
of the Nation: and these, like a mighty Torrent, did drive all before them,
with an unruly violence, brake down the banks of Ecclesiastical Discipline,
making no difference betwixt things Sacred and Common, swallowed up Churches
with their Revenues, and laid desolate Sanctuaries of Piety and Religion. Here
we may wail out an Epicedium, War and desolation, poverty and paleness, and
garments rolled in blood, hearing the woeful groans of dying men, and bitter
lamentations of Children for their Parents. The Orphan blubbers his cheeks, and
sighs with Elisha, O my Father, my Father. Now David breaths out an Elegy, and,
O Absalom, Absalom! my Son, my Son! And Rachel likewise weeps, and will not be
comforted, because they are not. These were the miseries this Kingdom groaned
under, after the Barbarous and horrid Murder of that Glorious Martyr King
Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory. And so it continued under the heavy
yoke of an insolent Usurpation, till his Majesty's happy Restoration, actual
Government, and gracious Reign over us in peace and quietness, security and
freedom. We owe the happiness of these temporal enjoyments, (under God) to the
prudent Conduct of Regal Majesty. And here take this Thesis or Doctrine by way
of affirmative Position.

If the Church be deprived of Kingly Majesty, she is as apt to be infected with
homebred Errors as Foreign injuries; for when there was no King in Israel,
Judge. 17.6.
every man did what was right in his own eyes. We see then the Office of a King
is attended with as much burden as Jurisdiction. He must encounter with
Adversaries. For has the holy Oil been poured upon his Head, and the Crown
settled upon it by Divine Providence, which overrules Nature? He that has given
him the Crown, gave the Sword also to secure and guard it: and as it was
Judah's Prerogative to sway the Royal Scepter, so also to yield Protection: for
the King is Custos utriusque Tabulae, Defender of the Faith, and a Nursing
Father to the Church. And the Princely Power, and Sovereign Authority (with
God's Blessing) may still preserve the true and ancient Constitution both of
Church and State from Anarchy and Disorder, from Popish Superstition and
Fanatical Faction. For the King has his Authority over us from Heaven, (...),
the Lord sets up Kings, says the Father: And, (...), Kings are from God, says
the Heathen. Therefore I must be subject, purely out of Conscience, for the
Lord's sake. The Religion of the Church of Rome (like the Laws of Draco) are
written in Blood, and advanced by Policy, and propagated by Violence: their Vow
of Poverty is such, as to covet Kingdoms, their Humility is such, that they
tread upon the necks of Emperors, their Charity is such, as to kill Kings,
making black TREASON a glorious Act, and to merit the brightest Crown of
Immortality, and highest Seat in Heaven. Whereas Christianity never used the
Sword (the Kingdom of Heaven is another kind of Warfare) Christianity came
attired into the World with the white of meekness, 2 Cor. 10.4.
humility and patience. Christ, the Prince of Peace, never pulled the Crown
from any Prince's head, but commands the payment of all Duties to Caesar, and
acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above. Nay, when our blessed Lord had
power with his Ego sum to strike all his Adversaries to the ground, or caused
Legions of Angels to have stood in his just defense to revenge the injury of
the People, the violence of the Soldiers, Mat. 26.53.
Joh. 19.15. Mat. 27.27, 28, 29. Luke 23.11. Mark 15 15.
the scorn of Herod, the judgment of Pilate, yet he yielded himself patiently
to suffer; to teach all his Disciples, that resistance is an affront to Divine
Authority. This was the Spirit of the great Exemplar of our Religion; this was
the Genius of his Doctrine and his practice. Nor did any of his Followers ever
rebel against their Prince, usurp the State, or disturb the Government; and
though it was their unhappy Fate at first to be accused as Factious and
Seditious, yet none were better Subjects, nor testified their Allegiance more
to Authority. S. Paul in the days of Heathen Persecution and Tyranny lays down
this Hypothesis, There is no Power but of God: the Powers that be, (...), are
ordained of God. If Religion be pretended, an Heathen must not be resisted. If
Tyranny, it is damnation to oppose a Nero. They that resist, shall receive, Romans
13.1, 2.
(...), the wrath and judgment of God, says the Apostle. This made the
Primitive Christians, those noble Spirits, where they could not comply, to
suffer, and thought it the greatest piece of devotion to be patient under all
oppositions. They were so far from conspiring into tumultuous Combinations,
that they freely offered themselves to the fury of their Enemies, and quietly
suffered all extremities of death and torment, choosing rather to be crowned
Martyrs for Religion, than be punished as Traitors for Rebellion. It was not
disability -- Si hosts exertos agere ^^llemus, non deesset nobis vis ^^merorum
and copiarum: Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia,
conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium, senatum, sorum. Cui
bello idonei non prom^ti suissemus. etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter
trucidamur? Si non apud istam disciplinam magis occidiliceret quam occidere.
Tertul.
, but duty, not want of money, or Martial prowess, but a reverend regard to
Imperial Majesty, as commanded by God, caused them not to avenge themselves.
The ancient Martyrs in saddest days (as Tertullian tells us in his Apologetical
Defense of Christians) had courage to say to their greatest Adversaries,
Cruciate, torquete, damnate, atterite, probatio est innocentiae nostrae
iniquitas vestra; Rack us, torture us, do with us what you will, or what you
can, your iniquity is but the proof of our innocence, you think to weary out
the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7.25.
by inventing of greater torments; but the Sect Exquisitior quaeque crudelitas,
vestra illecebra est, magis sectae nostrae plures efficimur quoties morimur.
Tertul. Apol.
of Christians is the strangest Sect that you ever read of, it is allured by
those miseries whereby others are terrified.

S. Cyprian writing to Demetrianus, the Governor of Africa, and Christian
Persecutor. God (says he) is the revenger of his Servants, when they are
annoyed; therefore none of us resists, nor avengeth Nemo nostrum quando
apprehenditur, nec se adversus injuriam vestram, quamvis nimius copiosus sit
noster populus, ulciscitur -- Odisse non licet nobis, and sic Deo placemus, dum
nullam pro injuria vicem reddimus. S. Cypr. ad Demetr.
himself of your unjust violence, though our people are numerous and able to do
it. The innocent rest content with their undeserved punishments and tortures;
and thus we please God the more, whilst we retaliate no injury.

Euseh. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 9.
Eusebius tells us, That in the Dioclesian Persecution in Thebais, which was
none of the greatest Countries of Africa, were slain, by various methods of
cruel death, so many, that the Executioners were tired out.

In the time of Trajan also, Tiberius the President of Palestine, gives this
relation in his Letter to the Emperor: I am weary with punishing and destroying
the Galilaeans, who are called Christians, according to your Majesty's Command.
It was the inspired patience and courage of these great The World admires the
Lacedaemonians and Romans, and they that had courage in any Age or place to dye
for their Country, they were so esteemed by the Heathens, that they had Statues
erected, Pictures engraven, Titles of Honor inscribed; the World doing what it
could to make their Names immortal, how much better to suffer for Christ? What
Soul would not desire to have his Name enrolled in that Catalogue among the
Cloud of Witnesses, who wandered up and down, destitute, afflicted, tormented,
were stoned, slain with the Sword, sawn asunder, yet not accepting deliverance
on unworthy terms, because they looked for a better resurrection, Heb. 11.35,
37.
Heroes that blunted the very edge of Persecution, to tire as the hands, so the
wits of their Tormentors, to turn their pity at their suffering into envy at
their patience, to hug their Stakes as so many horns of the Altar, letting fall
Magni animi est injurias despicere. Sen. de Ira, l. 2. c. 32.

Absit itaque a servo Christi tale inquinamentum, ut patientia majoribus
tentationibus praeparata, in frivolis excidat. Tertul. de bon. pat.


not so much as a tear, lest it might quench some sparkle of that fire wherein
they were (with Elijah) to ride to Heaven as in a Chariot; ignis igni remedium,
'twas this fire of holy Zeal and Christian Loyalty or Charity which out-burn'd
that of Malice and Envy. And in the midst of the fiercest flames that Barbarism
and Cruelty could invent, paid the Tribute of a peaceable subjection to their
Murderers, and made unforced acknowledgments of the Right they had to their
obedience. And the Church of England teaches no other Doctrine than what was
taught by the Prophets and Apostles themselves, i. e. Obedience and Submission
to Kings and Governors. In the Prophecy of Obadiah they are called (...),
Saviors or Deliverers. In Ezekiel's language they are (...) Shepherds, to feed
and rule the People. In S. Paul's they are (...), God's Ministers; nay Elohim,
Exodus 22.28.
Gods by Office and Deputation, to govern the affairs of men on Earth. The
Apostles also charged those whom they employed in settling of the Churches, to
put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, Tit. 3.1.
and to obey Magistrates. And S. Peter's Exhortation is, Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2.13.
not only unto the King (...), as supreme, but unto Governors (...), as being
sent by him. Rebellion then is as the sin of Witchcraft, and Disobedience as
the iniquity of Idolatry. 1 Samuel 15.23.
For whosoever disobeys the Viceroy, affronts the Sovereign; they fight against
God, and attempt to cross the Decrees of Heaven, and frustrate the Counsel of
the most High, who says, Prove. 8.15.
By me Kings reign. And it is the assertion of Plato, That a Kingdom is (...),
a Divine Good, which imprints on our minds a double instruction, to Fear God,
and Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. First, to adorn the Christian Religion with
holiness and piety of life. It is Religion that ennobles man, erects his
affections, and estates him in a happiness above Nature; alters his very being,
and puts him in opposition to what he was before. Religion is the most
effectual instrument to reform men's lives, and bring them into an hatred of
their vices, which all Moralists, especially the Pythagoreans, after all their
industry, despaired of. What Reports Diogenes Laertius, and Valerius Maximus
make of Polemus, the Convert of Zeno, are but mean and low things, if compared
with the Acts and glorious Success of Christianity; whose virtue and influence
upon men's Consciences, inables them to subdue Self, overcome their Vices, check
the impetuous force of their Passions, and withstand their own carnal and
sensual Inclinations, the greatest and most noble Conquest.

As the Luster of Christianity was thus bright and glorious in the Primitive
Constitution; so was the honor of its Professors, that they were of such piety
and integrity, that their Adversaries confessed, that their Religion was their
only ruin.

Let us therefore be so steadfast in our Religion, unshaken in our Faith, so
constant in our Devotion, and holy and unspotted in our Lives, that Wisdom may
be justified not only of her Children, but Enemies also: which lays the
greatest obligation on us to live the most holy and religious life toward God:
For were we more holy and righteous in our ways, and did we walk in newness of
life, we should more convince the World of the Truth of our Religion. Psalm.
93.5.
Holiness (says the Psalmist) becomes (O Lord) thine house for ever. No
garment becomes the Church so well, as the garment of Holiness. It is Sanctity
that is the Churches Glory: It is the Ephod of Purity that is the Churches
Excellency. Our first Creation set before us, as Hieroglyphics before the
Egyptians, whose very Shapes and Figures were Doctrinal; and by a kind of
Oratory, preached the Spectators Duty. What else means the Image of God in the
Soul, but that it might continually act and work according to the Pattern, viz.
Godliness, after whose Likeness it was created according to Holiness and
Perfection, which it brought down from Heaven; that reflecting still upon the
same Image, it might be holy as he is holy. 1 Pet. 1.15.
For a holy life and Christian works, are the very way to the glorious Vision,
and Fruition of the great God in an everlasting blessed Life: Therefore, Fear
God, Romans 6.22.
and honor the King, which is the best Christian practice, and brings me to
the next gradation in our Discourse, viz. to crown our Zeal with Loyalty to the
King; for he is (...), wears Gods Image, and beautifies the World (...). Plut.
ad Prefect indoct. Dei enim imaginem habet Rex, sicut Christi Episcopus. S.
Aug. Vet. Test. quaest. 35.
with Order and Government, whereby so many millions of men do breathe the life
of peace and comfort. For sooner might a heap of Ants be brought to an
uniformity in motion, and those little bodies that play up and down the Air in
a careless posture, to a regularity, than the (...), or popular sort, if they
were not held in by the reins of Government; whither would the fury of men's
passions lead them? if they were not bounded with Authority, if the rapacity of
these Orbs were not slack'd by the course of the higher Spheres, and subdued to
an awful subjection; Religion would quickly feel a heavy Destiny, and the World
be drowned in blood, as it was once in water. The Sword of Authority is put
into the hand of the King by Almighty God. To the like sense also is that of
Nestor to Agamemnon: (...)
(...) --
Jove lent thee thy Scepter and Jurisdiction. On this account speaks
Themistius, (...), God sent Regal Power from Heaven. Holy Athanasius also
confesses the Power of Kings to be of God, and their impiety not to be
punished by man: Ad Antioch. quaest. 55.
Sicut in toto mundo Deus Rex est Imperator, and potestatem exercet in omnibus:
As God is King and Emperor over all the World, and exercises his Power in all
Creatures: so the King and Prince is over all earthly men.

The Lord, says Athanasius, Athanas. apud Epiphan. Haeres. 68.
to Constantine, judge between thee and me, since thou give way to my false
accusers against me.

Let us send our prayers and tears, says S. Cyprian Mittamus prec^s and
lachrymas cordis ad Deum legatos. S. Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 4.
to the persecuted Christians, as Messengers and Ambassadors of our hearts
unto God.

Lactantius speaking of Obedience to Princes, says, They are to be defended not
by killing, but by dying, not by cruelty, but by patience.

Gregory Nazianzen lived under five Emperors, Constantius, Julianus, Valens,
Valentinianus, and Theodosius: in all which time he could find no remedy
against the Tyranny, Heresy, and Apostasy of Princes, besides prayers and
tears, speaking of Julian's (...); Greg. Nazian. in Julian. Orat. 2.
time, we had no other weapon, nor wall, nor bulwark, but our hope in God left
us: whom could we have either to hear our prayers, or to protect our persons,
but him?

August. in Psalm. 124.
And S. Austin says, That though Julian was an Apostate, an Idolater, and a
wicked man, the Christians were subject to him, their Temporal Lord, out of
respect to their Eternal Lord.

Rogamus, Auguste, non pugnamus: non timemus, sed rogamus. S. Ambr. l. 5. ep.
33.
We entreat, O Emperor, (say the Soldiers in Ambrose his Cause against the
Arians) we fight not; neither fear we, and yet we entreat only.

We will stand to it, and fight it out, even to death, Stahimus, and pugnabimus
usque ad mortem, si ita oportuerit, pro matre nostra, non scutis and gladiis,
sed precibus fletibusque ad Deum. S. Bern. Epist. 221.
if need be, says S. Bernard, for our Mother the Church; but with such weapons
as we may, not with Sword and Target, but with tears and prayers to God. These
were the weapons of the old Christian Martyrs.

Tertullian also to Scapula the Viceroy of Carthage, Absit ut ultionem nos
aliquam machinemur, quam a Deo expectamus: Far be it for us to attempt or plot
any revenge of our wrongs, which we expect from God. We (says he) are defamed
for seditious against Imperial Majesty -- Circa Majestatem Imperatoris
infamamur, tamen nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani, nec Cassiani inveniri
potuerunt Christiani. -- Christianus nullius est hoslis, nedum Imperatoris,
quem sciens a Deo suo constitui, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, and
revereatur, and honoret, and salvum velit, cum toto Romano Imperio quousque
seculum stabit. -- Colimus ergo and Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet,
and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo
constitutum, and solo Deo minorem. Tertul. ad Scap.
, and yet never were the Christians Rebels, as several of your own Religion
have been, Albinus, Niger, Cassius were Traitors against Marcus Antonius,
Commodus, Pertinax, and Severus the Emperors. A Christian is Enemy to no man,
much less the Emperors, knowing that Regal Dignity is constituted and ordained
of God, and therefore necessarily to be loved, reverenced, and honored, whose
prosperity, together with the welfare of all the Roman Empire, we wish and
desire so long as the World shall endure. We honor and worship the Emperor,
so as it is lawful for us, and expedient for him, as a mortal man, next unto
God, of whom he holds all his Authority, only subject to God, and so we make
him Sovereign over all. And it is manifest, we live according to the Discipline
of Divine patience, whilst being so great a multitude, we behave our selves
with peace and submission. This has been the practice of good Christians in
all Ages, and to do otherwise, is to sit in the Throne of the Almighty, and to
slight the Legislative Power, turning God out of his Sovereignty, affronting
him in his Authority and in his Laws, making themselves the sure Heirs of
Heaven, because the Apostle says, They that resist shall receive damnation.
All Subjects, Prelates, Peers, and People are forbidden with the tongue to
revile Kings, Exodus 22.28.
with the heart to think ill of them, Eccles. 10.20
or with the hand to resist them. Romans 13.2.
It is not the wickedness -- Si a saevo Principe crudeliter torquemur, etc.
subeat primum delictorum nostrorum recordatio, quae talibus haud dubie Domini
flagellis castigantur: inde humilitas impatientiam nostram fraenabit, nobis
nullum aliud quam parendi and patiendi datum est mandatum. Calv. Instit.
of the Prince should cause any to neglect their duty to his Person, nor the
injuries done by him tempt them to forget their Allegiance; because in the
worst -- In homine deterrimo, honoreque omni indignissimo, penes quem modo sit
publica potestas, praeclara illa and divina potestas residet, quam Dominus
justitiae and judicii sui ministris verbo suo detulit: proinde a subditis eadem
in reverentia and dignitate habendus, quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet,
qua optimum Regem, si daretur, habituri essent. Calv. Instit.
and most unworthy King the Divine Authority resides, which God in his Word
has given to righteous Magistrates; and therefore Subjects are to have the
same reverence for him (as far as it belongs unto public obedience) as for the
best King. The Divine Wisdom by the Tyranny of cruel Kings -- Etsi non loquatur
Dominus, satis tamen flagellis ipsis and plagis vocat; ut enim Scripturam nobis
omnem, Prophetas, Doctores, and Monitores deesse fingamus, aerumnis tamen and
calamitatibus nos erudit, ut breviter definire possimus, plagam vocationem ad
poenitentiam esse. Calvin.

Wicked Princes by Divine permission are exalted to punish the sins of the
people: tollenda est igitur culpa, ut cesset Tyrannorum plaga. Aquin. de Regim.
Princ. l. 1. c. 6.


, makes trial of the Virtues and Graces of his Saints and people, that they who
are found patient in tribulation, constant in truth, loyal in subjection, may
be crowned with glory and happiness. It was the height of Caesar's ambition to
walk in the steps of Alexander; and of the Turkish Emperor to walk in the
steps of Caesar; and of Themistocles to walk in the steps of Miltiades: so it
is the height of a Christians glory to be a follower of Christ, who is the
Mirror of Angels, and Beauty of Heaven, whose life is the perfect Idea of all
Virtue, and exact Pattern of holy living; tread therefore in the holy steps of
the blessed Jesus, the Savior of Mankind, whose actions should be our
instruction, and the patience and obedience practiced by our Lord, the rule of
our imitation; Leo in Sermon. de Not. Dom.
Frustra appellamur Christiani, si imitatores non fuerimus Christi. Christ and
his Apostles, both by Precept and Example, left to all succeeding generations
Christian obedience and subjection. Had the Language of the Scripture, and
sacred Oracle of the Word, so positively declared against Conformity, as it has
REBELLION, the Dissenters of this Age would have got into the Revelations to
loosen the Seals, pour out the Vials, and phantastically interpreted the Fates
of Kingdoms, and Churches ruin. God is angry with them (says the elegant
Moralist Plutarch) that counterfeit his Thunder and Lightning, (...), his
Scepter, his Thunderbolt, and his Trident: he will not let them meddle with
these; he does not love they should imitate him in his absolute Dominion and
Sovereignty, in the arm of his Power, or finger of his Miracles, but loves to
see them darting out those amiable and cherishing (...), those beamings out of
justice, goodness and clemency, imitating his meekness and humility,
long-suffering and patience, charity and obedience. And as many as lived to
Christ's sacred Institution, did never revile the Government of Tyrants, (but
carry themselves in a demeanor toward them, to obey and be subject, B^n^s
tanquam Deo, malis propter Deum; tam bonis quam malis, and tanquam Deo, and
propter Deum.
as one says, (...). Unto good Rulers as God, bad Rulers for God, Submit your
selves, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. to every ordinance of man, (...), for the
Lords sake, and to the King as supreme) much less repelling by force their
violence, lest they should be found (...), fighters against God. What
presumption is it then to contradict the Laws of our Superiors, and show
disrespect to that order of men, which God intends as his Vicegerents? The
immense perfections of a Deity being such, that the frailty of humane Nature
cannot bear his immediate converses (let not our Lawgiver speak unto us, except
we shall dye) therefore he rules us by our own Species, and governs us by men
like our selves: But as the dignity and excellency of Angels are above other
Creatures, so of Magistrates above other men. The Heathen Poet calls Kings
(...), persons divinely descended. God has imparted to them his own Name, Ego
dixi, Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said, Ye are Gods, and Sons of the most High, all of you. As he has
given an eminent appellation unto them, so he has conferred an eminent
Authority upon them, a Divine power (...). Diotog. de Regno.
, representing and resembling his own Sovereignty, and they are Sacred and
Sovereign, because they bear not the Sword in vain. And the same Authority that
binds us to obey God, commands us to revere those that so signally wear his
Image. Nothing can more oblige Heaven, than to oblige those Heaven has set
over us, especially our Princes and Governors. Let us therefore show our
future Loyalty to the King, and readiness to obey him, by submitting our selves
first unto God, whose MINISTER he is, that these things are enjoined, not
secular men only, says S. Chrysostom (...), etc. S. Chrysostom. in Romans Hom.
23.

Et eadem habent etiam Theodoret. Theophyl. and Oecumen. ad Romans 13. (...).


, but even Priests and Monks also, the Apostle evidently demonstrates, when he
says, Let every Soul be subject to the higher Power. Be thou Apostle, or
Evangelist, or Prophet, or whatsoever thou be else, thou must not only obey
them, but even be subject unto them. Here we may justly tax the intolerable
Tyranny and Ambition of that man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
who not only exempts himself from all Civil subjection, but even Sic Alexand.
III. Frederic. I. Imper. pede collum compressit. Philip. Bergom. Supplem. Anno
1160. Petr. Justin. rerum Venet. lib. 2. and Papyr. Masson. in Alex. 3. Et
Coelestinus Hen. VI. Imper. Capiti coronam pedibus imposuit, eisdemque denuo
dimovit. Roger. Hoveden. Annal. par. poster. in Rich. I. and Ranulph.
Polychron. l. 1. c. 26.
tramples on the Crowns of Princes in a most presumptuous manner. Gregory VII.
feared neither God nor man, when he erected the Papal Croisier against the
Regal Scepter, and read the Sentence of deprivation against the Emperor Henry;
Carol. Sig^n. de Regno Ital. lib. 9. in Vita Hen. III.
Ego Authoritate Apostolica, etc. I by my Power Apostolical do bereave Henry of
the German Kingdom, and do deprive him of all subjection of Christian men,
absolving all men from the Allegiance sworn unto him. And as I do deject Henry
from Royal Dignity: so I exalt Rodolph (Duke of Saxony, that was a sworn
Subject to the Emperor) to govern the Kingdom, granting unto all men, that
shall serve him against the Emperor, forgiveness of their sins in this life,
and in the life to come. It is no wonder, that Gregory his Chair clave asunder,
as some Writers Benno Card. in Vit. Gregor. VII.
affirm, at the giving of the Sentence, because the proud Pope and his wicked
Decree were too heavy a burden for S. Peter's Stool of humility to bear. The
ancient Fathers were not acquainted with this Divinity of the Popes Deity, they
were utterly ignorant of it. We worship the Emperor, Colimus Imperatorem ut
hominem a Deo secundum, solo Deo minorem. Tertul. ad Sca. pull.
says Tertullian, as a man that is next to God, inferior to none but God
alone. The Speech of Optatus spoken of him by that insolent Schismatic
Donatus, may be applied to the proud Romish Prelate, since Cum supra
Imperatorem non sit nisi Deus qui fecit Imperatorem, dum se Donatus super
Imperatorem extollit, jam quasi hominum excesserat metas, non verendo eum qui
post Deum ab hominibus timebatur. Optat. advers. Parmen. lib. 3.
above the Emperor there is none but God that created him. The Pope advancing
himself above the Emperor, goes beyond humane bounds, and carries himself,
not as man, but as God, in not reverencing him who of men is to be feared next
after God. Aeneas Sylvius says, Pius II. de ortu and Author. Imperii, cap. 23.
Sit tandem finis litium, Let there be an end of contention and one principal
Head to determine all temporal matters, and the occasion of perpetual debate be
taken away; let men acknowledge themselves subject to their Prince, and give
reverence to him whom God has made his Vicegerent on Earth. S. Bernard, though
he lived but in a bad and corrupt Age, writing to a great Bishop Si omnis
anima, etiam vestra; quis vos excepit ab universitate? Qui tentat excipere,
conatur decipere. S Bern. ad Hen. Senonens. Epist. 42.
, If every Soul must be subject to the higher Power, then yours also among the
rest. The like may be said of the Bishop of Rome, who has given you an
exemption from this general Injunction? He that endeavors to exempt you, does
but seek to destroy you. What shall we now say of those who have blinded their
understanding, and overturned their Morals? to think them Saints who have
courage only to control their Governors, and fancy it piety and devotion to
laugh at what the Supreme Magistrate commands, is to exclude themselves from
the Kingdom of Heaven. It is a piece of new Divinity without color of reason
or Religion, and was never heard of till Vice and Hypocrisy brought it into
the World. And it is hard to say which is worse, men's actions or opinions, that
can turn the Dictates of the Holy Ghost to the temper of their own humor, and
transform Religion into Fancy, Virtue into Speculation, Zeal into Contention,
Truth into Policy, and Faith into Faction, that can see sin in a harmless
circumstance, a decency of habit, or usage of a Ceremony, which are instances
of our obedience, or our charity and unity, but cannot discern those greater
lines of Duty, Subjection and Loyalty. And as the Scribes and Pharisees of old
cried up every where, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord: so we
have many such now adays, who are seemingly great Champions for the Church,
and take great care of the Duties of the first Table, and yet can freely
indulge themselves in the violation of the second, proving annoyances to the
State by seditious Insurrections, though the Christian Religion does firmly
oblige men to peace, obedience, and due submission unto Secular Governors:
there are many persons that own that Name, and yet entertain Positions wholly
inconsistent with the Precepts of that Religion, and the safety of Princes, and
their Kingdoms, swallowing REBELLION -- There was a time, which is a precaution
to posterity, when men pretended a Call from God, to do the work of the Devil,
viz. rebelling, and then murdering the best of Kings, erecting him a Scaffold
for a Throne, and for a Diadem of Gold, gave him a Crown of Thorns, and instead
of a glorious Prince, made him a glorious Martyr.
without regret, which opens the floud-gates of impiety, and lets in upon us a
Chaos of Anarchy, Libertinism, and popular Confusion, bringing a kind of
present damnation on the World. They that are Authors or Abetters of Sedition,
(says S. Chrysostom) can neither avoid shame on Earth, nor escape eternal
Damnation. Though God the great Judge do sometimes permit Rebels, in his
Justice, to prevail against Kings for the contempt of the Law of the highest,
and neglect of their own duty: the reward of Rebellion shall be no better than
the recompense of Satan, who is the Instrument of the Lords wrath for the
punishment of all disobedience. The Kings Power is from God; and for any
private person, or any Club of Subjects to wrest it out, is a double Usurpation.

First, They invade Gods Sovereignty, Romans 12.19.
who says, Vengeance is mine.

Secondly, The Princes Prerogative, whose Office is to protect and punish, to
defend the innocent, and correct the Spirit of Contumacy and Rebellion, relieve
the oppressed, and support the virtuous; rewards to Merit, as well as
punishment to Sin and Vice are dispensed: A terror to evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14.
(says the Text) and praise to them that do well. Therefore honor the King.

Secondly, As the goodness of Heaven shines in the preservation of our Royal
Sovereign from the Usurpation of cruel Enemies at home; so likewise Divine
Providence has guarded him from Foreign Attempts of unreasonable men abroad,
and made the Plots and Conspiracies of these (worse than Heathens) of none
effect, and delivered our King, and our Princes, our Nobles, and the Heads of
our Tribes, the Governors of our Church, and Judges of our Land; nay, the
whole Commons of this Realm, from a fearful destruction, that would have
swallowed them up: For when the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree, to cut off
Sovereignty, and destroy the Lord's Anointed, the rest of the people, who are
the Branches, must expect lopping. The restless Emissaries of the Church of
Rome, whether Priests, Jesuits, or College of Cardinals, give daily proof of
their inveterate malice against the King, the Government, and Protestant
Religion, thinking that new Massacres are the most effectual course to stop the
cry of the old; and that the readiest way to silence their Adversaries, is to
make them instances of the Truth of the Accusation.

If the great God of Heaven (who refrains the Spirits of men that delight in
Blood) had not been gracious to our King and Kingdom, you had not this Day been
Auditors, nor I Speaker of this Theme; but all of us miserable Spectators of
the contrary: And the Pope's Triple Crown would have been set with many red
Roses of great Triumphs in a (...), nothing less than utter extirpation of us,
and Memorial from under Heaven. The Rivers of Rome may seem to run smooth,
their Sea is Blood: the extracted Spirits of things work more forcibly than
concrete Bodies, take heed of an Elixir, an Extraction of Malice sublimated,
spiritualized into a Religion. The cruel Massacres of Primitive Christians If
we reflect on ancient times, and look back to the course of the World in
general; in the first Monarchy we find a fiery Furnace; in the second, a Den of
Lions; in the third, the madness and fury of Antiochus, when to believe in one
God was to be put on the Rack, and to abhor Idolatry, involved the Votary in
cruel Tortures: In the fourth Monarchy the ten Persecutions more bloody and
grievous than all that went before; for not to sacrifice to Idols, and to offer
Incense to Heathen Gods, was cause enough to be torn in pieces by wild Beasts,
and be exposed to all manner of terrible Torments, when bloody Tumults
affrighted Christ's Members, and chased them from their Devotions, when the
Priest became the Sacrifice, and his Books in disdain were made a
Burnt-offering.
will teach us the price of our own happiness, and the slaughter of our
Forefathers may upbraid our unthankfulness with the benefits of our peace.
'Twere good that we their surviving Offspring, would learn to make use of
their happy Martyrdom. In their crimson steps we may trace the way to our
Savior's Cross, and read in the living memory of their Torments the sad
Tragedy of his Sufferings. The World (at this day) is well mended with us; we
know not the meaning of Rack or Faggot, of Sword and Gridiron, the Instruments
of Romish Cruelty. Let three Kingdoms therefore bow themselves as the heart of
one man, and praise God for his mercy unto his Servants under the Protection of
our gracious and religious King Charles. Heaven has preserved our Church from
ruin and confusion, from the spreadings and prevailings of Errors, Heresies,
and Schisms, Superstition and Idolatry, which strive to oppress us, and to
eclipse the truth and purity of Doctrine, which is our Church's Glory, and so
much offends the Eyes of Rome, and makes them clip, wash, and new-coyn the Gold
of the Sanctuary.

Lastly, As Divine Providence and Goodness did this Day bring into the World
our gracious Sovereign, and has hitherto preserved him from all Enemies,
Domestic and Foreign: So the same special grace and favor of God, did this
Day bring home and restore to us our King; a Prince of so much Clemency and
Mercy, that he is inferior to none that sways a Scepter, or sits upon a
Throne. His Restoration was wonderful, without any Effusion of Blood. The
Voice of War is changed into Proclamations of Peace, the Clattering of Swords
and Spears is turned into the sweet Melody of Harps, and the harsh Tones of
Death into a Psalm of Thanksgiving. O Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy
Land, and have turned away the Captivity of Jacob: Praise therefore waits on
thee in Zion, and unto thee shall the Vow be performed in Jerusalem. We
celebrate the Memory of this thy Mercy, in restoring our King, and with him the
free Profession of true Religion and Worship. What does God require now both
from Prince and People, but the acknowledgment of his favor? He that will not
glorify God, as the Father of Mercies, in the rigor of Justice God may
glorify himself in his eternal ruin. If we prove not the Heralds of his
Glory, Examples shall we be of his just indignation. All tasting Mercy, all
should be thankful; and though all have not Frankincense, yet every one may
have Praise. Let us praise God for his miraculous preservation of our King and
Kingdom, Church and People; and let it sound so ^oud (this day) as it may reach
Heavens gates, and meet with Hallelujahs, which the bright Morning-Stars in
their Orbs pay to their Creator, (...), the Angels Liturgy is singing of Hymns
of Glory. And shall not the Militant Church say, We praise thee, O God; our
Souls do magnify the Lord? The Stork pays Tribute of her young, the Trees of
their fruits, the Earth of her flowers, and shall we be (...), without natural
affection? (...), without God in the world? not (...), return blessing and
praise to the Divine Majesty for his infinite Blessing unto us. We praise God
in his Sanctuary, and in the Firmament of his Power, for his mighty Acts, and
according to his excellent Greatness. Praise him with the Sound of the Trumpet,
with Psaltery and Harp, with stringed Instruments and Organs; show your selves
joyful before the Lord the King. Let every thing that has breath praise the
Lord.

Let us now direct our Prayers and Supplications to the Glorious and Eternal
Trinity, that all Blessings, Divine and Humane, Spiritual and Temporal like the
precious Ointment of Aaron's may be poured out on the Head of ou^ Royal
Sovereign, length of days on hi^ right hand, on his left Riches and Honor;
that his Reign may be glorious, and his Regal Virtues after this Life crowned
with immortal Glory. And we with the residue of God's holy Church, may rise to
that incomprehensible endless Felicity; where the Blessings of the Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity, will gloriously shine upon our Souls for evermore.
Which God of his infinite Mercy vouchsafe unto us, for the Mercies of his
Eternal Son, our blessed Savior. To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, three
Persons, one God, be ascribed, as most due is, all Honor, Glory, Power,
Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, the residue of our lives, and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 56. line. 13. for then read there, p. 62. l. 10. fo Reershaba r.
Beersheba, p. 74. l. 16. for fair this read this fair.


