September. 26. 1688.
Libellus cui Titulus, Chemical Dis. ceptations, or Discourses upon Acid and
Alkali, etc.

Imprimatur, Tho. Witherly, Aeq. aur. Col. Med. Land. Praeses.

Censores.
Pe. Barwick Joh. Elliot Rob. Pit. Joh. Bateman
Chemical Disceptations:

OR, DISCOURSES UPON ACID and ALKALI.

Wherein are Examined the OBJECTIONS Of Mr. Boil against these PRINCIPLES.

Together with a REPLY to a Letter of Mr. S. Doctor of Physic, and Fellow of
the College of ***, wherein many Errors are corrected, touching the Nature of
these two SALTS.

By Fran. Andre, Dr. in Physic, of the Faculty of Caen.

Faithfully rendered out of French into English By J. W. (...).

To which is added, by the Translator, a Discourse of Phlebotomy, showing the
Absolute Evils, together with the Accidental Benefits thereof, in some Cases.

London, Printed for Tho. Dawks, on Addle Hill in Carter-lane, and Benj.
Allport, at the white Horse in Little Britain. 1689.

THE Translator to the READER.
Kind Reader,
I Have here presented Thee with an Excellent Treatise of a learned French man
in an English Dress, and though, perhaps, it be not a la mode, and consequently
the less acceptable to vulgar Spirits; yet, to the Learned and Impartial
Readers, it will appear a Work of no mall Worth, especially when they shall
Justly weigh those Solid Reasons the Author gives in Defense of the Hypothesis
of Acid and Alkali, and the Weakness of those Objections against it: the first
being deduced from Reason and Experience, and the last only from overcurious
Supposition: The Work pleads so sufficiently its own Worth, that all
Commendations come much short of it. It Is a Book so Useful and Necessary in
Dispelling those Mists of Ignorance we at present generally labor under, that
it is Pity Our English Tongue was not honored with it from a more accomplished
Pen, long before this; seeing it is a Book which more particularly concerns us
than any other Nation, in respect, That that learned and Ingenious Person that
made those several Reflections against this Hypothesis (which this Author has
fully and civilly answered) is one of our own Country men, and a man of no
small Eminence, which, perhaps may be one Great REASON why this never learned
the English Tongue in public 'till now.

As for the Translation, I hope it is performed as near the Author's Mind as
possible, seeing I have all along, and especially in the most material Places,
confined my self to the Words of the Author; therefore perhaps some places may
at their first perusal appear a little difficult (especially to a Tyro in this
Hypothesis) because they relish a little of the French Idiom: however, I hope,
It is not so much wandered from English Sense, but that those of the meanest
Capacities may readily enough enjoy the true meaning: Thus by your kind
Acceptance of This, you will oblige me to serve you further

Yours to serve J.W. (...).

To The Deans and Professors of the Faculty of Caen.
SIRS,
IT IS usual, when we present the World with any Work, to choose some Worthy
Patrons, under whose Name it may appear, and, who can defend it against the
Attacks of Envy, Prejudice and Ignorance, which are three powerful Enemies to
contend against, and such as cannot be overcome but by those who have Zeal and
Love for Learning, and which are free and profound in their Understandings.
It Is this, Sirs, which has oliged me to offer this little Work to you, and to
publish it under tho Glory of your Illustrious Society: there are none can more
advantageously defend it than your selves, for you disarm Envy by that Zeal and
Love which you have always shown to Learning: you vanquish Prejudice by that
Liberty and uninterested Disposition which you retain in Physic and Medicine:
and you destroy Ignorance by that inexhaustible Fountain of Learning which you
enjoy. Wilful Opinion was never known to reign amongst you, for you consider
Things with a Solidity and Faculty of Mind truly extraordinary: Reason and
Experience are the only Guids you employ in your Inquisitions and
Understandings: Authority has no place with you if it be not accompanied with
solid Reasons, and uncontrolable Experience. In a Word, it seems that Nature
cannot withdraw her self from your View, nor has concealed any thing from you.

I had enlarged more in your Commendations did not your Modesty restrain me,
and oblige me to make an End: only with protesting my self to be all my life
time with Respect,

SIRS, Your most humble and obedient Servant F. A.

THE Author's Preface.
When I resolved the publishing my Sentiments on Acid and Alkali, I could not
but doubt my Book would find some Censures amongst the greater part of those
that should read it: and indeed I had little Reason to exspect a more favorable
Entertainment for the first production of my Genius; since I have observed the
Works of more accomplished and delicate Wits have not escaped the Attaints of
Critics. Besides there is also a particular Consideration which makes me
believe, That is it Inevitable to it, since it is not usual to reason according
to these Principles which are not yet established. For, it is certain, That
there is necessary to the inuring ones self to a New Hypothesis, a certain
Measure of Time: for, we see, That such as have at first esteemed a Doctrine to
be Chimerick and vain, have under their Examination, in Order to refute it,
found it possible and reasonable at last, and so at length, having made it
familiar, have embraced it.

All the Explications which I have made of the more curious Phoenomena's of
Nature, are so facile and natural, that they are indeed so many Demonstrations
of the Truth of these Principles; seeing I have not made use of any other Proof
than those which I have drawn from Reason and Experience.

This is that which induced me to Discourse under the Names of Eubulus and
Pyrophilus; the first, a man of good Understanding; and the other, a Lover of
Experiments. I have chose the Form of a Dialogue, believing it most proper to
instruct, and to give me room to refute all Objections which should be raised
to the contrary, which I have performed with a few words as was possible. I
have not sought any vain Ornaments of Language, because it is the Inclination
of my Genius to be more intent on the things themselves than in the manner of
expressing them: As for the Rest, I desire all those that may happen to have
some Experiments come to light, that they cannot explain by these Principles,
not to accuse the Hypothesis thereof: But, let such know, That to convince it
of Falcity, They ought to demonstrate That it is contrary to Experience; and
let them also remember, That others, or even they themselves may, which New
Lights one day, discover the true Cause, which they then did not perceive. All
those several Operations which I have unfolded hereby show of what Utility it
is in Physics; and, if what I have said, be so prosperous as to please the
Learned, I intend to show a greater Use thereof in Medicine by the Explication
of Diseases, and their Symptoms; and the Remidies we may obtain therefrom, with
the manner how they act.

Errata. Page 7. l. 4. read but they. p. 9. l. 10. r. Hartshorn. p. 13. l. 8.
different. ib. l. 9.-gulations. p. 14. l. 3. a salt. ib. l. 5. disssolve it. p.
50. l. 13. absorbed. p. 56. l. 17. it self. p. 59. l. 9. leaves. p. 63. l. 20.
Retine. p. 64. l. 22. Retine. p. 65. l. 16. dele of. p. 68. l. 11 Retine. p.
72. l. 2. and. ib. l. 20. has. p. 79 l. 14. or one. p. 99. l. 19. with. p.
101. l. 21. dele the. p. 105 l. 21. dele the. p. 106 l. 10. it. p. 115. l. 1.
become. p. 127. l. 15. you have p. 139. l. 16. add one. p. 165. l. 3. be as.

CHEMICAL DISCEPTATIONS; Or, SOME DISCOURSES UPON Acid and Alkali.
EUBULUS. DEar Pyrophilus, We shall at last arrive at the End of our Errors,
and Draw from the Fountain of Nature it self, Those Necessary Lights which can
make us Philosophers.


PYROPH. What say you, Eubulus?


EUB. I say nothing but what I can convince you of by evident Reason and
certain Experiments.


PYR. How have you discovered the Truth?


EUB. The Reading good Authors, and the Converse which I, for some time, have
had with learned Men, have quite demolished all my Prejudices, and made me
Examine things with as much Freedom and Impartiality, as I had before of
Antipathy: I have constantly observed, That Authority, eve^ to this present
time, has been an Invincible Enemy both to Physic and Medicine, and the very
Rock upon which all the Famous Men of the past Ages have relied; and is indeed,
at this day, the Cause of so many Sects and different Opinions which we see in
the Schools: Whereas Reason and Experience are the only True KEYS which can
give Admittance in^o either of these Sciences: for, ^o be a Philosopher, it is
abso^utely necessary to banish Au^hority, and to follow Reason and Experience.
I am not ^ble sufficiently to admire the ^rosperous Success and Exact^ess of
the Anatomists and Chy^ists of our Age! The first ^aving discovered to us, in
the Body, Parts, Humors and Uses ^nknown to the Ancients: and ^he Last have
withdrawn us from that erroneous Darkness wherein the Four Elements and their
First and Occult Qualities had plunged us, giving us Principles as clear as
those were obscure.


PYR. I have always told you That Anatomy and Chemistry were great Assistants
to Physic and Medicine, and that they enlighten us much, where we attain it
only by their Experiments.


EBU. I do not design to Entertain you here with the New Discoveries of
Anatomists upon Humane Bodies: I shall only speak of those which Chemists have
made us take Notice of, in the Dissolution of Mixts. Know, that for this
Effect, They acknowledge two sorts of Principles; of which, some they call
Active Principles; and others they style Passive Principles. The Active
Prin^iples are the Causes of all the Actions and all the different Motions
which are done in Nature: The Passive Princi^les, on the contrary, are not
^apable of any Action, but serve only as Matrixes to the active Principles for
them therein to make their Productions.


PYR. We cannot desire an exacter Distinction of Principles, but how many have
you of either.


EUB. There is some Controversy amongst Chemists about the Number of Active
Principles; Some will have Three, which they call Salt, Sulphur and Mercury;
pretending that these are the last Bodies they find in the Resolution of Mixts.
By Mercury they understand the most subtle, most penetrating and most
aetherial Substance in the Mixed. By Sulphur, all that which is therein
oleagenous and inflamable and, By Salt, and that is dissolved in Water, and
coagulated by Fire: they say, The Mercury or Spirit is the Soul of Bodies, That
it gives Motion and Life to Animals, That it makes Plants grow, brings forth
blowers, and ripens Fruits; also that it renders Stones and Metals perfect.
That the Sulphur or Oil Causes the Diversity of Colors and Odors, the Beauty
and Deformity of Bodies: and, That the Salt is the cause of the Tastes, Weight,
Solidity, and hardness of Mixts. Others acknowledge that there are Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury in all Bodies; they demonstrate also by several Experiments, That
these Three Substances are composed of Two others, a great deal more simple,
viz. of Acid and Alkali Salts, and that Salt, Sulphur and Mercury are no other
but these Two Salts at liberty or intangl'd: In effect, you shall observe, That
there are Two sorts of Salts, there are some Simples, which are not compounded
of any other Substance; and some Compounds (as are all the compound Mineral
Salts, and essential Salts of Plants) which are composed of simple Salts and
passive Principles, notwithstanding in such sort as the Acid, which is the
first of these simple Salts, predominates therein. And these Salts are called
Salts, because they are dissolved by Moisture, and coagulated by Dryness.

The simple Salts are either Alkali or Acid; the Alkali Salts are either Fixed
or Volatile: the Acid Salts are always in a Liquor; therefore called Acid
Spirits: nevertheless, these Acid Spirits are no other but Acid Salts dissolved
in a little water. The Alkali Salt, on the contrary, is almost always in a
Body: it is, as I said but even now, either fixed or volatile: the fixed Alkali
Salt is never elevated by the action of Fire, as Salt of Tartar, and all those
Salts which are drawn from Plants by Incineration, which we call Lixiviate
Salts, as those of Scordium, Tamarisk, etc. The Volatile Alkali Salt, on the
contrary, is elevated with the least heat of fire, and is drawn chiefly from
Animals, as the Volatile Salt of Vipers, Hearts, etc.

There are Three Sorts of Mercury or Spirit; an Acid Spirit, as that of Niter,
Alum, Vitriol, etc. A sharp or biting Spirit, as that of Hartshorn. Urine,
Vipers, etc. and a burning Spirit, as that of Wine, Beer, Cider, etc. The Acid
Spirit is an Acid Salt dissolved in a little Phlegm: The sharp biting Spirit is
an Alkali, volatile likewise, dissolved in a little Phlegm and the burning
Spirit is a Sulphur; and a Sulphur is an enveloped Acid.

All Chemists, in effect, agree That there are two passive Principles, viz.
Water and Earth, or Phlegm and Caput Mort.

The Water serves as a Menstruum and Dissolvant to the Acid and Alkali Salts;
and it is extracted by Distillation from those Bodies which contain it.

The Earth serves as a Bond to these Two Salts, it is extracted commonly after
the Extraction of the Lixivious Salt.

It is to be noted, That according to the different Mixture of these Four sorts
of Substances, and the different Rangings of their Parts, there are made
different Productions in Nature, sometimes of Animals, sometimes of Vegetables,
and sometimes of Minerals.


PYR What do you mean by Acid Salt and Alkali Salt?


EUB. The Acid Salt is easily known by the Taste and Smell, and by the
Firmentation which it makes with Alkali's, as Spirit of Sulphur. This Salt is
composed of small sharp pointed parts, which insinuate themselves into the
Pores of those Bodies they meet with, and make either a Disunion of their
Parts, or a Coagulation: for, according to the different Motions, particular
Figure. Subtilty or Grosness of these Points and the disposition of those
Bodies, they either pass through them with Violence, and scatter their parts
one from another: or else they are Entangled therein, in such sort that they
lose their Force and their Motion in them: Remaining very often sticking to
them.

We observe, in effect, That Acid Salts dissolve hard Bodies, as Stones, and
Metals, (except Gold, which cannot be dissolved but in salt Menstruums:) and
coagulates the most part of soft and fluid Bodies, such as Milk, Blood. etc.


PYR. Then, there are Acid Salts of different Natures?


EUB. There are as many different sorts of Acid salts as there are different
Bodies in Nature; and though the Particles or Attoms which compose them are all
sharp, yet that hinders not, but they have nevertheless all different Figures,
which causes all the compound Mineral Salts, in which the Acid salt
predominates, as Niter, Vitriol, etc. and also the Essential Salts of Plants,
to take all different Figures in their Coagulations according to the Nature of
the Acid which determines them, whence some are formed Pyramidical, as Niter;
others, winding like a Screw, as Vitriol, etc.


PYR. Whence comes it, That Acids dissolve Silver and other Metals, and do not
dissolve Gold? and, on the contrary, salt Liquors dissolve Gold, and touch
neither Silver nor other Metals?


EUB. Gold being almost all Sulphur, cannot be corroded by Acids of what nature
soever they be, it must be salt Liquor, and as perfect a Spirit of Salt as can
dissolve; which in Corrosion must re-take the Nature of Salt: Silver and other
Metals having, on the contrary, more Mercury than Sulphur, can never be
dissolved in salt Menstruums, for there is none but Acid Spirits that can
dissolve them. To confirm both to you, You ought to take Notice, That those
that work in Slat Petar, after they have extracted it, draw forth yet a Salt, a
great deal less acid; which is of the Nature of common salt, which they call
Sal centrique, which when it is Resolved into a Liquor dissolves Gold after the
same Manner as Spirit of Salt does, and in corroding re-takes the Nature of
Salt, and dissolves neither Silver nor other Metals.


PYR. Suppose that Gold be almost all Sulphur, and then it is easy to
comprehend, Why it cannot be dissolved by Acids, but only by salt Menstruums.


EUB. Have you never observed, That when Gold is in flux, if the end of an iron
Rod be put therein, it will be calcined and reduced into Scoria? after the same
manner as if it had been burnt with common Sulphur: and, that Argent vive
forsakes all Metals to join it self with Gold, which it renders as brittle as
Glass: How should Gold calcine Iron, and be in such wise penetrated by Mercury,
as to become brittle as Glass, if it did not abound with Sulphur? first you
know, That Iron cannot be calcined but by Sulphur, which seeing Gold calcines,
consequently Gold must be a Sulphur. Secondly, Mercury being a powerful
Metallic Alkali (though imprisoned) which is not joined but with a Sulphur of
its own Nature, would not quit other Metals to be joined to Gold, if Gold had
not more Sulphur than others: and the Mercury renders it not otherwise brittle,
but because it absorbs its Sulphur and dis-unites the parts thereof.


PYR. Mercury, nevertheless, does not destroy the Body of Gold, which it would
do, if it absorbed the Sulphur, and disunited the parts thereof.


EUB. That is not a Consequence, That because the Mercury absorbed the Sulphur
of Gold, and scattered the parts thereof, It must therefore destroy it; for the
Sulphur of Gold being most fixed, and the Mercury, on the contrary, being most
volatile, there cannot be made an exact Union betwixt them two, that is to say,
by small parts; and, the Mercury being cast into the fire, quits in that moment
the Sulphur of the Gold which it had absorbed, and flies away, and the Sulphur
of the Gold is reunited to its own Mercury, and the Gold becomes as hard, as
fixed and as solid as it was before: Moreover, how should Gold become
fulminant, if it did not abound in Sulphur? The composition of Aurum fulminans
makes us sufficiently sensible of it. They cause Gold to dissolve in Aqua
Regis, which they afterward precipitate by little and little with Oil of
Tartar made per Deliquium: there is then made a Union of the Alkali of Tartar
with the Acid spirit of the Nitar, which composed the Aqua fort; and there is
produced therefrom a newmade Nitar: this Nitar, being united to the Sulphur of
the Gold, is inflamed, and produces all those surprising Effects which we take
Notice of therein.


PYR. The Nitar would Produce these Effects alone, or being mingled with the
Sal Armoniack or common Salt, which was put into the Aqua Regia.


EUB. Salt-Petar is never inflamed but when it is mingled with some Sulphur; as
with common Sulphur in Gun-pouder and Pulvis fulminans; or with the Sulphur of
Antimony when one makes Regulus and Liver, etc. Common salt and Sal Armoniack
are so far from rend'ring Salt-Petar inflamable, that they extinguish fire with
more force than common Water does: it therefore follows, That the Sulphur of
the Gold is united with the Salt-Petar, and causes this Deflagration.


PYR. We see never^^^less, That Salt-Petar is inflamed at the same time that
one puts it on burning Coals.


EUB. The Salt Petar is not inflamed then, but because it is united to the
Sulphur of the Coals: for if one put some Salt-Petar into a Crucible and make
the Crucible red-hot, it simply melts, and is not inflamed but when one casts
some Sulphur or some Coal thereinto.

And, to convince you fully, That Gold contains a great deal more Sulphur than
other Metals; You may take Notice, That one cannot make either Silver, Lead or
Tin fulminant, because These Metals have only a very little Sulphur, which is
wholly absorbed by their Mercury.

There is nothing in the world which ows not its Birth to Acid Salt: nothing
can live, nor be multiplied without it: It is that Soul of the World, of which
the Ancients have so often told us:

Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat Molem.
The Spirit within, and the Mind infused, through the Members nourishes and
agitates the whole Body.

In a word, The Acid Salt is the Author of the Construction of every Body, and
the absolute Master of Alkali Salts, it prints them (as a Seal is made on Wax)
with all sorts of Characters, and makes thereof several different Bodies,
according to the diversity of its points, as we observe by the Regeneration of
the Essential Salts of Plants, and compound Mineral Salts.

If one mingles with an Alkali, either fixed or volatile, the Acid Liquor of
some Vegetable: as for example, Of the grains of Kermes, or Wine, 'till there
is not made any more Fermentation, and then one philters them through gray
Paper, and evaporates the superfluous humidity, causing them to cristallize in
a Cellar or some other cool place: there will be made thereof an essential Salt
of Kermes, which has the same Virtues with that which is ordinarily drawn.
There will also be made a Tartar like that of Wine, whose, sourness is gone.

The Acid Spirits of compound Mineral Salts, as of Alum, Niter, etc. change
all sorts of Alkali's into Salts of their own nature, to wit, into Alum, Niter,
etc. like to those from which they were drawn.


PYR. These Experiments are most fine, most curious and most convincing, and
this new way of Reasoning by Deeds, please me much: but pray give me as clear
an Idea of Alkali Salt, as this you have given me of Acid Salt.


EUB. The Alkali Salt is easily known, by its fermentation with Acids, and by
its precipitating Vitriol of Mars, and other compound Mineral Salts dissolved
in water, except Sea salt, in which, the Acid and Alkali are so strictly united
that neither the violence of fire, nor the mixture of any other Body can ever
dis-unite them, as I have already said, where I spoke of the Dissolution of
Gold in salt Menstruums. I have caused you to take Notice, That there are two
sorts of Alkali's, a fixed and a volatile; fixed, as Salt of Tartar: Volatile,
as the volatile Salt of Vipers.

Sal Alkali is extremely porous, wholly empty and rough, that is to say, whose
parts are unequal: and, it is for this Reason, That it whitens Linen, and
cleanses Stuffs: It takes out the Filths that are found therein by its
Inequalities, and it fills at length its pores therewith.


PYR. What Proofs have you That Sal Alkali is vacuous and cleanses Linen and
Stuffs.


EUB. There are several Experiments which prove both. If Alkali's were not
vacuous Salts, How should they be so easily resolved into in Liquor, when they
are put into a moist place? since it is observed that Salts filled with their
Acids, as Niter, Alumn, Vitriol, etc. are not Dissolved therein; the Alkali of
Niter, which has not been separated from its Caput Mort. could not charge it
self with an Acid equal to that which was drawn therefrom: Diaphoretick
Antimony which has not yet been washed, should not augment Weight therein, and
should not change its Diaphoretick retick quality into an Emetick: in a word,
Corals, Lead, and diverse other Alkali's reverberated in a violent fire during
some days and nights, should not augment a fifth part; and of Alkali's as they
were, should not become salt, and should ferment still with Acids, as they did
bebefore, if Alkali's were not vacuous salts, which are easily filled with the
Acids of the air and fire. We see, notwithstanding all these Experiments are
true: that the Alkali of Nitar draws out of the Air an Acid of its own Nature,
That Antimonium Diaphoreticum becomes therein Emetick: that reverberated Corals
augment not only in weight, but also become Salt, and ferment no more with
Acids, from whence we may very justly conclude, That Alcali Salts are vacuous
and porous Salts, which fill themselves with all sorts of Acids, of what nature
soever they may be.

There are also no less Proofs that Sal Alkali whitens Linen and cleanses
stuffs: if you have observed, that one cannot make a Lixivium of ashes wherein
this salt is wanting, as it is in those of Wood, which has a long time
floated, but only of those in which it abounds, as in the ashes of Oaks,
Appletree, Broom, etc. and, That the salt Salts, as common Salt, can never
cleanse them, because that their Alkali is wholly filled with its Acid, and so
consequently it cannot fill it self with the filths of the Linen and Stuffs: I
should have no need to bring any other proofs, nor to tell you, That the herb
which we call Saponaire [Soapwort] because it is made use of to whiten Linen
and Stuffs, cleanses them on no other account, but because it abounds in this
Salt.


PYR. I am sufficiently convinced by what you have told me. You have already
explained (where you spoke of the Dissolution of Metals) why Gold cannot be
dissolved but by a Salt Liquor, and Silver and the other Metals, on the
contrary, but by an Acid Liquor: I would willingly you Explained to me, Why
Acids do not precipitate Vitriol of Mars dissolved in water, as Alkali's do:
and, as they, on the contrary, precipitate equal with them, Mercury sublimate
dissolved in common water, and dissolved in Aq. fort.


EUB. It is easy to give you a Reason for all these different Effects: for,
Little do you consider the manner by which these Praecipitations are performed.
Alkali's, as well fixed as volatile precipitate all these Dissolutions, because
they absorb the Acids which hold the Iron and Mercury in Dissolution; and in
this Manner the Iron and the Mercury being no longer detained nor agitated by
the points of those Acids, are precipitated and fall by their own weight to the
bottom of the Vessel which contains them: It happens much otherwise in the
precipitation which Acids make of corrosive sublimate dissolved in common
Water, and Mercury dissolved in Aqua fort. for there is not made any Union of
Acid with Alkali, but only a Confusion of Acid with Acid: and this
precipitation happens only because the Acids of Niter, Vitriol and common salt
which had sublimed the Mercury, and those of the Aqua fort. which had dissolved
it, were not able to penetrate, nor unite themselves intimately with it: which
causes that a new Acid easily shakes them and makes them at the same time to
quit their hold; thus is the precipitated: This is the Reason why Acids can
never precipitate Vitriol of Mars dissolved in water, because there is so
perfect and strict a Union between its Acid and Alkali, that there is not found
the least pore which is not filled, in such manner, That a New Acid not finding
therein any vacuous place can never dis-unite them.


PYR. I do not yet well understand how Acids which hold a Body in Dissolution,
can quit it to join themselves to another.


EUB. Experience will presently make you comprehend it, for if one casts upon a
Solution of Vitriol of Mars and upon that of Mercury sublimate an Alkali,
whatsoever it be, there will be made at that instant a Precipitate: and, if
after having put an Alkali to it, there is immediately put, an Acid, there will
not be made any precipitate, but the solution will remain as clear as it was
before; because the Acid which was put last thereto, joining it self to the
Alkali which was put to it before, hinders conquently that that Alkali cannot
absorb the Acid which held the Mercury and Iron in dissotion: if this
Precipitation of Vitriol or Mars, and Mercury dissolved by Acid Spirits and
precipitated afterward with Alkali's, was made after any other manner than
that which I have already told you, it should be all one whether one put an
Acid thereto after there was an Alcali cast into it; or, that one put none, the
which notwithstanding happens not, for the Acid which was put thereto, joining
it self to the Alkali which was put thereto before, hinders by that means that
the Alkali could not absorb the Acid spirits, which held the Mercury and Iron
in disiolution.


PYR. All your Experiments convince me strongly of that which you have told me
concerning Acid and Alkali Salts; but, as it is not sufficient to Establish
Principles, only to tell what they are, and what they do: It is therefore very
needful it be proov'd that they Exist, that they are found in all Bodies, and
that they are Principles thereto, that is to say, That all Bodies are resolved
into them; and, that they are not resolved into any other substance: and, It Is
this that I could wish you would plainly show me, concerning these two Salts,
if it be possible.


EUB. You have none but Animals, Vegetables and Minerals to examine, and you
shall not find one of them, in which these two Salts are not to be met withal,
and in which they are not Principles.

The Volatile Alkali's which are drawn in abundance from the Blood, Flesh,
Horns and Bones of Animals, which ferments with all Acids, and precipitates
Vitriol of Mars dissolved in water, do they not prove, There is excess of
Alkali therein? and the different Acid Juices which are separated from their
Bodies, as Spittle which mortifies Mercury, it being a powerful Alkali, which
cannot be so mortified but by an Acid: and, as the Acid of the Stomach curdles
Milk when one drinks it fasting, the which is plainly perceived by Vomiting it
up again, almost as soon as it was taken, and Milk cannot be coagulated but by
an Acid. Flesh, also Blood and Milk which grow sower when they begin to
corrupt, prove sufficiently, That there is some Acid Salt in Animals.

Is there a Vegetable in which these two Salts are not found? the simple
Fermentation which Vegetable Juices make, should be sufficient to convince you
of it; for Fermentation, as I shall tell you hereafter, cannot be made but by
the meeting of these two Salts. Also there is not a Vegetable from which we do
not draw a great quantity of Alkali, and which does not give, when it begins to
corrupt sufficiently sensible signs of its Acidity. How also should we be able
to draw an Essential salt from Plants, if they had not Acid and Alkali, seeing
Essential salts are no other (as I gave you to observe, when I spoke of the
Regeneration of Salts) than these two Salts joined together.

Do they not draw also an Acid and Alkali from Minerals? compound Mineral
Salts, as Vitriol, Alum, Niter, etc. give us an Acid in dissolution; and leave
us an Alkali in the Caput Mort. Calcined stones, as Calx vive, are not
fermented when they are dissolved in water; but because they contain each of
these two Salts: Has not common Sulphur its Acid, which they draw, per
Campanum, in burning it, and which elevates Mercury into Cinaber? has it not
also its Alkali which remains in the Caput Mort? Is there not Acid and Alkali
in Antimony, as we observe in the Composition of its Butter? Equal parts of
Antimony and Mercury sublimate they mingle together, which they put in a Retort
and commit to the fire. Then the Acid spirits, which had sublimed the Mercury,
quits it to join it self to the mercurial Part or Alkali of the Antimony, and
the Sulphur or Acid of the Antimony elevates the Mercury into Cinnabat. Have
not the Metals also their Acid and Alkali? Gold abounds in Sulphur which is
Acid, and it has a Mercury which retains this Sulphur, and unites it self
intimately to it, Silver and the other Metals have a Mercury which ferments
with spirit of Niter which is Acid and a Sulphur which hinders the volatility,
and fluidity of this Mercury.


PYR. May not the fire produce these Salts also from the most part of those
Bodies from which they are drawn.


EUB. No; for when one has once drawn the Salt from Ashes, calcine them never
so well, they will never give others, no more than floted wood [that is. I
suppose, Wood that has lain in water till it is rotten] rotten wood, and Plants
exposed some days and nights to the Aier, because their salts have been
dissolved in the air and water, and are consequently drawn out from their
Bodies. It should not happen so, if the fire had produced those two Salts; for,
then at all times, whether after Putrefaction or Calcination the fire should
always, produce some new salt, and one body would give no more than another;
the which is contrary to Experien^e, as you see.

The Acidity of Blood, Milk and Flesh is natural to them, and those different
Acid Juices which we find in the Bodies of Animals are separated therefrom
without Artifice, and without the help of fire.

The Fermentation which Vegetable Juices make, is done of it self.

In a word; The Acids and Alkali's of compound Mineral salts, separated one
from the other by the means of fire, would never recompose the same salts, when
one reunites them together, if the Fire had produced them: for, what
proportion, what relation should these new Productions of the fire have with
the Principles which compose these salts, to cause that these Productions
should regenerate salts, as natural as Niter, Alum, Sal-gem, etc.

You see plainly by all these Experiments, That the Fire does not produce in
Bodies the Salts which we draw therefrom, but that these Salts are actually
found therein. There remains no more, but that I show you they are Principles
thereto.

There are commonly drawn from all Bodies, three different Substances, to which
are given (as I have already said) the names of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury,
which are pretended to be the last Bodies, which are found in the Resolution of
Mixts: but Experience has at length discovered, That these Three Substances
were composed of Acid Salt and Alkali Salt; and, that these two Salts are not
composed of any other substance and by consequence, they ought to be Principles.

For, though the Artist work as much as he will, he may easily find the means
to reduce the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury into our Two Salts but he will never
find the Knack to reduce these two Salts into any other Substances; and though
he make use of the same two Infirnments which he used for the reducing the
other Three substances into these Two Salts, to wit, Fire and Water:
notwithstanding standing he shall never be able to make that the Acid Salt be
no more Acid Salt, nor the Alkali Salt, Sal Alkali.

I have occasioned you to take Notice, that there are two sorts of Salts,
namely, an Acid Salt and an Alkali; That there are Three sorts of Spirits or
Mercuries, an Acid spirit, a sharp [biting] spirit, and a burning spirit: that
the Acid spirit was an Acid Salt, dissolved in a little phlegm; the sharp spirit
a volatile Alkali dissolved also in a little phlegm; and the burning spirit, a
Sulphur, and Sulphur an inveloped Acid, I have now no more to do, but to bring
you some Experiments to convince you of this Truth.


I. EXPERIMENT. Which proves that Acia Spirits are no other than Acid Salis
dissolved in some phlegm.
An Acid Spirit ferments it self with all Alkali's, and makes thereof Salts of
the same nature with those from which it was drawn, as the Spirit of Niter, etc.

II. EXPERIMENT. A sharp Spirit is a Volatile Alkali dissolved in some Phlegm.
All sharp spirits ferment themselves with Acids, and precipitates Vitriol of
Mars dissolved in water, as the volatile spirit of sal-Armoniack, etc.

III. EXPERIMENT Which proves that burning spirits are Sulphurs.
Plants give a great deal of Oil, and a little spirit, before they are
fermented: and they give, on the contrary, a great deal of spirit, and a very
little Oil after they are fermented, because the parts thereof unloose
themselves and dis-intangle themselves one from the other in the time of
Fermentation, and remain bound and entangled one in the other before the
Fermentation was made, which clearly shows that a burning spirit is a vegetable
sulphur, but much less entangled than the other sulphurs of Vegetables.

IV. EXPERIMENT Which proves the same.
Experience shows us, That burning spirits exposed to the air for some time,
are changed into Oils of the same nature as those of the Plants from which they
were drawn.

V. EXPERIMENT Which demonstrates that burning Spirits are envelloped Acids.
There is drawn from salt of Saturn a burning spirit of the same nature as
spirit of Wine, this spirit cannot come but from the Acid of the distilled
Vinegar, which entered into the Composition of the salt of Saturn, whose parts
are bound and entangled one in the other.

VI. EXPERIMENT Which proves that Oils of Vegetables are envelloped Acids.
Oil corrodes Copper and turns it into Verdigrise: there are none but Acids
which can produce this Effect: and therefore consequently Oil ought to be Acid.

VII. EXPERIMENT Which proves the same.
Fire is an Oil whose parts are unwrapped, and in a most Violent Agitation and
Motion: fire is Acid, (since it renders Corals Salt) Oil which is the matter
thereof ought then to be Acid.

VIII. EXPERIMENT Which proves the same.
Soap does furnish us still with a most convincing Proof, That Oils of
Vegetables are enveloped Acids: Soap is made with three parts of Alkali and two
of Oil, which two matters are mingled together, and then boiled; and there
comes therefrom a salt body which is Soap: you know that saltness comes from
the mixture of Acid with Alkali: and, that consequently, seeing soap is salt,
the Soap ought not only to have Alkali in it, but also Acid, the Acid cannot be
communicated to it but by the Oil which was put thereto, which Acid unwraps it
self in the Alkali, which was joined thereto: it must be therefore that Oil is
an envelloped Acid.

PYR. It may be also, Tha^ the Fire communicated this saltness to the soap, as
it did to the Corals; for, you have already told me, That when one reverberates
them in a violent fire for some days and nights, they become entirely Salt,
and ferment no more with Acids.


EUB. The same thing cannot be said of soap, as of Corals; because one must
reverberate the Coral six days and nights to render them salt, and the
saltness of Soap is communicated to it in a short time, even as soon as the
Acid of the Oil is dis-enveloped and absrobed by the Alkali which was put
thereto, likewise the soap augments not in weight on the fire, as the Corals
do, they augmenting a fifth part.


IX. EXPERIMENT, Which proves that the Fats and Suets of Animals are envelloped
Acids.
Soap is made with the suet of Animals, after the same manner as it is with the
Oils of Vegetables: It must be therefore that the Fats and Suets of Animals may
be envelloped Acids, as the Oils of Vegetables are.

X. EXPERIMENT, Which proves the same.
The flame of Fats and Suets is Acid: it destroies Iron, and reduces it into
Scoria's, etc. Grease's and Suets ought then to be Acids.

XI. EXPERIMENT, Which proves that the Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals are
envelloped Acids.
Sulphur of Antimony elevates Mercury into Cinnabar, as we observed in the
Composition of its Butter; How should the Sulphur of Antimony elevate Mercury
(which is an Alkali) into Cinnabar, if it were not Acid? It follows therefore
that the Sulphur of Antimony is acid.

Common Sulphur elevates Mercury into Cinnaber, and it may be made use of for
the position of Soap, as well as the Oils of Vegetables, and Fats of Animals:
In a word, the Sulphur of Gold is acid, since it produces the same Effects as
Acids do, for it calcines Iron which cannot be calcined but by Acids, etc. The
Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals are then envelloped Acids.

PYR. In Truth, These Principles are most sensible and palpable.


EUB. This is not yet enough to have discovered thus much to you concerning
Acid Salt and Alkali Salt in particular: but it is needful that I press the
thing more home, and that I make you know what these II Salts are capable to
do, when they are once united. These two Salts are in regard one of the other,
as the Soul is in regard of the Body, and the Body in respect of the Soul: The
the Acid Salt is the Soul which animates and vivifies the Body, and the Alkali
Salt is the Body which receives the Soul and unites it self so intimately
therewith: that this Soul can be nothing without this Body, nor this Body
without this Soul. When they are once intimately united, as we observe in
common Salt: it is impossible to separate them one from the other: and though
these two Salts seem, at first sight, to have an Antipathy, one against the
other, by the Fermentation which they make when they meet: Nevertheless they
embrace and unite in such wise together, that, very far from destroying
themselves, they are coagulated, and make no more, but one and the same Body.
And, it may be said thereof as the Incomparable Hypocrates has said in his
Book of DIET, speaking of Fire and Water, that though these two Elements differ
in Quality, nevertheless, they agree in use, That they are sufficient for all
Bodies and for themselves, but neither the one nor the other separated can be
sufficient neither for any other body nor for it self.


Constituuntur (says he) tum Animantia tum alia omnia, tum homo ipse ex duobus
differentibus quidem facultate, Concordibus vero and commodis usu; haec ambo
simul sufficientia sunt tum aliis omnibus, tum mutuo sibi ipsis, Utrumvis vero
seorsum neque ulli alteri neque sibi ipsi sufficiens est.

All living creatures (says he) as well all other things as Man himself, are
constituted of two Principles different in Faculty, but concording and fit for
use: These two together are sufficient for all other things, as well as for
themselves, but either of them severally and apart is neither sufficient for
any other nor for themselves.

These two Salts are never at rest, if they be not united one with the other,
and as soon as they are once united, have nothing but love and sympathy one for
the other: which we take notice of by an Infinity of Experiments, as by the
sympathetical Inks.

The first Sympathetical Ink.
THere must be made two different Liquors in two separate Vessels.

The first, which is that we must write with, is made with distilled Vinegar
and Ceruse, which must be made to boil together for the space of an hour in a
well stopped Vial, then filter them through gray Paper, and reserve the Liquor
which comes therefrom in another bottle well stopped.

The Second which causes the writing to appear, is made with Calx Vive,
Orpiment and common water, after the same manner as the former.

We Write with the first of these two Liquors, and we apply upon the Writing a
paper imbued with the last; the Writing that was invisible appears at that
instant as black as if it had been writ with the best Ink in the world.

For to understand clearly the cause of this so surprising Effect; we must take
Notice, That the Calx vive and Orpiment abound with Alkali, and that these
Alkali's wherewith we did imbue the Paper, quits the Paper to absorb the Acid
of the Vinegar, and so the Writing appears.

But that which is more surprising is, That the Alkali's of Calx Vive and
Orpiment can pass through a Ream of Paper, a Table, and a Wall, to absorb the
Acids of the Vinegar, which is observed by the Writing which at the same time
appears, and by the Impression and odor which it e^aves on the Paper.

The Second Sympathetical Ink.
WE must write with an Ink made of Cork Coals and Gum-Arabick, and the Writing
will appear most black; then rub this Writing with the Liquor made with the
Calx Vive and Orpiment, and it will at that instant disappear, and will never
reappear, if it be not rubbed with some acid liquor, as with that which was
made with distilled Vinegar and Ceruse.

The Alkali's of Calx Vive, and Orpiment absorb (as you see) the Acid of the
Cork Coals and Gum Arabic, and so obliterates the Writing, which reappears as
soon as it is rubbed with some Acid liquor, because the Alkali which had
absorbed the Acid of the Ink, quits it to absorb that which one casts thereto:
thus the Writing reappears.

The Third Sympathetical Ink.
THis third Experiment teaches the way to transcribe in a Moment all sort of
Books, and Characters, and to draw out all sorts of Prints.

Take Venice Soap cut into little bits, and Oak-ashes equal parts, and about as
much Calx vive, cause them to boil in a new bottle with common water, then
philter them through gray Paper, and rub with a fether dipped in the Liquor which
shall come therefrom the Book or Image which you would draw, put some white
Paper which you shall also rub with the said Liquor, between each leaf of the
Book; put this Book between two pressures, and in a quarter of an hour it will
be drawn; the Letters or Picture not being in any wise hurt.

The Reason of this Experiment is, That the Acid of the Ink, which always
over-powers its Alkali, and which in process of time blots out the print or
writing, does fortify the Acid of the Liquor, wherewith we did imbue the Paper,
in uniting it self with its Alkali, and consequently prints all the Characters
of the Book on the Paper, after such fashion as they are in the book printed or
written, only as much Acid as the Alkali thereof could absorb; so that the
writing becomes fairer and nearer than it was before.

It is for the same Reason that Acids, as spirit of Niter, obliterates writing,
because they choke the Alkali thereof; and, that strong Alkali's, such as the
Infusion of Gall-nuts, causes them to reappear when they are rubbed therewith,
and renews ancient defaced Books and Writings, because they charge themselves
with the Acid which had blotted out the Writing.

These two Salts are at rest as soon as they are united: they cause the
Diversities of all the Phenomena's which we see in Nature. They are the cause
of the permanent colors which we behold, and of the Odours we scent, and Savors
which we perceive; for, according to the different Mixture of these two Salts,
the different Nature and the different Ranging of their parts, the Retain is
differently struck, and we behold different Colors, and the olfactory Nerves
and papillous Nerves of the Tongue are also differently struck, and we taste,
and smell differently.

PYR. I earnestly desire you would yet more explain to me how Acid Salt and
Alkali Salt joined together cause in us all these different Sentiments (...) of
which you tell us.


EUB. Whether the diversity of Colors which we behold comes only from the
diverse Reflect^on of the Light; whether they com only from the different
Impression which a colored Body makes upon the Air, and the Air upon the
optic Nerves: or, whether lastly, they may be no other but Attoms or
Corpuscles which go out continually from Bodies, and striking the Retain, cause
in us different colors; it is always constant, That the principal cause of
permanent colors comes only from the different Nature, and different Mixture
of Acid Salts with Alkali Salts, which we may observe by diverse Experiments.


The first Experiment.
ALl Acids destroy blew colors, and all Alkali's make them re-appear.

The Second Experiment.
SYrup of Violets, which is a Composition of Acid and Alkali, becoms of the
fairest Green in the world when it is mingled with some Alkali, as with oil of
Tartar made per deliquium; and reddish, when some Acid is mingled therewith.

The Third Experiment.
OIl of Vitriol is a powerful Acid, makes a black Composition with an Infusion
of Gall-nuts which is a powerful Alkali.

The Fourth Experiment.
A Decoction of Red Roses becomes ruddy by Mixture with Acids, and black by
Mixture with Alkali's.

The Fifth Experiment.
MErcury is elevated into Cinabar by common Sulphur and becomes a fair Red: and
the same Mercury sublimed, dissolved in water, and then precipitated by
Alkali's, falls down in a powder, sometimes red, sometimes white, yellow,
citrine, etc. according to the nature of the Alkali which precipitated it, and
as the Alkali absorbed more or less the Acid which held the Mercury in
Dissolution.

The Sixth Experiment.
SSpirit of Niter, which is a great Acid, renders the Juices of Herbs, which
abound in volatile Alkali, as white as Milk.

Distilled Vinegar does the same with Litharge in the Composition of Lac
Virginis.

The Smell is an affection of the olfactory Nerves, and the Taste is also one of
the papillous Nerves of the Tongue, as colors are of the Retain. There is so
great a Relation between the Taste and Smell, that those things which are
agreeable to the Smell are also almost always to the Taste: Whence it comes,
That the most part of Animals smell their Aliments before they taste them, and
they do not eat them except they find them agreeable to their Smell, as we may
take notice of it in Apes. All the Difference between these two Senses is, That
the Particles which cause us to Smell are a great deal more subtle and thin
than those which cause us to Taste.

As there are no Colors which we do not behold but by the different mixtures of
Acids with Alkali's; so there is also no Savor nor Odors which we do not
perceive according to the diverse Mixture of these two Salts.

1. EXPERIMENT, Which proves that Odours come from Acid and Alkali.
OIl of Roses drawn by Distillation (which is an envelloped Acid) mixed with a
sufficient great quantity of water has almost no odor, but mingled with Salt
of Tartar, which is a powerful Alkali, it makes a fluid Composition, some drops
of which being mingled with a quantity of water, makes the water one of the
most delectable odours in the World.

2. EXPERIMENT, Which proves the same.
SUlphurs of Minerals which are envellopod Acids, being to be dissolved by
Fire, or some other Dissolvant, cast forth an odor as stinking as that of the
Oil of Roses drawn by Distillation, but mixed with some Alkali it is pleasant.

3. EXPERIMENT, Which proves that the Difference of Tastes comes from the
Diversity of Acids and Alkali's.
EXperience shows us, That Saltness comes from the Mixture of Acids with
Alkali's: Soap which is salt gives us a familiar example thereof; It is made
with pure Alkali's, and Oil which is an enveloped Acid.

4. EXPERIMENT. Which proves that the Diversity of Savours depends upon the
different Mixture and particular nature of Acids (...) Alkali's.
SIlver reduced into Cristals by spirit of Niter, which is a powerful Acid,
become of an extreme bitter Taste: Lead, on the contrary, dissolved in distilled
Vinegar and reduced into salt, acquires the sweetness of sugar, etc.

I could bring several other Experiments to prove that the diversity of Odors
and Savours depends upon the different Mixture of Acid and Alkali: But, though I
have discoursed you thereof elsewhere, I shall yet bring you one more
sufficiently familiar: which is that of Wine: Wine having another Taste and
another Smell before it is fermented, than it has when it is fermenting, or
after it is Fermented, for it changes by little and little its green Taste into
a plesanter, and becomes at last sour, and loses its temperament of Wine; and
all these changes happens to it according (...) the Acids and Alkalies which
are found therein are more or less entangled, and (...) as one of them is more
or less exalted, and there is almost no odor or savor through which it does not
pass before it grows four.

There remains no more but that I speak two words of the passive Principles.

The Water is the first of these Principles, it serves (as I have already told
you) as a Vehicle to the Acid and Alkali salts; it serves also to dissolve
them, and put them in Motion, because Salts act not except they are dissolved,
Salia non agunt nisi dissoluta.

Water causes the Destruction of Mixts, when it is found therein in too great a
quantity, as it compacts them; and strictly unites their parts when it is found
therein in a lesser quantity; and it fills up the empty spaces, which it meets
with therein.

The Earth or Caput Mort. on the contrary being extremely porous and light,
makes a great many vacancies in Bodies wherein it is found; but, on the other
hand, it hinders that those bodies be not destroyed by the abundance of phlegm.

It is unnecessary to bring you a great many Experiments to prove that Water
and Earth are found in all Bodies, and, That they are Principles thereto, but
without any action: I believe you are sufficiently convinced thereof, and have
several times observed, That there is no Body from which we cannot draw some
Phlegm by Distillation, and which leave not some Earth after Calcination; and
though we work never so much on Water and Earth, it is Impossi to draw any
other thing therefrom but water and Earth. You are not ignorant also. That
rotten wood which has no Acid and Alkali Salts, and which has nothing but
some Phlegm and Earth, has no more any action.

PYR. I could wish you would a little longer explain what you mean by the words
Fermentation and Precipitation, whereof you make use so often.


EUBUL. By the Word Fermentation, I mean an Internal Motion of all the parts of
Bodies which are fermented in such Manner that they take no more the same place
nor situation as they had before, and that they change consequently, or at
least alter very much the nature of the bodies which are fermented: as for the
difference of Effervescence, in which there is made only a simple Motion of the
integral parts of Mixts by the force of some exterior Agent, as Fire; the
which parts re-take afterward the same situation which thy occupied before,
unless their natures and qualities be in any wise changed.


There are several sorts of fermentations in Nature; some are made with
Effervescence, as that which happens upon the mixture of Oil of Vitriol with
Oil of Tartar: and others are made without Effervescence, as it happens in an
Eg which a Hen hatcheth: and in common Water, when one casts thereinto some
Drops of well-deflegm'd Spirit of Vitriol, and this Fermentation is known only
by the Heat which we feel at that instant: There are some which are made
without Heat, as that which is made of Vitriol dissolved in water with Oil of
Tartar: There are some which are made with Fires and Flames, as the
Fermentation which is made of Calx Vive in the time it is sprinkled with a
little Vinegar: and others which are without Fire or flame, as are the ordinary
Fermentations. There are still some sensible and insensible; sensible, as the
Fermentation of Spirit of Niter with Oil of Tartar: and insensible, as that of
Wine, which sours.

PYR. Whence comes it that there are so many sorts of Fermentations?


EUB. Either Bodies are fermented of themselves, as Wine; or they are fermented
by means of a Ferment, as Dough with Leven; either the Acid Salts and Alkali
Salts are Exalted, or else they are Entangled one in the other: and, in the
Passive principles, one of them is exalted, and the other Entangled; or, one of
them is in a great quantity, and the other in a small quantity.

If the Acid Salts and Alkali Salts are each as powerful as the other, the
Fermentation cannot be made without Heat and Effervescence, as of spirit of
Niter with oil of Tartar; if, on the contrary, one of these two Salts is weak
and the other strong, as are the Alkali of Water, and the Acid of Oil of
Vitriol well deflegmed, there is only made a little heat without effervescence:
if the Acid, which is mingled with the Alkali, is dis-intangled from its own
Alkali and passive Principles; as the Acid of Oil of Vitriol, there is made a
Fermentation with Heat and Effervescence: and, if on the contrary, the Acid is
entangled, as in Vitriol in its Body; there is only made a Fermentation with
Effervescence without Heat: In like manner, if these two Salts are exalted and
dis-intangled one from the other, and from the passive Principles, they take
fire at the same time that they ferment, as Calx vive does when it is sprinkled
with some Vinegar. In a word, if these two Salts are weak, the Fermentation is
insensible.

There are few Fermentations made, but there is at the same time made a
Precipitation; though there are several Precipitations made without Fermentation,
as in the Precipitation which is done by Acids of Mercury sublimate dissolved
in Water.


Precipitation is a Dis-uninion of a dissolved Body from its dissolvant, in
such manner that being separated therefrom it falls by its own weight to the
bottom of the vessel which contained it.

Precipitation is made several ways; for, either it is an Acid which holds an
Alkali in dissolution; or, its an Acid which is dissolved by an Alkali, as it
happens in the Composition of Regulus of Antimony, in which the Sulphur of
Antimony, which is an Acid, is separated from the Regulus, and remains in the
Foeces dissolved by the Alkali's of Tartar and Niter. If it is an Acid which
holds an Alkali in dissolution; where the union is so perfect that there is not
the least Pore empty (as in all the compound Mineral Salts, as Vitriol) the
Precipitation cannot be made but by an Alkali; or else, where the union is not
so perfect, and there remains a great many Pores which are not filled by this
Acid, as in corrosive sublimate; The Precipitation may be done as well by Acids.

OTHER DISCOURSES UPON Acid and Alkali.
PYROPH. THOSE Arguings which we had at our last Meeing have almost wholly
persuaded me of the Verity of the Hypothesis of Acid and Alkali: But I must
confess, dear EUBULUS, that I have been extremely shaken by the Reflections of
the Incomparable Mr. Boil upon these Principles, which are lately fallen into
my hands, and the Objections which he makes are so strong, that it seems
impossible to bring a solution thereof.


EUB. I doubt not but that the Objections which the leared Mr. Boil makes
against Our Hypothesis have much seeming Truth in them; but nevertheless, I
believe that they may be resolved with great Ease, when one very exactly
considers what I have said to you concerning the nature of these two
Principles, and all their force will serve to make the Truth of this Hypothesis
the more conspicuous.


PYR. Mr. Boil thinks it strange, That they should explain all the Qualities
of Bodies and the other Phoenomena's of Nature, by this new System; and, that
they attribute to it an Extent which ought only to be given to Matter and
Motion.


EUB. You may easily conclude by the several Phoenomena's of all sort of
Species which I have explained to you according to these Principles; That it
will be easy to Explain all those which they shall be able to prefer: and I do
not see Why the Extent that is given to this Hypothesis, ought to be different
from that of Matter and Motion, since that in it self is found the Existence of
the Matter and Cause of Motion.


PYR, Our illustrious Englishman pretends, That they have not made Experiments
enough, nor sufficient Inductions to prove, That Acid and Alkali are to be
found in all Bodies, and in all the sensible Parts of Mixts; and, That they
ought not to conclude, that these Two Salts are to be found therein, because
such or such Effects are the Emanations of these Principles; as for Example,
When the Patrons of Acid and Alkali see Aqua Fort. or Spirit of Niter dissolve
Filings of Copper, they conclude thereupon, That the Dissolvant which is Acid,
meets, in those filings of Copper, with an Alkali upon which it works: Whereas
they do not take Notice, That a well deflegm'd Spirit of Urine, which in their
Hypothesis is a Volatile Alkali, dissolved in a little Phlegm, does dissolve
filings of Copper as readily, and much more naturally than Aqua Fort. does.


EUB. I believe you have sufficiently proved by those Experiments which I
brought you, That there is Acid and Alkali in all parts of Mixts. It is most
easy to separate these Two Principles from Animals, Vegetables and the most
part of Minerals; but as for Metals, These Principles are therein so strictly
united one with the other, That it is almost Impossible to dis-unite them:
Nevertheless, we see therein the same Effects as we know are produced in other
Bodies by Acid and Alkali, and therefore, we have good ground to believe, That
these principles are also to be met with therein, and, That the same effects
are produced by the same Causes. Thus, when we see Spirit of Niter and the
volatile spirit of sal Armoniack dissolve filings of Copper, we conclude, That
there is Acid and Alkali in those filings, and, That the Acid spirit of Niter
acts on the Alkali which it finds therein; and the sharp spirit of sal
Armoniack on its Acid: for, it is a sure Maxim That Acid spirits never act nor
ferment but with Alkali's: and Alkali's, on the contrary, never act upon any
other Bodies but Acids: and thus Mr. Boyle's Objection is of no force, seeing
Spirit of Niter and Spirit of sal Armoniack meet in the filings of Copper with
different Parts upon which they act differently, and they act not any otherwise
on the same subject.


PYR. He continues his Objections by an Experiment like the former: He says,
That in the Solution which is made of Iron by Acid Spirits, they are wont to
attribute this Effect to the Acidity, of the Liquor which dissolved it,
although Iron is dissolved redily enough, and also in the Cold too, in sharp
Spirits.


EUB. This Objection is as easily resolved as the former: for there is found in
Iron, as there is in Copper, Acid and Alkali; The Spirit of Niter acts on its
Alkali, and the Spirit of sal Armoniack on its Sulphur or Acid, and it is
sufficient that the one or other of these Two Liquors act upon the Alkali or
Acid of the Iron to make the Metal change its Form: as for the rest, it is
sufficiently easy to know, That there are Acid and Alkali in Iron by this, That
Iron cast into Cream hinders that the Butter cannot be made, in as much as it
charges it self with the Acid which ought to make the Coagulation: and there
are none but Alkalies which have the Privilege to produce this Effect: Acids
assisting to make this Coagulation, as Country-women observe; Therefore
consequently there may be Alkali in Iron. We see likewise by another familiar
Experiment, That there is Acid in Iron, for, if one puts a bit of iron into
Sauce, wherein there is some Gall, as in that of a Carp, the Gall of which one
has broke; all the Volatile Alkali which causes the bitterness of the Gall
joins it self to the Iron and the Sauce remains sweet: How should this be, that
this Volatile Alkali does join it self to the Iron, if there was not Acid in
the Iron, seeing Alkali cannot produce such an Effect; it follows therefore,
That there is Acid in Iron.


PYR. He afterward demands the Reason, Why Mercury, (which dissolves Gold so
readily, it being a hard and solid Body, and reduces it into an Amalgama) acts
not at all upon filings of Iron, though this is a Metal so open that Liquors
weak enough work upon it.


EUB. Two things contribute to this Effect: The first is, That there is a great
deal more Sulphur in Gold than in Iron, and consequently, Mercury (which
abounds in Alkali) can rather work on Gold than on Iron: The second is, That
the Sulphur of Iron is entangled in a great quantity of Earth which hinders the
Action of the Mercury which has not parts sufficiently subtle nor sufficiently
penetrating to dis-intantangle it, as the Spirits of Niter and sal Armoniack
do, whose parts are so thin and so agitated that they dis-intangle the parts of
the Iron one from the other, and makes a Disunion of its Sulphur and Alkali:
it is not so of Gold, whose Sulphur is only entangled in its Mercury, and,
which has only a very little Earth, which is not strong enough to entangle the
parts of the Sulphur and Mercury of Gold.


PYR. The same thing happens, which he pursues to the same End: In the
Precipitation which is made of Corals and Peals dissolved in distilled Vinegar
with Oil of Tartar made per deliquium: Chemists attribute this Precipitation to
the Alkali of Tartar, which absorbs the Acid spirits of the Dissolvant, and
nevertheless we see That Acids precipitate them as well as Alkali's.


EUB. I do not wonder, That Acids precipitate equally with Alkali's, Corals and
Pearls dissolved in distilled Vinegar: Yet that does not at all destroy the
Reason, That they are wont to render when it is made with Alkali's: for, there
are, as you know, Two sorts of Dissolutions in Nature, either an Acid dissolves
an Alkali, or else an Alkali dissolves an Acid: if it is an Alkali which holds
an Acid in Dissolution, the Precipitation cannot be made but by an Acid, for
then the Alkali which held it in Dissolution quits it to join it self to the
new Acid that is cast thereto: If, on the contrary, it is an Acid which holds an
Alkali in Dissolution, either the Alkali dissolved by this Acid is mixed
intimately with its dissolvant, in such manner that the dissolvant fills
exactly all the pores of the dissolved body, as it happens in Vitriol of Mars;
or, the dissolvant does not penetrate the Body but superficially, and does not
thoroughly fill the pores thereof, as we observe in Mercury dissolved in Aqua
fort. and in Coral and Pearls dissolved in distilled Vinegar: If it happens
that the Acid spirit penetrates intimately the Boto which it is joined, and
that those points be of the same figure and grossness, as the Pores of that
Body, the Precipitation cannot be made but by an Alkali which charges it self
with the Acid which held that Body in dissolution, and makes it at that instant
to quit its hold: The which Acids cannot do, because that not finding therein
any Vacuity they cannot work upon it. If the Dissolvant is not mingled per
minima with the dissolved Bodies, an their points are not of a figure
proportionated to those of the pores of the Body, the Precipitation thereof may
be made by Acids and Alkali's: by Alkali's after the same manner as I told you
but now: and, by Acids because the points of these Acids work upon those of the
Dissolvant, causing them to quit their hold: for, the Body being no longer
agitated nor detained by those points, it falls by its own weight to the bottom
of the Vessel which contains it. Thus when Oil of Tartar precipitates Corals
and Pearls dissolved in distilled Vinegar, they have Reason to say, that this
Precipitation is done, Because the Alkali of Tartar has blunted and charged it
self with the points of the distilled Vinegar which held the Coral and Pearls
in Dissolution, although Acids precipitate also this Dissolution.


PYR. Our Author says, Chapter the Third, That the Admirers of Acid and Alkali
seem to have assigned, arbitrarily certain Extents and Employments to each of
these Principles: as for Example, That an Acid does, in quality of an Acid,
such and such Operations, and the Alkali's in their quality the like also: and,
That from thence depends all the Phaenomena's of Nature; and, That they ought
not to promote, in publishing, Propositions of this Importance, without good
and sufficient Proofs thereof.


EUB. Does not Experience teach us, That Acids, of whatsoev^r Nature they be,
coagulate Blood, Milk, etc. That they ferment with all Alkali's, and never with
other Acids: That they constitute the Essence of all Bodies* that they are the
pointed Bodies which fills up the Vacuities of Alkali's, and which are the
absolute Masters thereof; That Alkali's, on the contrary, dissolve Blood and
Milk coagulated by Acids: That they hinder them also from being coagulated;
and, that their parts are not dis-united one from the other: For Example sake,
If one mingle some volatile Spirit of Sal Armoniack with new Milk, or with Blood
so soon as it comes out of the Vein, it conserves them in their Consistence for
a great while, and hinders them from being corrupted: Alkali's whiten Linen
and Stuffs; they ferment well all Acids and never with other Alkali's: These
are the little Bodies full of holes and wholly vacuous: in a word, They
precipitate Vitriol of Mars dissolved in Water, which Salts nor Acids can never
precipitate: You thus see plainly, That they assign not in vain, these nor
several other Effects to Acid's and Alkali's, seeing Experience teaches you,
That they are always and at all times the Cause thereof.


PYR. He affirms also, That the Division of Salts into Acid and Alkali is
purely arbitrary, and, That they may divide them otherwise: Acids and Alkali's
having not only in a great many things some agreement: but also salts of one
and the same Denomination being visibly different in several chief points: as
Alkali's, whereof some are fixed, others volatile; and some thereof give a
Precipitation of corrosive Sublimate dissolved in water of a tawny color, as
salt of Tartar; others a white color, as spirit of Urine, Hartshorn, etc.
Finally, some act very slowly on filings of Copper, as Oil of Tartar made per
deliquium, and others dissolve it with readiness, as spirit of Urine, etc. he
adds also, That there is no less Difference between Acids: some dissolve Bodies
which others cannot dissolve, as Aqua Fortis which dissolves Silver, Mercury,
etc. and touches not Gold: and, as Aqua Regis which dissolves Gold, and touches
neither Silver nor the other Metals: Spirit of Vinegar well deflegm'd dissolves
Lead in the Cold, and reduces it into minute parts, which Spirit of common Salt
cannot do: and he concludes this Chap demanding whether Acid and Alkali have
the Simplicity that a Philosopher requires in Principles? and in Smiling at the
Definition that they are Wont to give, That Acid is an Enemy to Alkali, and
Alkali to Acid.


EUB. The Division of simple Salts into Acid and Alkali is as Just and Exact as
can be wished; Acids and Alkali's having not any agreement in Virtue and
Property, and the one never produces the Effects of the other: as Mr. Boil
would have it: as for Example, Alkali's are Bodies vacuous and full of holes,
which precipitate Vitriol of Mars dissolved in Water, which whiten Linen and
Stuffs; which make a Dissolution of Milk and Blood coagalated by Acids. etc.
Acids, on the contrary, are pointed Bodies, which fill up the little holes they
meet with in Alkali's, which foul Linen and Stuffs, which coagulate Blood and
Milk, etc. in a word, which have not any of the Properties of Alkali's. And,
though Salts of one and the same Denomination differ in some things, yet
nevertheless, they all agree in Nature and use: for we see. That Alkali's,
whether fixed or volatile, are Bodies full of holes, That they all precipitate
Vitriol of Mars: That Acids, on the contrary, are pointed Bodies, etc. so that
when some Alkali's precipitate corrosive Sublimate dissolved in water, into a
tawny colored Powder, and some others into a white powder, that does not
prove, That they have a different Nature one from the other, but that comes
from the Diversity of their Pores, some having them more conformable to the
Acid which had sublimed the Mercury and others less, and they blunt after this
manner more or less the points of those Acids, whence comes the Diversity of
colors of the precipitate: It is not also the Diversity of Natures that makes
that Volatile Alkali's dissolves Copper more readily than fixed Alkali's do:
but only the greater agitation of their parts: all Acids work on Silver and the
other Metals, but more or less, according to the greater or lesser Relation
their points have with the pores of those Metals: These Acids never work on
Gold which cannot be dissolved but by salt Menstruums, as I have said
elsewhere. And, whatsoever Mr. Boil says of spirit of Salt, which he cites
for a most powerful Acid, is Salt, and not a pure Acid, notwithstanding the
Acid seems to predominate therein: and, That is the Reason why spirit of Salt
works neither on silver nor the other Metals.

These two Salts have the Simplicity that a Philosopher requires in Principles,
because they are composed of Particles of one and the same Nature, and can
never be resolved into any other Substances. In respect of the Definition which
Mr. Boil relates of Acid and Alkali, he has Reason to blame it, because he
does in no wise explain the Nature of these Principles, no more than if one
should say, That that which dissolves a Body dissolvable by an Acid, ought to
be an Acid: and, That all which precipitates a body dissolved by an Acid, ought
to be an Alkali: but Mr. Boil cannot say the same thing of the Definition
which I have already so many times repeated concerning Acid and, Alkali: That
the Acid is a Salt composed of small pointed parts which ferment with Alkali's
and makes the Essence of all Bodies: The Alkali, on the contrary, is a vacuous
Salt which ferments with Acids, and precipitates Vitriol of Mars dissolved in
water. This Definition explains clearly their Nature, Kind and Difference; for,
these two Principles agree in that they are Salts; and they differ in that one
of them is pointed, and the other porous and unequal, and that one fills the
Pores of the other, and is its absolute Master.


PYR. This Famous Englishman will not allow, Chap. 4.
That the Fermentation or Heat and Ebulition which is caused when these Two
Salts are mingled together, is a sure Token to know Acid and Alkali: For, he
pretends, That these Effects depend principally on the Mechanic Disposition
and Construction of Parts; and, That it is sufficient to produce heat when the
parts of a Body are agitated with vehemence on all sides: and, for the
Ebulition, That the Bodies which are mingled intercept the parts of the air, or
the warm Vapors in the time that they are excited; and, That there happens
often in this mixture Heat without Ebulition, and Ebulition without Heat: He
relates some Experiments of both: For, he says, When Oil of Vitriol, which is
a powerful Acid; or, Salt of Tartar, which is a powerful Alkali, are mingled
with Water which is neither Acid nor Alkali; There is at that time a
considerable heat excited, without any Ebulition: and, That on the contrary, in
the Mixture which is made of spirit of verdigriss, made per se, which is an
Acid, with salt of Tartar: there is made a great Ebulition and gross Froth
without any remarkable heat.


EUB. It is very true, That the Heat and Ebulition which happens in
Fermentation depends upon the Mechanic disposition and Construction of the
parts of Bodies which are Fermented: But this Construction or Disposition
likewise depends wholly upon the different nature of Acids and Alkali's, and
their diverse mixtures one with the other, as I have already caused you to
observe, where I spoke of Fermentation and its Differences, which would be
needless here to repeat: as for the oil of Vitriol and Salt of Tartar which
heat water when they are dissolved therein; you shall observe, That there is in
Oil of vitriol, a metallic part of Iron or Copper according to the Nature of
the Vitriol which was elevated in the Distillation by the Acid of that Salt, as
Experience sufficiently teaches us: This oil coming to be dissolved in the
water, there is then made a separation of the Metallic part from the Acid,
which had elevated it; and an action of that Acid upon the Alkali of the water;
which is powerful enough, since it hardens red hot Iron, and hinders it from
going into scoria's, when it is squenched therein, for, there is none but
Alkali's which can produce this effect: then there is made on all sides an
agitation of their parts, with sufficient Vehemence, whence comes the heat
which happens in this mixture. In regard of that which results from the mixture
of salt of Tartar with water, you shall understand that salt of Tartar does hot
heat water, but when it is too much or too little calcined: when it is too much
calcined, it is charged with an Acid from the fire, which coming to be
dissolved in water, it separates it self from the Alkali of the Tartar, and
acts upon that of the water, and causes, as I have said but now, the heat in
the water: and when the Tartar is not sufficiently calcined, it retains some of
its own Acid, and becomes a little near the nature of Calx vive, which causes
it to ferment in water: but when this Salt is neither too much nor too little
calcined, it dissolves simply in water without causing therein any Heat, as all
pure Alkali's do.


PYR. He afterward comes to speak of the Taste, which he says, is as the
Touchstone to know Acids and Alkali's: he says thereupon, That there are a
great many mixts, in which the Taste can so little discern which of those two
Principles predominate therein, that one cannot suspect that there is in those
two Bodies the least part of those Two Salts, as in Diamons, Rubys, Gold,
Silver, etc. That there are also several Bodies which abound in Acid and Alkali
Salts, yet have no taste at all, or, which have one altogether different from
that which the Chemists attribute to their Principles, as Venice Glass, which
is insipid on the Tongue, though it is almost no other thing but fixed Alkali;
and as Cristals of Silver and Lead made with aqua fortis, whereof the first has
an extreme Bitterness, and the last, the sweetness of Sugar; neither of which
retain any thing of Acid of the aq. Fort. which did dissolve those Metals.


EUB. By the Taste we can only know pure Acids and Alkalis, as the Spirits of
Sulphur, Niter, etc. which are taken Notice of by their acidity: and as the
volatile Alkali's of Viper, Hartshorn, and fixed Alkali's as lixivial. Salts,
which are known by their great acrimony: as soon as these two Salts are mixed
together they produce different Savours according to the diverse Mixture and
particular figure of their Parts: It happens also very often that a body which
experience teaches us a acid, being mingled with a Body which experience makes
us know to be an Alkali, they being insipid: as for Example, When four parts of
Cream of Tartar dissolved in Water: in which may be manifestly seen, that the
Acid predominates, is mingled with two parts of Salt of Tartar dissolved also
in water, there is made as soon as they come together a Fermentation
sufficiently violent, from which afterward is obtained, by Cristallization, a
salt which is altogether insipid. You see by this Experiment, That though a
Body be insipid, nevertheless one may not conclude, That it c^ntains neither
Acid nor Alk^li^ therein.


PYR. Mr. Boil pretends is the fifth Chapter, That the Hypothesis of Acid and
Alkali is neither Necessary nor Useful to explain that which happens to
qualitys; Whereof some are produced, others destroyed or altered; it not
appearing, That these two Principles contributed in any wise thereto; as when
Water is changed by the force of Beating into Froth, which has some
Consistence: or, as when Coral which is red and transparent, is changed into a
white and opacous Powder, without doing any other thing thereto than reducing
it into a Powder sufficiently subtle to pass through a fine Searce.


EUB. The Froth which is formed on water by Beating comes only from the
agitation of its parts, and as there are a great many Alkali parts, and also
some Acid parts, and a little Earth to be met with in water, it is certain,
That these Principles contribute to the Production of this Quality. It should
be needful that Mr Boil prove, That there is no Acid nor Alkali in water, to
conclude That Acid and Alkali do not contribute in any wise to the production
of this new Quality; which is impossible to be done: as for the Coral, which
becomes white and opacous when it is reduced into an Impalpable Powder: I shall
tell you, That the most part of Bodies are destroyed by Trituration, and
entirely change their Nature, and those also which are harder and solider: and
if we may believe some, of the Renouned Chemists of our Age, as the famous
Langelot, Olaus; Borrychius, Schroder, etc. Leaf-Gold is destroyed in such wise
by a long Trituration, that it is impossible to make it retake the form of
Gold, whatsoever artifice you use: so that it is not strange, That Coral which
is red and transparent, should become white and opacous, when it is reduced to
an impalpable powder, because that in the Trituration which is made thereof,
its parts are dis-united in such wise one from the other, and are in so great a
confusion, that they can no longer keep their natural color, either because
they do no longer reflect the light as they did reflect it before; or, because
they do not make the same. Impression on the aier: or lastly, that the, Attoms
which go out therefrom are not conditioned as they were: and this color cannot
return to it, except by the force of some exterior agent its particles retake
the same place, and the same situation as they occupied before the
Trituration: as we take notice of it in blew Vitriol, which becomes white when
reduced into powder, and which retakes its natural color when this powder is
dissolved in water, and afterward caused to cristallize.


PYR. He proceeds with an Objection like the former; He says, They cannot
render a Reason by Acid and Alkali of Gravity, Light, and several other
Qualities, which are called MANIFEST; and much less of those which are called
OCCULT: as of the Force of the Loadstone on Iron, and of Iron on the Loadstone,
as well as several other Phaenomena's of the Loadstone.


EUB. The gravity and levity of a body depends upon the more or less of Vacuity
that there is in that body, according to Mr. Boyle's Opinion, in such manner,
That a body in which there are fewest Vacuities, is most Weight, as, on the
contrary, that in which there are more vacuitys, is more light. Now the
Moreness or Lessness of Vacuities depends upon the Moreness or Lessness of the
acid which there is in Bodies: for, when there is a great deal of Acid therein,
the Pores of the Alkali are filled therewith; and, when on the contrary, there
is but a very little Acid, those Pores remain empty, and consequently the
gravity of a Body depends upon the quantity of Acid that is found therein, and
the Levity upon the smallness of the Acid and quantity of Alkali which is found
therein: The abundance of Caput Mort. contributes much to the lightness of
Bodies, as we observe in the Firr-tree which is a very light wood, and has much
Earth in it. Light is no other but an agitation of small pointed Bodies which
are poured out in the air, and puts all the parts thereof in Motion: It is of
the same Nature with fire since it produces the same Effects, and that being
reunited in a burning-glass, it liquefies Metals and calcines Stones as fire
does, which is Acid, as I have proved elsewhere, and by consequence Light
ought also to be an Acid, since it has all the qualities thereof. The Effects
which are attributed to qualities, and are called. OCCULT draw no less their
Original from Acid, and Alkali than the manifest Qualities, which I shall show
you when I speak of some Effects of the Lodestone; The most considerable
whereof is, That whereby it draws Iron. You shall take notice therefore, That
Iron is an imperfect Load stone, which has Pores of the same figure with those
of the Lodestone, and which are filled with the same Particles as those
wherewith the Lodestone is filled. We see likewise, That Iron, exposed to the
air a long time, becomes Lodestone, since it acquires the qualitys thereof, as
the Crosses which are upon Churches, these in Succession of time become
Load-stones, and produce the same Effect as the Lodestone. You shall likewise
take notice, That there are a great many more Pores in the Lodestone than
there is in Iron, and, That the force of the Lodestone consists in the small
pointed Bodies that fill these pores; Iron becoming Lodestone in the air,
furnishes us with a most convincing Proof thereof; for, Experience teaches
us, That all porous Bodies are charged in the air, with an Acid of their own
nature, as the earth from whence Salt-petar has been drawn, which is therein
charged with a new Salt-petar, which is acid, etc. Lastly, you shall observe,
That there goes out continually from the Loadstone a multitude of these little
pointed bodies, and at the same time there enters thereinto others which retake
their place, because the air is wholly filled therewith: This being granted, it
is sufficiently easy to render a reason for the attraction of Iron by the
Lodestone. The attoms which go out continually from the Lodestone insinuate
themselves into the Pores of the Iron and fills them, These Corpuscles cannot
go out from the Lodestone, but at the same time they agitate the air with
violence, this agitated air throws the Iron against the Lodestone, or the
Lodestone against the Iron, according as the one of these Bodies resists it,
and after this manner the Lodestone attracts Iron, and Iron the Lodestone.
You see plainly, That this Virtue, which did formerly silence all the
Philosophers, is explained by our Hypothesis, and that, after a manner so
natural, that it is easy to judge, That all the other Phenomena's of the
Lodestone ought as certainly to be produced according to our Principles.


PYR. Mr. Boil, in Conclusion, Makes an Objection, which to me seems
sufficiently strong: he demands, How in the Dissolution of Metals, their Parts
are sustained by the Dissolvant, though the Metal be in equal bulk nine times
heavier than the water; and if it be Gold, nine times heavier than the liquor
which hinders it from sinking, and always a great deal heavier in particular,
than the Salts which compose the Dissolvant, can render the water in which they
are mingled.


EUB. It is easy to comprehend how the parts of Metals dissolved in Acid
spirits, sharp Spirits and salt Mestruums are sustained by these Dissovants: It
is because their parts are continually agitated by those of those Liquors whose
motion is sufficiently strong, an sufficiently rapid to carry them with them,
and to hinder them from precipitating.


PYR. I did not believe, That you were able, without seeking some other
Principles than these which you have established, to satisfy the Objections of
the illustrious Mr. Boil: But you raised all the Difficulties thereof with so
much Force, that they have only served to give a greater illustration to your
Principles, and to show the extent thereof, and their Conformity, to Reason and
Experience.

NOW, seeing a Genius so delicate, and which knows Nature so exactly, as that
Learned Man, has not been able to give them any Attaint, I doubt not but day by
day they will be confirmed, as we make new Discoveries therein; and, that they
will remain firm and steadfast against all that can be employed to shake and
destroy them.


A REPLY TO A LETTER OF Mr. S. touching the Nature of Acid and Alkali.
SIR,
NOne can doubt but there is much Honor to be acquired by Publishing the New
Discoveries which are made in Physic and Medicine; but, I must also confess,
That it is not Advantageous to write, when we are moved thereto only by Envy,
to censure the Works of others, without considering, Whether the things that we
write are indeed what they seem to be in the Imagination. This is the
Difference that there is between the manner whereof Mr. Houppeville has
faithfully communicated to us the Observations which he had made upon the Corpse
of a Woman, and that whereof you freely attack him, without being in any wise
obliged thereto: Yet I am less surprised at it than at your proceeding
concerning the Faculty of Caen, which you treat after the sharpest and
violentest manner in the World: which cannot proceed but from a Spirit very
little inclined to speak well of any one; and all the abuses which can be made
against a Faculty whose Reputation is so well established, and has so just a
Title, cannot but return with Disgrace upon their Author, since no Body will
ever balance the Authority of a particular person, who aims to be known only by
the Faults which he endeavors to discover in others, with that of a Society,
whose Doctrine and Exactness have rendered it so famous, and which (without
speaking of those which adorn their places so worthily at present) has
produced Men most Famous in their time, such as were Cahagnese, Dalechamp,
Schroder and several other Famous Doctors, whose Names will last as long as the
SCIENCE to which they have applied themselves: and all the ill Treatments which
Envy and Jealousy can borrow of Railery and supposition, will but increase the
true Esteem we ought to have for it. Likewise there are some persons whose
Judgments are so little conformable to the Rules of Reason, that a man may be
esteemed by displeasing them. I know not whether the Praises which you give to
the celebrated Faculty of Montpelier, whereof you call your self Doctor, be not
more prejudicial than advantageous to it; and the manner by which you Depick'd
it, a Slave to the Opinions of the Ancients, and an enemy to the new Anatomick
and Chymick Discoveries: where you say, It cannot Deceive, nor be Deceived, Page
3. 4.
because it does not receive any Novelties, if the contrary was not known, it
would be thought blind, and incapable to be enlightened by those Lights which
the Exactness of the Anatomists and Works of the Chemists of our time have
discovered to us. I know well, That the Lightness to change Opinions, and the
too great Aptness to receive Novelties, is a Fault; but not greater than
wilfully to retain an old Error, and refuse one's Consent and Belief to a
Truth but lately found out. Truth is not of any Age, it is not subject to
Years, but it is in it self Eternal; and it is only the Observation we make
thereof that is of such a year. A Geographer could not handsomely deny, That
there is a fourth Part of the World, because Ptolomy, Strabo and other ancient
Geographers did not know it: How fair soever the Descriptions be which ancient
Anatomists have made on MAN, yet they have left to us some Parts of this
Microcosm to be discovered, which tho they be not of any great Extent,
nevertheless they are of extreme Importance for its Conservation: and our
ancient Philosophers have not penetrated so deep into the Secrets of Nature,
but that we have Discovered by means of CHIMISTRY many things which were
unknown to them. You observe so little the Maxims for which you praise the
Faculty of Montpellier, that without fear to cheat or be cheated, you reason by
Principles all-together unknown to the Ancients: and, you admit several new
Anatomicks and Chimicks, but you turn them lo particularly, that they become
unknown to their own Inventers: and, I know not but the use which you make
thereof will rather serve to Destroy then to Establish them.

The manner by which you explain Nutrition, Renders us not much more knowing;
You tell us, page 79, and 107.
The Chyle is made in the Stomach, without teaching us the manner thereof; That
it falls afterward into the Intestins, where it is fermented with the Bile and
splenetick Juice without explaining to us the Cause of this Fermentation: and
you go on with an evident false supposition, That it is carried to the Liver by
the Vena Porta; after, having passed through the Tunicks of the Intestines, to
acquire therein the form of Blood. For, to discover the Cause and Means of
these Operations, it must be observed, That there is an Acid Liquor in the
Stomach, which produces them therein; Whether this Liquor be brought thither
by the extremities of the Arteries which terminate thereto; or else it is the
remains of the Aliments which grow sour by abiding there, and which serve as
Leven to those that are taken afterward, as we observe that Dough grows sour
by age, and then it can ferment a great quantity of new. The existence of this
Liquor needs not be doubted of, nor that it is a powerful dissolvant: The Bones
which we find half digested in the Stomachs of Dogs, and the Copper which we
find half corroded and half dissolved in the Stomachs of Ostriges and Drakes,
are sufficient Testimonies thereof.

And we may perceive that this Acid Liquor was not unknown to the incomparable
Hypocrates, when he says in the first Aphorism of the sixth Section, In longis
laevitatibus Intestinorum si rectus Acidus superveniat, bonum, In long
Loosnesses of the Intestines, if acid Belchings supervene, it is good, for it is
then that this Liquor begins to be renewed and to execute its functions. When
the Stomach is empty and this Liquor is fallen thereinto, in a sufficient large
quantity, or else (if you please) the Ferment is sufficiently exalted, it
excites Hunger, for then it strikes the superior Orifice of the Stomach, which
is wholly nervous, and of a most delicate Sense, and produces in us different
Appetites according to the particular Nature and different Figure of its
Particles; whence it comes, That we do digest more easily those aliments to
which our appetite excites us, because they have much conformity with that
Acid. This Liquor serves not only to excite Hunger, but also to dissolve the
Aliments which we take, and to convert them into Chyle: for, after the Aliments
have been prepared in the Mouth by mastication, and by the mixture of the
Spittle, they are cast by the Tongue into the Oesophage, and fall at the same
time into the Stomach, as well by their own weight as by the impulsion of the
Muscles of the Oesophage, the acid liquor of the Stomach is immediately mingled
with them, scattering the parts thereof from the other, and bruises them, and
attenuates them, and by the continual agitation and motion which it makes
thereof, it causes them entirely to change their Nature; and, according to the
relation that this liquor has with the aliments which we take; the
Chylification is made more or less perfect, and in more or less time. The
Stomach being continually pressed by the Diaphragma in the time of Respiration,
the Chyle falls insensibly into the Intestines, where it is confounded with the
Bile and pancreick Juice, and then there is made a Fermentation of the Chyle
with these two Liquors, during which time, the more subtle parts, and
consequently the more proper to nourish the animal, are strained, and pass
through the Tunicks of the Intestines, and the grosser parts are cast out
backwards by the anus, as well by their own weight, as by the peristatick
Motion of the Intestines. Sylvius de le Boe, Graaf, Suale, etc. have attributed
the cause of this Fermentation of the Chyle with the Byle and pancreick Juice
to the acidity of the pancreick Juice, but experience has taught our more
curious Anatomists. That this Juice is not in any wise acid, but altogether
incipid, and therefore, That cannot be the cause of this Fermentation; and to
discover the true Cause thereof, it must be observed. That when the Chyle falls
from the Stomach into the Intestines, it is of an acid-salt taste, because of
the Mixture of the Acid of the Spittle and of the acid Liquor of the Stomach
with the volatile Alkali of the Aliments; for, as I have showed in my foregoing
Discourse, that Acid-Salt Bodies are composed of a Mixture of Acid with Alkali.
This Taste is found manifestly in the Chyle; and it is, in other Cases, a
constant Maxim, That Acid-Salt Bodies being mixed with some Alkali, and
dissolved in some Menstruum (for Salts act not except dissolved) are fermented,
as Vitriol of Mars does, being dissolved in water, with Oil of Tartar made per
deliquium. The Chyle then being an acid-Salt, and the Bile abounding in
volatile Alkali, they are fermented as soon as they come to be dissolved by the
pancreick Juice. This Fermentation cannot be made but at the same there is made
a Precipitation of the Faeces, and the more subtle parts pass into the lacteal
Veins, and not into the Vena porta, and from thence into the Liver, as you
suppose: for, if the Branches of the Vena porta, in the time of the
Distribution of the Chyle, be tied, they are found only filled with Blood, and
if they be separated with the Liver from the Intestines, there is likewise not
lost one drop of Chyle, but it is carried continually from the Intestines into
the lacteal Veins, from these veins into the two Receivers of Pequet, and then
into the thorachick Pipe, where it is mingled with the Lympha which is
discharged thereinto from the inferior parts, and ascending all a-long by this
pipe, it is disgorged into the left subclavial Vein, where it is confounded
with the Blood; and, continuing its way it falls into the descending Vena Cava,
where it is still mingled with the Blood that it contains, and the Lympha which
flows thereto from the superior parts; it enters lastly into the Heart, where
it is subtilized, and begins to be changed into Blood, and by circulating
several times from the Heart into the arteries, from the arteries into the
Veins, and from the veins into the Heart again, it is rendered proper to nourish
the animal; the subtiler parts whereof penetrating as vapors through the Tunicks
of the arteries and joining and uniting themselves to the Parts, nourish and
augment them, and the rest is drained into the Liver, Reins, Pancrea's, etc.
and according to the Laws of Circulation repasses into the Veins, and from the
Veins into the Heart, where it is refurnished with Spirits by the means of a
Ferment, which is contained in its Ventricles, and by the Mixture of the Air,
which insinuates it self through the Lungs into the Heart.

I could prove by many Experiments, That the pancreick Juice comes not from the
Spleen to the Pancrea's, Page 79.
as you pretend: But, as the thing is of it self, sufficiently clear, and that
we need but observe the structure of these two Viscera's, and the communication
that they have one with the other to convince you thereof:

It will be sufficient to cause you to take Notice of that which modern
Anatomists have several times experimented, That after the Spleen has been
taken from Dogs, the Wound being consolidated, these Dogs have been as well as
if they still had their Spleen, and we draw a pancreick Juice therefrom,
altogether like that which we ordinarily draw. Wherefore, if the Spleen did
communicate this Juice to the Pancrea's, it is certain, That these Dogs, whose
Spleen was cut out, would languish, and Nutrition would no longer be perfectly
made, because the Chyle is not fermented with the Bile, for want of the
Pancreick Juice, which is the Menstruum that dissolves these two Bodies, and
which puts them in action: there would also be no longer any secretion of the
Cream of the Chyle from the Excrements, and we could not be able to draw a
Pancreick Juice from these Animals, for the Cause being removed, there is no
longer any Effect, sublata Causa, tollitur Effectus. The pancreick Juice comes
not then from the Spleen to the Pancrea's but is a Liquor which is strained in
the Pancrea's as the Serocity in the Reins.

It is not a vain Fancy, as you go on, to believe, Page ^3
That the Lympha is a Serocity which is separated from the Blood, and from the
nervous Juice in the Glands: if you had examined the substance of the Glans,
and the Vessels which terminate thereto, you would judge otherwise thereof: You
would see, that the Glands are as so many strainers, through which the Serosity
is strained, and there terminates thereto four Sorts of Vessels, namely Nerves,
Arteries, Veins, and the Lymphatick, Vessels; the Arteries carry Blood thereto,
which the Veins re-carry to the Heart, according to the Laws of Circulation,
the Nerves carry the animal Spirits or nervous Juice thereto, and the
Lymphatick Vessels draw thereto the Lympha, and is discharged thereof, as I
have already said, into the thorachick Pipe, and into the descending Vena cava:
You see from hence, That since the Glands have no other Vessels which
administer thereto but Nerves and Arteries, it neceassrily follows, That the
Lympha is a Serocity which is separated from the Blood, and from the nervous
Juice in the Glands.

You say, There is neither Acid nor Alkali in the Seed, because that being the
Decidu of [or that which is fallen off from] all the Body, Page 109.
and the Recidu of the last Aliment, it suffers neither the one nor the other:
since they have been separated therefrom in the first Concoction of the
Aliment, and are not to be ound in the second, which is the Haematose, and yet
less in the Third, which is the assimilation, or Nutrition of Parts.

You add, That if there were Acid and Alkali in the Seed, it would be destroyed
by the continual Ebbulition and Fermentation which is made thereof. It is to be
admired that you can be of this Opinion, seeing according to the Doctrine which
you would establish, you cannot deny, but the seed has the same Principles,
as, Flesh, Blood, Bones, Horns, and other parts of Animals, and it is otherwise
indisputable, That Meat, Blood and Milk which grow sour when they corrupt,
contain Acid and the Volatile Alkali's which are drawn in abundance therefrom,
are Proofs no less certain, That there is an Alkali therein; whence it follows,
That these two Salts are also to be found in the Seed, since according to what
you affirm, It is only the Residue of the last Aliment of of those parts: as
for the Objection which you make, That if there were Acid and Alkali in the
Seed, it would be corrupted because of the continual Fermentation which is made
theteof: You shall also observe, That these two Salts never act, except they be
dissolved or excited by some external Agent, as Heat, or by the mixture of some
other Body: as it happens, when the Seed of the Male and that of the Female
come to be mingled together, and to be heated in the Womb, for then all their
parts are put into Motion, and there is made a Pattern or rough draught of all
those of the Foetus: the more subtle parts of the seed retire themselves to
the Center, and scatter to the Circumference those which their grossness or
figure render less proper for motion, from which are produced the Membranes
which environ the Foetus; and the more subtle parts continue their motion in
the middle, dis-intangling themselves from those whose figure is not
proportionable to theirs, and uniting themselves to those which are with them
conformable; and so those which are Decidued [or fallen] from the Brain, or
more properly those which are found proper to form the Brain, unite together
and produce the Brain. Those which ought to form the Heart, unite together and
form the Heart, and so of all the other parts: and when it happens that the
Man's Seed overpowers that of the Woman's, there is formed a Man; as there is
formed a Woman, when that of the Woman's is stronger than the Man's: and we may
believe that there may be an Hermaphrodite when both Seeds meet together in a
perfect Equality.

Where you begin to treat of Acid and Alkali; you tell us, You can hardly give
your Opinion thereof, Page 89.
because it is difficult to declate it upon a matter which ('till now) is
undetermined: yet nevertheless you, as it seems, decide it so absolutely, as if
it were the most known and determined Truth in the World.

You pretend, that Acid is a principle of Death, and the Alkali a principle of
Life, Page 96.
that is to say, That Acids are the Destroyers of Bodies, and Alkali's, on the
contrary, the Authors of their Construction. For to make the Probability of
this Maxim disappear, one needs only to make reflection upon what I have spoken
thereof in my Discourses upon Acid and Alkali, where I have spoke of the
Regeneration of compound Mineral Salts, and the Essential Salts of Plants: for,
it is most certain, That Acids are not the destroyers of Bodies, nor Alkali's
their Authors, since all Alkali's are determined by Acids, to make Bodies of
the same Nature with those from which they were drawn: and if it happens
sometimes, That Acids destroy some Bodies, as common Sulphur does Iron, that
happens because there is little Alkali to be found in those Bodies, and the
Acid being entangled therein, in a great deal of Earth, it may easily be
disintangled therefrom by another Acid, the which entirely destroys the
Composition, but that happens not in those Bodies where the Acid is fixed, and
united intimately with its Alkali, as it is in Gold, Silver, etc.

You bring us Tartar of Wine for the first of all Acids, and you prove it after
so convincing a manner, ^^g 93.
That the same Reasoning may be applied in all its force to all the other
Tartars of Vegetables. It is the first, say you, in its generation and Action:
it is the first in its generation, because it is produced such by nature, for
it is in Grapes together with the Alkali of wine, and so long as Nature governs
them they have not any motion of alteration one against the other, etc. but as
soon as Nature does cease to govern them, they ferment themselves one with the
other into Wine, etc. May not the same thing be said of all the other
Vegetables? They have all their Acid and Alkali produced such by Nature, they
are not dis-united but when Nature ceases to govern them, they are fermented in
their Juices, as the Alkali and Acid of Grapes are in Wine.

You are not contented to assure us. That Tartar is the first of Acids, but
also, That its Acid consists in its Salt, and, That that which is distilled
therefrom, is the Volatile Alkali of Wine, which this Acid had absorbed. The
Anatomy of Tartar will perhaps make you be of another Opinion, for there is
drawn therefrom first a Phlegm by Distillation; Secondly, an Acid Spirit, which
ferments with all Alkali's: Thirdly, a stinking Oil, and lastly, a fixed Salt,
which is separated from its Caput Mort. by Lixiviation, which ferments with all
Acids, and precipitates Vitriol of Mars dissolved in Water.

The Acid spirit of Tartar is of the same Nature with that of Vinegar, as may
be seen by this Experiment.

some Salt of Tartar, and pour thereupon good Vinegar, until it will take in no
more, and there will be made a regenerated Tartar like to that of Wine, whose
sourness is gone: You may perceive then by this, That that Spirit which is
drawn from Tartar, is not the volatile Alkali of Wine, which the Tartar had
absorbed, as you teach us; but it is, on the contrary, the volatile Acid of
Wine, which causes it in time to degenerate into Vinegar. The black and
stinking Oil which went forth after the Phlegm and Spirit, is an enveloped Acid,
as are all the Oils of Vegetables. In a word, The Salt that is drawn from
Tartar is as powerful an Alkali as any there is in Nature, which, as I said
even now, ferments with all Acids', and does precipitate Vitriol of Mars
dissolved in Water.

It seems also you have acknowledged this Truth, when you said, That Oil of
Tartar made per deliquium (which is no other thing but fixed Salt of Tartar
dissolved in some Phlegm) did ferment with the Spirits of Salt, Vitriol, Page 97.
Sulphur and Niter, and did precipitate, after the Fermentation, some Matter
from those Bodies: Oil of Tartar is therefore an Alkali, since it ferments with
Acid Spirits; for, as you grant, there is none but Alkali's which can ferment
with Acids; and, it is false that you assure us, That this Oil is Acid; for, if
it was Acid, it would ferment with Alkali's, and never with Acids, the which is
contrary to what we see. Page 98, 99, 100.


The Reason which you render of the Effervescence which happens in the
Dissolution of Metals in Aqua fort. is a Subject as little satisfactory: for,
you say, That it is not the Aqua fort. that causes this Dissolution and
Effervescence, but rather a volatile sulphurous Spirit which animates the Aqua
Fort. to the Dissolution of the Metal, since that being evaporated, or
separated therefrom by the Acid of Salt of Tartar, the rest of the Water acts
no more; for, assuredly (continue you) it is this imperfect, or to speak more
properly, embrionated Sulphur which symbolizeth with the Sulphur of a Metal,
and more or less with one than with another, whence come the Diversity of Aqua
fortis; and, that one acts upon one Metal and not upon another, etc. This
Sulphur is impatient for a union with a Sulphur more perfect than it self,
therefore it searches through the Mercury, and striving to be united with it
per minima, it divides it, etc.

Experience fully destroys the appearances of this Reasoning; for, it is most
certain, That Acids, as Spirit of Niter, dissolves imperfect Metals, which have
more Mercury than Sulphur, as Silver, Lead, etc. and, as for Gold which has a
great deal more Sulphur than Mercury, it cannot be dissolved but in salt
Menstruums, as Spirit of Sea Salt. I have explained all these different Effects
so clearly, in the preceding Discourses of this Book, That the repetition
thereof would be both useless and troublesome: And, as to the Hindrance that Oil
of Tartar brings to those Dissolutions which you attribute to its Acidity, it
is not at all probable; since I have formerly shown, That it was an Alkali: and
the true Reason of it is, That the Oil of Tartar being a powerful Alkali,
absorbs the Acids which held the Metals in Dissolution, and the Metals being no
longer agitated or stirred by their points are precipitated into a powder, to
the bottom of the Vessel.

Truly, I see as little Justice in your Definition of Alkali; You argue it to
be a thing made Salt by Cremation, Page 102.
as though it was not a Salt before: and, this Definition does in no wise
explain the Nature of Alkali, but only agrees with fixed Alkali: yet it is
certain, that some are Volatile, which are elevated and sublimed with the least
Heat, as your self acknowledges, p^. 94.95.
where you speak of Tartar: You say, It retains the volatile Alkali of Wine,
which causes it to break the Vessels by its combating with the Acidity of the
Tartar, when it is distilled alone by Retort, The Recipient being very exactly
luted, and the fire too much pressed. But I have moreover sufficiently formerly
proved, That Alkali as well as Acid was actually in all Bodies; and, that to be
Alkali, it is not necessary, that a Body be made salt by Cremation. Moreover,
the Doctrine which you promote contradicts it self; Page 104, 105.
for, if the Alkali was no other, as you would have it, than only the Sulphur
of the Mixed retained in a portion of water under the form of Salt by the
disposition position of the fire, it would most easily be destroyed, and
consequently as Volatile as you pretend it fixed.

That which you say of the Liquor Alkahest of Helmont, and the Doves of the
Diana of Philalethes, appears to me so frivolous, That I think it not worth my
stay to refute it, no more than several other Passages of your Letter. It
sufficieth me to make you know the principal Points wherein you have deviated
from Experience and Reason: and also to make you take Notice, That it is much
more honorable to keep Silence than to employ your Time and Pen unjustly to
censure the Works of others, and to rage and rail without Reason, or any
seeming Truth, against a Faculty whose Credit and Reputation you are in Justice
obliged to vindicate.

FINIS.
Errores PHLEBOMIAE DETECTI.

Errores PHLEBOMIAE DETECTI.

Or, The ERRORS OF PHLEBOTOMY DISCOVERED, For the USE of Tyro's:

By J. W. (...).

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Dawks. 1689.

(...). Sive Errores PHLEBOTOMIAE detecti.
THAT Phlebotomy should be without its Errors is strange, since all humane
Operations are subject to Mistakes; for, Humanum est errare: but, That these
Errors should be maintained with so much Stifness, when Reason and Experience
daily demonstrates them to be contrary to the safest way of Healing, is most
strange! because, such Persons must needs either obstinately despise the
Dictates of Reason, and go on in their old Dangerous roads, merely for want of
knowing better, or to excuse themselves from those more troublesome though safer
ways: Or else such persons show themselves Incapable to be taught by Reason or
Experiments, by paying too great a Veneration ^o some few Opinions of our
ancient Physicians, as well as to the Male-practice of our European Neighbors.

Methinks, where the Lives of our miserable fellow Brethren are so nearly
concerned, we might be the less rash and inconsiderate in our Practice,
especially, if we are not so horridly wicked as to be void of all Thoughts of a
Future State, wherein we shall either receive the just Merit of our
unchristian Actions in endless Torments; or, the gracious reward of our
charitable and just Endeavors in eternal Enjoyments

And, That Phlebotomy, as it is now rashly and carelessly used, may appear to
be in many Cases, dangerously and cruelly infl^cted upon Mankind by unthinking
and partial Physicians: Give me leave to present you with these following
Reasons to prove it.

First, The Blood is by all granted to be the Vehicle of Life, and that whereby
Nature performs all her Operations: and, as the Blood is an Instrument of
Nature, so it is a Product of Nature, which is proved by comparing Childhood
and Maturity together; a Child has not so much Blood as a man; therefore it is
necessary it should have its generation and augmentation, which can only be by
what it had a beginning from.

Nature also does not generate or augment the Quantity of the Blood in vain,
and this is apparent, because all Philosophy maintains, She does none of her
Works in vain, but for the end of Health and conservation thereof. Now, it
follows, That the Diminution of that which Nature has ordained for
Conservation, must produce a Chasm in the matter to be conserved: this may be
proved in any continued Matter, whether Lines, Superficies or Solids, for, the
matter conjoined being dissolved the Matters conjoined are separated. Now, a
Chasm cannot be made without Loss of some Intention of Nature, if it could, it
would necessarily follow, That the thing making the Chasm was made in vain,
which is notoriously against the Principles of Philosophy: and, a Loss of any
of the Intentions of Nature, is in order only to her Dissolution, because it
obstructs Nature in her Constructive and Conservative Operations; and a
Dissolution of Nature will produce a Destruction of the humane Frame.

And, it must needs be so because Nature her self, being Conservatrix, is taken
away. In Nature lies the band of Union by which all Particles and Parts of the
Body are knit and joined together, and this Band is only in the Medium of Life;
for, there is no Difference between the Medium of Union and the things to be
united; This Medium is the Blood, and the things to be united are the humane
Frame and Life: Indeed, it is the Life it self that is the Real uniting
Principle, which because it is immaterial and so without Parts, and not capable
of Division of it self, so it is impossible to be disunited from any thing it
is joined, unless the Medium of that Conjunction be first destroyed which is
first begun by a Chasm; and, as a Chasm is the Medium of the Separation of
united things, so the Diminution of the Medium of union is a Diminution of the
United Forces, and consequently an Inlet to the Destruction of the ad^j^ined
Principles: for, the Medium, of Uni^ion adds strength to the things united by
Virtue of their Conjunction or being made one; for, Vis unita fortior; hence it
is evident, That the Abstraction of that Medium must be the Dissolution of that
Strength, and proportionable as that Medium is augmented or diminished, so must
the Strength of the conjoined things either increase or decrease: and, I have
before proved, Nature does nothing in vain.

From all which it follows,

That the taking away of the Blood, First, Hinders Nature in performing her
Operations. Secondly, Diminishes her Generation. Thirdly, Frustrates her
Intention. Fourthly, Diminishes the Medium of Unition. Fifthly, Impares the
Strength. Sixthly, Opens a Casm, which being sufficiently wide lets our Life,
and introduces Death. Wherefore since a diminution of the Quantity of the
Blood cannot be done without manifest Damage, the Alteration of the Quality,
when it is hurt, ought to be attempted some safer way.

And, whereas it is generally believed, That Blood-letting often prevents a
Fever, yet if we examine the thing more accurately, we shall rather find, That
it makes us obnoxious to a Fever. It is the Opinion of that great and learned
Champion for Blood letting, Dr. Willis, in his Book of Fevers, page 75. Prae
coeteris vero observatione constat quod Crebra sanguinis missio homines febri
aptiores reddat: and again, he says, Hinc fit ut qui Crebra mittunt sanguinem,
non tantum in febres sunt proclives, verum etiam pinguescere soleant propter
cruorem succo sulphureo plus impregnatum. But whether this sulphurous Juice is
the true Cause of either, I shall not at present examine: since it is also the
Opinion of diverse learned Physicians, That Blood-letting, by cooling the Body
in depriving it of its vital Spirits, does so qualify it, as it cannot cast out
that dewy excrementitious substance which sweats through the Tunicles of the
Veins (which is the Matter of Fault) by Perspiration, but suffers it to congeal
under the skin in that thick pingueons Substance called Fat: hence Pesons that
are coldly constituted are fat without Phlebotomy: and hence also it is, That
fat persons are the smallest Eaters, by reason of the lack of internal Heat.
But a little after the Doctor speaks yet more fully to the Purpose, Qui
sanguinem habent sale volatilizato been suturatum, ^i sunt minus Febribus
obnoxii: hinc etiam qui saepius sanguinem emittunt ad Febres aptiore sunt. Thus
far he whose single Testimony in sufficient.

And, since it appears, That it does so little hinder the approach of a Fever
that it rather furthers it, it seems impossible That it should absolutely and
alone cure any Fever. For, it is granted by all Physicians, That a Fever has a
property to pollute the Blood, and, that this can be taken away a posteriori,
that is, by withdrawing what is putrified and contaminated, seems very absurd
to think, being contrary to that Philosophic Axiom, Manente causa, manet
Effectus. Besides, It is generally believed, That the material cause of a Fever
does not possess the Vessels about the heart, but rather the Vena cava: and
therefore how can Blood-letting be supposed to remove either, the efficient or
material causes thereof? Wherefore consequently, it can be no true Remover of a
Fever, but only an Abater of one of its most troublesem Symptoms, viz. Heat:
which it does by impoverishing the Stock of vital Spirits, which maitaining
Contest with the Radix of the Fever, does by that contentious Motion cause that
preternatural excessive Heat and Ebulition of the Blood, which is particularly
affected therewith: hence it is, That old Persons, whose vital Spirits are poor
in quantity, and consequently not able to combat so strongly with the Disease,
do not appear so hot in a Fever as those whose Spirits are stronger, and in a
larger quantity: and other persons after a tedious Warfare with this cruel
Disease, some small time before Death, the Spirits having given up the Victory,
as not being able any longer to oppose the same, do seem to be totally freed
from all the Symptoms of their Fever: For, as I said, the Spirits by reason of
their Paucity and Imbecility do then resign up their noble Members to the Mercy
of the Disease, whose, truculent Forces quickly invades the very Royal
Pavillion of Life it self, and as suddenly subverts it, by committing it into
the frozen Arms of a drowzy Death.

Whence it is held as a dangerous Prognostic when a Fever abates in the
Violency of its Symptoms, without any CRISIS or natural Assistance, or without
any medicinal Aid, or without any certain Signs of approaching Health, as well
as sure Tokens of Nature's obtaining the Victory over the Disease.

So that it is no Wonder why Phlebotomy seems to afford so great Refreshment to
the afflicted, even in the most troublesome Symptoms; because, by depriving
Nature of some of her provoked Forces, it compells the rest for want of Power
to suffer patiently the Cruelty of the Disease, which if it be not very
malignant, as those Fevers called Ephemera, Synochus non putrida, and sometimes
in those putrid ones called, Synochus putrida, and the continual Quotidian,
Tertian and Quartan, the Contention ceasing, and the corrupted blood being
partly let out, and the rest (by some proper Medicament) being corrected and
amended, Nature does with much Difficulty, and with great Debility at length
obtain a pleasing Health.

Now, if Phlebotomy did only let out the corrupted Blood, and left still behind
those Spirits which used to flow with it, then Blood-letting, by partly
removing the Effect, might ease Nature of a great deal of that, which she
otherwise must with abundance more Toil cast out: And, Reason would tell us,
That the natural Forces being still the same in Quantity and Power, and the
Inimical vitiated Blood being diminished and partly let out, Nature must needs
be the better able to cast out and purge the rest. But, since we find that the
Blood and Spirits are Correlatives, and do issue out together, the Spirits
going forth in such Quantity, and the Blood let forth could be Vehicle too.
This proves then That Phlebotomy as it does take away some of the corrupted
Blood, so it takes away also those Spirits which might have assisted to its
correction some better way: thereby rather weakening than assisting Nature.

But Phlebotomy being used in any malignant Disease is utterly destructive
without a Miracle: for, in the Meazles, Small Pox, Plague, etc. It most
commonly obstructs Nature in her Intentions, so much debilitating her strength,
that she often proves unable to cast forth the malignant Matter, but by its
poison is wholly overcome and destroyed, or, at least is not capable of making
an exact Purgation; and though with extreme hazard, she escape Death, yet there
is such a stock of malignant matter left behind secretly lurking in the Mass of
Blood which will, upon a small Excitation, discover its presence there by
untoward troublesome Symptoms, unless by powerful Remedies it be dispossessed
before it has fermented it self to that height.

It has been the Audacity of some Physicians to prescribe Blood-letting even in
the Small Pox and Plague, supposing That in the first, the corrupted Blood
being partly let out, it would be impossible that the afflicted persons should
have so many of those deforming Pussles, as they otherwise would have had, and
therefore Blood-letting in such Cases might be lawful, if it were upon no other
account but the preserving the threatened Beauty of a youthful Face. It Is true
by allaying the Effervescence of the Blood, and weakening the expulsive Faculty,
partly, as they say, by reason part of that Corruption is let forth, which
otherwise, perhaps, might have made some hundreds of those filthy Pussles:
There is, (if the Diseased escape Death) a great diminution of them, and
thereby those sweet Features which they before possessed are not wholly rased. But
that this cannot be performed without ^^nifest Hazard of the Patient's Life,
Experience and Reason has shown, since so many great Persons have fell merely
to save a handsome Face. The Spirits by Blood-letting being diminished and
enervated, so that they can no longer endeavor for their own Recovery: for, as
Hippocrates says, Natura est morborum Medi^a^ri^, Besides, Phlebotomy
generally, by weakening the retentive Faculty, produces a Diarrhaea, which was
ever accounted a dangerous Symptom in malig^^^ Diseases, but most particularly
in the Small Pox: and, upon this Account it is That Phlebotomy sometimes by
producing (...) accident, on the a simple Fever.

But, in the Plague, they pretend That the opening of a Vein is necessary for
Prevention sake, Because the less Effervescence is in the Circulation of the
Blood, the less obnoxious we are to the Contagion. The most noted man of this
Opinion, I find to be the above mentioned Dr. Willis, in his Book of Fevers,
page 157. Where he says, Vbi adest Plethora cum magna sanguinis Turgescentia,
^ut quibus longa Consuetudine sanguis solenniter mitti solebat iis venam secare
convenit, quo enim sanguis minus effervescet and sine tumultu in vasis
circulatur ^o tardius Lue pestifera Contaminatur. A most injurious Opinion,
since by weakening the Spirits, she becomes the less able to withstand so lethal
an Enemy: For, if a Plenitude be the Pretense: by a more spare Diet, and other
proper things, it may be made so harmless as not in the least to assist that
poisonous Disease, when it has seized us, nor to encourage it in any way to
seize upon us.

Wherefore to go and let any infected person Blood, is a short Way to Cure them
of the Disease, and Rid them of their Lives together: since it so wastfully
spends the vital Powers, by whom only this cruel Disease can be withstood and
vanquished. For, if Nature, at any time has so far prevailed with the Disease,
as to collect the greatest part of the malignant Matter into one place, and
does endeavor to cast it forth in Botches, Boils, or Carbuncles: which
commonly appear in the Emunctories: whose Gland^^es are then tumified with this
poisonous Humor: Blood-letting being then admitted, Nature dos not only for
want of Power cease to prosecute her design, but this vicious Humor is
remitted ob fugam vacui: and so quickly spreads it self through the whole Mass
of Blood, assisting those poisonous Particles (which were there before, and
which Nature was obstructed, by Phlebotomy, from purging out) to the
destruction of the miserable Patient.

It is for the very same Cause that those common Breakings out of the Body, in
large Swelling, in the Emunctories, and in small Pimples and Scurfs, all over
the Body do all disappear after a plentiful Emission of Blood: The vitiated
Matter being returned to supply the Deficiency of the Blood newly let out: and,
it is there so long circulated 'till it is thence cast out by Perspiration: or
else, if it be very venemouns, it infects the whole Mass: so that, perhaps, an
accute and dangerous Disease succeeds it, and (...) it be neither very
Malignant, and Yet the whole Mass be contaminated, those Pimples, Blisters and
Scurff keep so long in and lurk secretly in the Blood: either 'till Nature has
recruited her Forces, and be ins to cast them out again, in order to the
freeing herself from those noxious Particles (though perhaps it be impossible for
her alone and unassisted to perform it, yet she always endeavors her own
Redemption if she be not obstructed) of else, 'till those Venomous Corpuscles
are by some accidental Cause excited to fermentation, whereby they pollute the
Blood to a greater degree; so that the whole Flesh is so depraved as to appear
in a Measly Scurfy and filthy form, and may, perhaps, at last merit the name
of Incurable Leprosy.

It is the Opinion of some Physicians, That Blood-letting is very proper, yea,
Necessary in the Scurvy; among whom (...) find the often, quoted Doctor Willis
t^ be one, who says, in the Book of the Scurvy, page 256. Cum enim Liquor
sanguineous valde impurus evasit nullo Remediorum genere certius emendatur,
quam crebra and parva extramissione, quippe sanguini veteri corrupto quoties
educitur recens melior and defoecatior Existit.

Now, thererefore it is granted by Most, That the Blood is better in some venal
Pipes than in others, which may easily be proved by any who ever saw many robbed
of this rubid Liquor: for, In some it spouts out Bad at first, and better
afterward: in others, The quite contrary: Wherefore, if this be true, as it
most certain and undeniable, Then the Question is, How shall we know when that
vitiated parcel of Blood, which we so much seek to remove, has taken up its
abode in the inferior parts of the Veins of the Arm, and in the Arteries
tending thereto, that we may let it out: For if it be not there, it is
impossible we should extract it: since all the other Arteries are too remote:
and, so in stead of the Bad, we may take away the Good: and, besides if we did
take away some of the Bad, for its impossible to take all, yet it may be
questioned, Whether the new made Blood may not be vitiated in its Preparation,
before it comes to be circulated with the old, as undoubtedly it is, both in
the Liver, Spleen and other Viscera's: Wherefore, though a new Mass of Blood may
well be expected this way, yet not without a cruel wracking of Nature, in
forcing her to labor so hard for Life, being before tormented by so stubborn a
Disease: yet we cannot expect to have it much better than the former, but
rather worse, unless we use some proper Remedies to cut off the Causes, and to
purify it in the Fountain; the which Remedies would as well have corrected and
amended the Old Mass of Blood as this New one, since no Blood in a curable
Disease can be so corrupted, but it may be reduced to its pristin Sanity
without extramission of any part of it: which proves, That its not a Real
Corruption, but a Disposition thereto: for, an absolute Corruption is a total
Destruction of its first Essential Form, and the Assumption of a new one, which
by no means will admit of being reformed into its pristine one, according to
that Philosophical Axiom, A privatione ad habitum non datur Regressus.

Yet we find, That the Blood, tho it seem to be deeply corrupted, may easily
with proper and efficacious Medicaments be restored to its former Soundness and
Pureness, because it has not totally lost that Form with which it was first
stam'd.

But, yet further, Suppose the Scorbutic Malignity did lodge no where but in
the Blood [which is indeed false] yet new Blood coming to be circulated with
that old which was lest, would by mere contact be, in a small time, equally
affected by those noxious Particles, as that: Such a fermentative Force has the
Seminal Ens of a Disease, as it can quickly multiply it self to a Wonder, if it
be not restrained or cut off. Wherefore Blood-letting in these Cases does not
appear, being Examined by Reason and Experience, to be so very Necessary, as
some would make us believe it is.

Therefore to make an End of all, it appears, That the Means used to let out
bad Blood, without removing the Efficient Cause thereof, is no direct Method of
Healing.

Now, Phlebotomy lets out bad Blood without removing the Efficient Cause
thereof; Ergo, Phlebotomy is no direct Method of Healing.

The Major is easily proved, For whatsoever suffers the Cause to remain can
never totally remove the Effect: Now, Phlebotomy suffers the Cause to remain,
therefore it can never absolutely remove the Effect.

The Minor is also as easily proved; For, if the Cause of bad Blood were cut
off, the Fever and Scurvy depending thereon would quickly cease; the which we
find rarely to happen, since after a frequent Extraction of Blood, we find the
Fever and most of the Symptoms still remain, and the Disease grows more strong,
even to a total deprivation of all the vital Faculties, of their Power and
Vitallity.

I own Blood Letting may do least Harm, yea be very Beneficial, by accident, in
some Respects, in some few Diseases; of which the most noted are, a Frenzy,
Quinsy, Pleurisy, an inveterate and stubborn Headache, and in some Fevers,
which be in no wise malignant; as also in Contusions, Rheumatisms and
Intermitting Fevers, but it must be in young and strong Bodies, if it be done
without any cause of Fear; and in some few other Diseases: But especially, it
is most proper to temper the plethorick Bodies of our age, who by an
extravigant Destruction of vious Liquors cause themselves to abound in that
precious balsamic vital Liquor.

It helps a Frenzy by abating the Effervescence of the Blood, in diminishing
the Vital Spirits.

It helps a Quinzy by Revulsion and drawing back the Blood into the Veins which
would have putrified there, that it may supply the loss of that which was let
out.

In a Pleurisy, it obstructs also the Apostumation of the Blood collected in
the Pleura and Intercostal Branches of the Aorta by Revulsion, for that Blood
there ready to putrify, by reason of the great heat of the Parts, and its own
Disposition to Putrefaction does, as the Blood is drawn out of the Arm, repass
into the Superior Arteries, and so becomes again circulated in them: the
Abscess thereof being thereby prevented.

It cures an inveterate Headache by reason it appeases the Fury of the Spirits
there, and by reason it depleats the Veins and Arteries, wherefore it is, they
are not so distended and pained as before.

And, as for Fevers, I have told you already how it comes to be assisting to
their Cure, only intermitting Fevers accidentally are cured by altering the
Cirlation, and by putting Nature into a Fear of Death, wherefore she musters up
all her Forces to oppose it, whereby very often the Root of the Fever is in
this great Hurry and Commotion cut off and expell^^ for, as Duretius says,
Animi act ones incidente aliqua occasion fortius agunt presertim in morturis:
Whence also in Swoonings and Aopoplectick fits it proves beneficial: and, hence
also it is, That great Fears have often been a means, by stirring up all the
natural Forces for their own Safety, to rid some Persons of chronick accute and
almost incurable Diseases, as Experience has often manifested.

Rheumatisms it cures by Derivation; and so it does some Coughs, by causing the
sharp Lympha which Tickles the Lungs by its sharp pointed Corpuscles; the which
also afflict the Nerves and Tendons with accute Pains to be discharged from
thence mediately into the subclavian Veins, to supply the loss of the Blood let
out, and into the Mesenterial Glandula's, to be mixed with the Chyle; also to
promote the speedy making the like quantity of Blood: hence sometimes does the
Cause of a greedy Appetite proceed afte^ Blood-letting, and after the retreat
of a sharp Disease: for Nature being studious to repair her loss, and
especially When she has not been too much weakened by the Disease or
Blood-letting, does manifest her wants by these hungry Symptoms: It seems to
assist the Circulation of the Blood, when it is congealed by reason of the
Obstruction of its Circulation in the small Veins, which by the Contusion are
so squeezed that they wholly deny its flux, because it seems to afford it more
Room for that Circulation: but if we consider, That the Blood is Conglebated
only, as I said, in the smallest Veins, and that the thinnest and most fluid
Blood spins out at the Orifice: we cannot think it can much further its quiet
Circulation, since fluidity is the greatest Promoter of it.

Lastly, By its wasting the Spirits and depriving us of that pure nutritive
Juice the Blood, it keeps us back, not suffering Nature to store up so much
Nutriment to her self, and thereby renders us equally as needy as if we put a
greater restraint upon our Appetites and indulged them far less than we do.

To the former Advantages by Phlebotomy, here is added, by another hand, this
further Benefit, viz. That it is of excellent use for Women, when their Terms
dodg with them, and begin to leave them; and to prevent the settling of them in
their Limbs, or in their own Vessels putrefying and causing Ulcers, Sores,
Piles and Fistula's in the inferior Parts, etc. to prevent all which Evils,
Women so affected ought to bleed once a month for 3 Months together.

FINIS.
Errores Phlebot. p. 10. l. 18 Crebro. p. 11. l. 5. Fat. p. 12. l. 6. above. p.
15. l. 5. as the.

Advertisement. All Dr. Salmon's Works are certainly to be sold by Tho. Dawks
living on Addle hill in Carterlane near S. Paul's Churchyard. Also the said
Doctor's Medicines truly prepared, are in his absence to be sold by his Wife,
at his House, at the Blew Balcony, by the Ditch-side near Holborn Bridge.
There is also preparing for the said Dawks's Press, A Practical Discourse
concerning Swearing; Not only-sharply reprooving the vain, false, rash,
inconsiderate Swearer; but also chiefly reprimanding the Over-wise Quaker, in
the midst of all his vainglorious Show of seeming Holiness, proving that he
most abominably abuses all those Scriptures he brings for Refusing to take an
Oath before Authority, when the Law of God commands it, and the Glory of God as
well as the Necessity of his Neighbor require it, etc.

Place this leaf last of all.


