A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church AT WINCHESTER, The xxix of May
MDCLXXXI.

Being Trinity Sunday, and the day of His MAJESTY'S happy Birth and
Restoration.

By HENRY ANDERSON, M. A. Vicar of Kingsumborne in Hampshire.

(...).
Fear God: Honor the King.
1 Pet. 2. 17. Printed at the request of many who heard it.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Joanna Brom, at the Sign of the Gun, at the West
End of St Paul's, 1681.

A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL Church at Winchester, the xxix. of May,
1681.
PSALM. 73. verse. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee.
COntentment is the universal Center to which all the thoughts, actions, and
contrivances of Men tend; the point to which they are all directed, is
satisfaction. This is the great spring to all the various motions of mankind:
and however distant and contrary their ways and courses, their inclinations and
constitutions are; yet here they all meet and concenter in this one reconciling
object. Contentment and satisfaction is that which the Learned seeks to obtain,
in his industrious quest after Knowledge. This jewel the Merchant seeks in his
dangerous Voyages, the ambitious in his passionate pursuit of honor, the
covetous in his unwearied heaping up of treasure, the wanton in his pleasing
charms of beauty, the conqueror in his earnest desires of victory, and the
Politician in his deep designs. But alas! the misery of Man is, That he would
find that in the variety of the Creatures, which is no where to be found but in
the unity of the Creator, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. For absolute
content dwells not here below. It is not in Granaries filled with plenty, in
ambitious Haman's state and grandeur, in Sampson's lovely Dalilah's, in
Nebuchadnezzar's Rule over the world; it must arise from no other spring but
God the Holy Trinity alone, who is the only principal of Being, and fountain of
true content. And King David draws a right line to the immovable Center, and
directs the Soul to the true Zenith of happiness, God himself, Whom have I in
Heaven but thee? God alone is the purest truth, the chiefest good, and final
end of intelligent Beings, which speaks the excellency of Christianity, in
reference to the sublimity of its object, which is not the (...), the Universe,
or boundary of the world; but God the (...) and (...), from whence all goodness
flows, the rest, repose and tranquillity of all Creatures. Aristotle in his
Metaphysics, says, That God is vivens, aeternus and optimus; a living,
eternal and transcendent Good. Plato in his Book de Legibus, says, That God is
bonus, and causa bonorum omnium, good; and the cause of all good things. And
Cicero contemplating God in the happy fruition of himself, says, Ea est Dei
vita qua nihil beatius, nihil omnino bonis omnibus affluentius cogitari potest;
nihil enim agit, nullis occupationibus est implicatus, nulla opera molitur, sua
potentia and virtute gaudet, habet exploratum sore se semper tum maximis tum in
aeternis voluptatibus: i. e. Such is the life of God, than which nothing is
more happy, nothing in the world can be thought to abound with more good
things; he is implicated in no business, he undergoeth no labor, but enjoys
his own power and virtue, and knows certainly that he shall be always in
transcendent pleasures. God is the Haven of Eternal Felicity, where till we
arrive in our Spirits, we are mazed in endless wanderings, tortured on the rack
of self-vexation, our desires know no Shore or bottom. And there is no man but
feels his soul too big for terrestrial things, too noble to glut it self with
base corporeal pleasures, and the understanding too sublime a faculty to
subject it self to a brutish appetite; these things are never able to fill its
vast capacities, but only the glorious Trinity, its Maker, and leaves no room
for sorrow to creep in. For the heart of man is triangular, which the whole
circle of the world cannot fill (as Mathematicians say) but all the corners
will complain of emptiness for something else. Nothing can fill the heart of
Man but God. Nothing can satisfy it but the Divinity it self. There is nothing
can give rest to the soul, but only him that made it; for the heart of Man is
like the Needle of the Compass, it has a natural trembling to the Pole, even
the fruition of bliss. And then will the soul be pleased, when it lies down in
the lap of Eternity, and the Triple Angle of man's heart satisfied, being united
to God, the fountain of happiness, where the Angels sun themselves for ever:
and the mystery of the sacred Trinity shall be in full revelation, and that
inconceivable joy shall be opened to you, which changes not as the Moon,
eclipsed as the Sun, nor set as the Stars. Holy David having travested and
coursed the whole world in his thoughts, for a resting place (like Noah's Dove)
finds not amidst the swelling Tides of this world, whereon to stay his feet,
returns back again to the Ark with this Olive Branch in his mouth, Non est
mortale quod opto. He finds no sanctuary but in Heaven, no safe repose but in
the Almighty, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that
I desire besides thee. The Royal Prophet seems to be now under the storms of
grief and trouble, and placed as it were inter suspiria and lachrymas, between
fighs and tears; yet he Anchors his hopes upon Providence, and cheerfully looks
up to Heaven, fetching comfort from thence with a full assurance of Divine
favor, and in all pressures or difficulties whatsoever 'takes himself to his
Harp and plays this divine Anthem, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is
none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, The words being Musical, I shall
follow the Allegory, and in it observe these Two generals, viz. The disposition
of parts, and the opposition of the notes on both. The disposition of parts are
Aspiratum and Lene, high and low.

First, High in a rational expostulation, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

Secondly, Low in a positive determination, And there is none upon Earth I
desire besides thee.

In the expostulation there are these notes in a divine Climax.

First, Quem in Coelis? Whom have I in Heaven?

Secondly, Quem praeter te? Whom have I besides thee?

Thirdly, Quis mihi? Who is for me?

First, Quem in coelis, Whom have I in Heaven? The Holy Trinity is the Ocean of
all true felicity; the comfort, the joy and bliss of Souls. How should we long
after thee, and the fruition of that happiness, which thou have laid up for
those that fear thee! In that most glorious state these operations are most
specially recommended, and spoken of by the Scriptures, viz. Vision, Dilection,
and Fruition. They shall be possessed with such a sweet trinity of sight, love,
and joy; that the soul will confess, being in an ecstasie of wonder and
amazement, that it could not believe those things which now it sees with its
eyes, in that it can look no way but it beholds unspeakable glory. And the Soul
solacing it self with infinite content, cries out, Here will I dwell and abide
for ever Psalm. 1. 32. 14.
. Now whilst others lay up treasures on Earth, in Heaven is my Exchequer. Our
souls will be irregular like the Planets in their Epicycles; and whilst we are
in the sphere of flesh, and clothed with mortality, sailing in the Sea of this
world, there will be winds to create storms: but in Heaven there is a perpetual
calm; no tempest in it; the Soul will joy in Gods Everlasting rest. And this is
the divine elevation of David's spirit, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? It is
the glory and honor of the soul, to be originally from Heaven. How suitable,
and how natural is it for the rational soul which comes down from Heaven to
look thither, and tend toward the source and fountain of its Being! Os homini
sublime dedit, coelumque tueri jussit -- How hard a thing is it to keep the
flame from pointing upwards? And with what unwearied diligence do the Rivulets
seek out the main Ocean? Such an eager pursuit, such strong propensions* (nay
far stronger) may be justly expected in the soul toward Heaven, seeking the
(...), things above; To seek there (...), an habitation not made with hands,
(...), Eternal in the Heavens, in as much as the end is incomparably greater,
and the Agent more noble and active: for God has made us for himself, and
unquiet is Man's heart until it attains him; it longs for, and thirsts after
the living God, Whom have I in Heaven but thee?

Secondly, Quem praeter te? Whom have I besides thee? Say thou, O Lord, unto my
soul, I am thy Salvation, and it is enough to bless and raise me above the Icy
hills of worldly joys. For the blessed Trinity is a Christian's portion, he is
truly possessed of nothing but the Deity, Whom have I besides thee? How glorious
art thou in Heaven above! and what infinite happiness is there provided for me
in thee! One day in thy Courts, O Lord, is better than a thousand elsewhere in
the Palaces of sinful pleasures, or Tabernacles of wickedness. How then may I,
or can I take full content or delight in any thing that is here below? For I
envy not this globe of Earth, nor sumptuous habitations of the ungodly: because
all delicious enjoyments in this life without thee, will but make a Paradise
without a Tree of Life. King David weighed them in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and did not only find them very light, but (...), nothing to
spiritual comfort Psalm. 4 6.
. Whom have I besides thee? Thou, O God do far surpass all the contents of
Israel, as light does pitched darkness, thou art the very joy of my heart, and
my portion for ever.

Thirdly, Quis mihi? Who is for me? Who pleads my cause in Heaven? not any
Saint or Angel, nor yet the Holy Virgin; but thou, O Lord. And do not some dote
on Images with the Romanists, and others on Imaginations with Factionists; who
fall into the heat of contention, the fire of Schism. How few are in the right
way of Gods prescriptions? which is Jehovah Elohenu, Jehovah Echad, the Lord
our God is one Lord; the Father Lord, the Son Lord, the Holy Ghost Lord. And
what the transcript or copy of the world could not, the Sacred pages and
volumes of Holy Writ have discovered of the Deity; the Co-eternity of the Son
of God with the Father, the procession of the Holy Ghost from both, the Unity
of the Three in One uncreated Essence; For there are three that bear record in
Heaven, 1 Epist. 5. Chapter 7. ver.
(says St. John) the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost, and these three are
one. Thou art my Creator, my Redeemer and my Comforter, which makes the
question past all question, and needs no further disputation, I have none in
Heaven but thee. The desire of this Celestial place and state, causes the
Royal Prophet to despise all transitory flashes and sparks of earthly
pleasures, which is the second part, viz. Low in a positive determination, And
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee.

The Princes and Monarchs of the world, who are retinued with all the Equipage
of greatness, and strange variety of delights; being liberally and abundantly
provided for; Silver, Gold, and Jewels are their's, and all Creatures in the
Earth, and the Air, and Water are pressed for their service: yet all these
enjoyments are nothing without thee, None upon Earth I desire besides thee. Et
tecum non, the the negation is personal, no man for his favor, no Creature for
its excellency that I desire in the least comparison of thee. For the treasures
of this world are but gilded Thorns and concealed Miseries; and yet how many
Shrines and Altars are there erected in men's hearts to this great Idol of the
world? Most scarce acknowledge any other God but this Golden Calf, to which
they pay their servile devotions. And when thoughts stream toward wealth,
Rivers are but draughts enough for them. Quod naturae satis est, homini non
est, as Seneca, that grave Moralist, speaks of Alexander, who had swallowed up
Darius and the Indies, and yet in those floods did thirst, and in that surfeit
was hungry. If the Earth were a Center of Diamonds, and did the Heavens shower
down Pearls into Diana's lap; and could we enjoy the Land with its Minerals of
Gold, and the Sea with the greatness of its treasure, sending Ships to
Tarshish, and fetching Spices from the East in the Navy of Hiram; all these
things cannot satiate the desires of the Soul, but are miserable fruitions
without the glorious Trinity. Then when others lay up on Earth, Heaven shall be
my treasure. For the favor of a Prince is but a pleasing snare without thee,
and therefore non est in terris, there is none upon Earth I desire besides
thee. The world is a Theater of sorrow, a warfare and a bondage, all are
prisoners, some in golden Chains, others in Iron; some slaves to poverty,
others to riches; some to honor, others to meanness: And all these are
interwoven with mixed varieties, as pain and grief, pleasure and sadness; so
that the greatest happiness that the world can afford, is not able to fill the
unlimited desires of the heart, but God only. For the world (the Fools
Paradise) is full of Vipers, the obscure print of unsound joys, a dreamed
sweetness, and a very Ocean of gall; and so there is nothing on Earth that I
desire besides thee. Mundo utamur, use we may, but not adore the Creature; we
may look upon this fair picture as the work of the Almighty, but not esteem it
for a Deity or a God, like the foolish Egyptians, or those Persians that gave
veneration only to the luster of their Jewels. The Christian account (as to
Divine Arithmetic Psalm. 90. 12.
) is cast up for another world, to be a Denizen of the New Jerusalem, an Heir
of Eden, a Peer of Paradise, a Pearl of Virtue, a Star of Glory. Although we
are Sojourners here, however we are Municipes Coeli, Freemen of Heaven, and
have the privilege to be called and owned by God as (...), the Fellow-Citizens
of the Saints. A Christian is called (...), one that lives in the confines of
Heaven; so that whilst he is here on Earth, he wants but the courteous hand of
Death to put him into possession of that above 2 Cor. 5. 1.
. Heaven then is my home, the Creator my Father, the Judge my Advocate, the
Spirit my Consolation; therefore there is nothing on Earth that I desire
besides thee.

The opposition of Notes on both (being the Second General) now appears.

First, In primacy of order, King David is the glass in which we may behold
Christian practice. In his thoughts Heaven takes the precedence of Earth, Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, O Lord? This is his first care to seek (...) the
Kingdom of God, here is the primum mobile that moves his heart, his will, and
his affections, Heaven: then the desire on Earth follows after; and it is
honor enough for this vile Earth to wait upon Heaven. Let us not now chaffer
Heaven for Earth (as sottish Indians truck away Ore for glass) and for the
gaudy nothing of this life, hazard our immortal souls to everlasting flames,
and for the toys and vanities of this world lose an Eternal Kingdom, and for a
glorious mortality bid adieu to Heaven, which ought to have the precedence in
our heart and affection. Open our eyes, O Lord, that we may see those glorious
rays that stream from the Divinity, and so beautiful an object will be enough
to draw and attract our hearts unto thee, echoing forth the Anthem of the Text,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire
besides thee.

Secondly, Take it in the sense of the verbs, habeo and desideravi; habeo in
Coelis, I have in Heaven, desideravi in terris, I desire on Earth. Here we tire
our selves with a restless fancy, still wandering through the Creation, but
never finding any satisfaction; but in Heaven there are all things that may
delight us, and solace the faculties of our Soul. For God is a plenitude of
light to the understanding, a multitude of peace to the will, Eternal joy and
consolation to the memory. And in Heaven all our desires shall be satisfied
with fruition, and those exellencies will always supply new and fresh desires
to the soul, which in the beatifical vision shall enlarge into that vast and
infinite satisfaction, that it shall be lost in the enjoyment and most happily
plunged in that fruition which we shall never fully understand, but be still
more and more happy in having pleasures so great as to transcend our knowledge.
How glorious is that Sun that sets not! and how clear is that day that is not
chased by the darkness of the night! Heaven is that resplendent residence, and
of this bliss there is such a fullness that our heads are too thick to
understand it, or if we were able to understand it, yet our hearts are too
narrow to give it entrance; or if our hearts could hold it, yet our tongues are
too stammering to express and utter it Men's deficit, vox silet, non mea tantum
sed and Angelorum. St. Ambrose.
. For the glory of the invisible heavens out-strips humane capacity, and
outgoes our invention; it is such, as eye has not seen, ear heard, nor yet
entered into the heart of man to conceive, what the Almighty, the great Being
of Beings, has prepared in Heaven for those that fear him. And though some
vessels contain more than others, yet all shall be full, there shall be no
vacuity or want in any.

Lastly, Take it in the diversity of the prepositions, cum and praeter, nothing
with, nothing besides thee O Lord! Heap up all the riches of the world into one
pile, till they reach the Stars, and charm all the delights of the world into
one Circle, and enjoy them freely; yet there is a desire in man, which looks
above them, for whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is nothing on Earth
that I desire besides thee. The organ of a Christian Ear is not for Earth, its
music is mixed with too many discords, it is Heaven it aims at, the Angels with
whom it would consort, and the melody of the superior powers that yields the
most absolute concord. This is the Psaltery that King David sings to, and is
the true Ela of a Christian; Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and there is
nothing on Earth I desire besides Thee. How miserable are they then, whose
Pleasures only divert them from God their Maker; and have no other Apology for
their Neglect of Heaven, than what Sin can make; that court the World, and for
a fading Embrace exchange a Diadem of Bliss, a Crown of Glory?

And here let us raise our Thoughts from Earth to Heaven, because the Glorious
Trinity is a fairer Object for Contemplation: For in the Glass of the Trinity,
we may behold all Felicity; it will be Joy to Man's Soul, Health to his Body,
Beauty to his Eyes, Music to his Ears, Honey to his Mouth, Perfume to his
Nostrils, whole Happiness to every Part. Therefore, let us no longer dote upon
this Molehill of Earth, or prize its artificial complexioned Pleasures,
Structures of Cedar and Vermilion, Garments and Embroideries of Aholiab, Tables
of Delicacies, Couches of Ease and Ivory; all Things here below are but
Bracteata Foelicitas, Copper leaved with Gold. If we do but behold the Pavement
of Heaven stuck with Stars, as so many sparkling Diamonds; How despicable and
mean is the Stateliest Palace of the greatest Monarch? If the Hangings be so
precious, What must we think of the Room? If the Frontispiece be so Glorious,
What are those better Parts yet unseen? Magnum and Mirabile sub tanta
Majestate. O think then what Treasures, what Riches, what Excellences are in
those Courts above, where the Gates of the New-Jerusalem is beyond the Orient
Majesty of Pearl, and Streets more splendid than pure Gold; where there is no
need of the clear Light of the Moon, nor the bright Beams of the Sun! What
Ineffable Glory is in God, the Light of those Heavenly Tabernacles? Consider
but the Eternal Joys of that Place, and how heartless and dying is the best of
worldly Pleasures? Nay, were the whole World turned into a Seraglio of Delight,
and every Region into an Arabia; could every Field become a Paradise, and every
Object that we meet with, bring with it a Magazine of Pleasure; had we all the
Enjoyments this Life could triumph in; yet without God, we should find them
dismal Fruitions. Heaven does as far surmount all these things, as the
Celestial Sphere does this Earthly Globe. And so the Proposition is made good,
That Heaven is a fairer Object than Earth for our Contemplation, even the
Glorious and Eternal Majesty of the Holy Trinity, that is enshrined in an Unity
of Essence. And Pythagoras, that Old Samian Philosopher, made Unity the
Original of all Things, and the Cause of all Good in the World. And the Fathers
under the Allegorical Vail of that Unity, discover an undivided Deity, (...),
as if That and God were so inseparably linked together, that the Thought of Man
could not possibly part them asunder. It Is a pious Exhortation that St Paul
gives the Ephesians to holy Concord Ephesians. 1, 4, 5.
, and Unity of Spirit; and lays it down with a triple Argument, (knowing that a
threefold Cord is not easily broken) and admits of no Separation at all,
unless they would seem to dissolve their Religion: There is one Lord, whom
Christians obey, and therefore no Distraction by Service; There is one Faith,
whereby they believe, and therefore no division by Creeds; there is one baptism
whereby they get entrance into the Church, and therefore no distinction by
initiative grace: and these three are more peculiarly (...) that Trinity of
Unities, wherein God by the Ministry of the Holy Apostle appears to his Church
as it were in the Shape of three Angels.

Silence now ye warbling Birds, Consorts of the world be still, and hear the
Harmony of the Royal Prophet sung in an admirable Air, tune the Instruments of
your hearts unto it, Thou art my Portion, thou art my Riches. I love the beauty
of thine House, which is no other than thine own Essence, and the sole aim of
my desire is the place of thy Glory. The Diadems and honors of this world are
of a short standing, and nothing comparable to that Royalty which is
everlasting, and to that Kingdom which knows no end.

This world is an Ark wherein are clean and unclean Beasts; a Park where Goats
and Sheep live together; a Net where good and bad Fish are found: But in
Heaven, nothing that is impure or imperfect can have entry there: In that fair
place Solomon's wisdom will appear folly, his knowledge ignorance; Absolom's
beauty shall be there deformity; Samson's strength shall pass there for
feebleness, and the Riches of all the Kings of the Earth shall be there as
Poverty. The longest term of life in our Forefathers will appear a death, for
in Heaven it is in triumph above the reach of dull mortality. A man may enjoy
the light of the Sun, and walk in its glittering rays, and now and then give a
glance upon it, though we cannot keep our eye fixed upon its globe to behold
its glory; we may behold its beams refracted through a cloud; but we may lose
our sight by gazing on it in its naked beauty, for according to an Axion in
Philosophy, Excellens objectum laedit sensum. Pliny prying into the Mountain
Vesuvius, to discover the fiery irruptions of Natures Kiln, procured his death
by his too bold attempts into the mysteries of Nature. Surely it cannot but be
dangerous to be too inquisitive into the mysteries of the Trinity, which ought
rather to be religiously adored than curiously searched into; it requires
rather Faith to believe than Reason to comprehend and judge: for where there is
a Curtain drawn, if we are so bold to lift it up, we may justly be struck with
blindness, even in those things which before were exposed to our view. It is
enough that God makes us of his Court, though not of his Council. That we may
be free, though not to rifle his Cabinet, yet to sit at his Table, no matter
whether on the right hand, or left in his Kingdom. Why should we strive with
danger, what we may be ignorant of with safety? In such things admiration is
better Piety, than apprehension. Nothing breeds more Atheists among us than
this (the first spawn of Sin) Curiosity, which plucks still at the forbidden
Tree. The Arminians will find a reason in us of Gods Decrees. The Socinians
also will have a reason of his Mysteries, except they see they will not
believe. Our sight now does disperse and lose it self in the immensity of the
extent, for who has beheld it that he might demonstrate it? Not the Angels for
they cover their faces; much less we that dwell in Houses of Clay, and have
that ignorance and guiltiness those glorious Seraphims are freed from, Isa. 6.
2. that cried one to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy. One of the Ancients
glosses finely upon it, unum Jehovam celebrant repetendo unum and idem
(Sanctus) trinum agnoscunt ter repetendo quod uni tribuerunt. A Trinity they
acknowledge in that Blessed Unity of the Godhead, whilst they repeat thrice,
Holy, holy, holy; three in one, and all three but one God. Therefore let us not
furnish our heads only with speculations, but laying up Divine things within
our hearts, and drawing them out into our lives in order to practice, worship
the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity.

The Deity is the ground of our Adoration; and as it is necessary for every one
to be established in this truth, that there is a God, so likewise that there is
but Vnitas divinitatis Person arum pluralitate multiplex St. Austin.
one God, and not a plurality, as the blind Idolatrous Heathen imagine. We
ought then to make God the object of our highest admiration, and of our
greatest love, to offer Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises to him, in all our
ways to acknowledge him, and cheerfully do what he commands; to trust in him,
and depend upon him: for our life is lent us for no other end but to be mindful
of Eternity, and cast up our eyes to Heaven, our future happiness. Anaxagoras
being asked wherefore man was made? replied, To behold the Heavens. For not a
Psalm. 8. verse. 3.
Star sparkles there, but is a Preacher and Herald to the Majesty of its Maker.
Empedocles likewise being demanded why he desired to live in this world?
Answered, only to Contemplate Heaven. Christianity is a kind of Religious
Astronomy the Contemplation and study of Heaven. No Geometry or measuring the
Earth in the Christian Mathematics, unless it be that our Souls might more
easily take footing in Heaven. And as Philosophy describing Lines drawn from
the Center of the Earth, may go to the Circumference of the Heavens; so,
according to our Comportment in these short Moments, (wherein are comprised the
Lines of Life* which we are to live on Earth) shall be the definitive Sentence
of an Eternal Abode. Our true Happiness depends upon our well Management of our
Time here; and it highly concerns us, to foresee what will be our future
State: For in this Life we sow those Seeds, whose Fruits either of Misery or
Happiness, we shall gather in another World, and reap them in Eternity.

Let the Serious Consideration how short our time is on Earth, enforce upon us
a Care of Redeeming it, and use it not to the Maintenance of Wickedness and
Vice, but the Promotion of true Religion and Virtue; that our future State may
be as happy, as it is sure to be lasting. There are but few that consider, that
their Time here on Earth, is but a Prologue to an everlasting State. In this
vast Eternity you must Live; Why do you not let your Thoughts be more upon it?
Your Minds that love to count the days of this narrow Life, extend themselves
unto Eternity, where there are no Limits at all. Tell the Torments of
everlasting Fire, the aching Thoughts (if you can) of a burning Soul, that fryes
in the Wrath of God to eternal Ages: Then number the Joys of Heaven, tell the
Notes of that Celestial Quire, the Hymns of Praises that they sing; and though
thou had a Head as big as Archimedes, that could tell how many Atoms of Dust
were in the Globe of the whole Earth; yet all these were but as a single Atom,
in comparison of those endless Joys or Sorrows. And it is an Oracle of
infallible Truth, and a Promise that remains for ever to the Righteous; Joh.
16. ver. 22.
Your Joy shall remain, none shall take it from you. Therefore, Heaven is the
most lovely, amiable, and most desirable Object. The Enjoyments of Riches,
Honors, Kingdoms, Feastings with us in this World, are but short and
transitory; but in Heaven, there shall be an eternal Feast: The Jubilation of
the Lamb shall be for ever, and shall be extended to the vast duration of
Eternity. O my Soul, Why do thou not aspire, and mount up to the Center and
Light of Glory, to the Fountain of Beams and Brightness, from whence thou wast
derived? How happy shall thou be, when thou shall lay down corruptible Rags of
Earth, and being delivered out of the Prison of this wretched Body, may be
thought worthy to hear the sacred Songs of that Celestial Harmony, and the
Praises of the King Eternal of that Glorious Empire? How accomplished shall thy
Honor and Glory be, when it shall come to thy turn to sing a gracious
Hallelujah? Join unto all this the Pleasure there is to live in the Company of
Angels; to enjoy the grateful Conversation of all those excellent and sublime
Spirits, where Angelical Troops make ravishing Music; and to behold Armies of
Saints, more bright than the Stars of Heaven; to contemplate the Sanctity of
the Patriarchs, the Hope of the Prophets, the Crown of Martyrs, the white and
flowery Garland of Virgins And as for the Sovereign King, who keeps his
Residence in the midst of that glorious People, What Tongue is able to speak
His Praise! O Israel! Now how goodly are thy Tabernacles, how delightful thy
Pavilions! Gardens watered with Floods and Fountains are not so flourishing,
nor are the fruitful Valleys so abundant. Let us not then suffer our selves to
be abused any longer, with the delusive Appearances of this World; but fix our
Eye on Heaven, because it is a fairer Object than Earth, for our Contemplation;
joining with the Royal Prophet, as it is in the Verge of the Text, Whom have I
in Heaven but Thee?

All the Blessings that we do enjoy, are the sweet Influences of Heaven upon
us, Spiritual or Temporal.

First, Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places, arise from no other Spring, and
are Irradiations of the Trinity, and the great Kindness of Heaven to Mankind,
in relation to these Souls of ours. The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have all
done their parts for them: The Father gave His only Son, the Son gave Himself,
left his Glory, and endured the bitter Death of the Cross, merely to keep our
Souls from perishing. The Holy Ghost is become (as it were) our Attendant,
waits upon us with continual Offers of his Grace, to enable us to do that which
may preserve them. These things all the Persons work equally and inseparably,
in respect of the Cause and Effect; for what One does, All do: yet in
congruity, we attribute a distinct Act in regard of the Order and Object.

In Order the original of Action is ascribed to the Father, Joh. 5. 17, 19.

The Nature and Manner of Working, to the Son, Joh. 1. 3. Heb. 12.

The Efficacy and Power, to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 11. 12.

(1.) The Father Creates, Genesis 1. 1. (2.) The Son Redeems, Gal. 3. 1^. (3.) The
Holy Ghost Illuminates, 2 Pet. 1* 21.
The Father is to be adored, as altogether of Himself.

The Son to be glorified, as that Consubstantial Word.

The Holy Ghost to be magnified, as that Co-essential Spirit, eternally
proceeding from Both.

The Three Persons in the Trinity is the Object of our Faith, and we daily own
it in our Creed.

(1.) We believe in God the Father, who made the World. (2.) In God the Son,
who redeemed all Mankind. (3.) In God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies all the
Elect People of God.
A Unity of Essence, and a Trinity of Order; Ordo originis, though not
Regiminis; Co-ordinativus, though not Subordinativus; of Priority, though not
Superiority; a First, a Second, and a Third, though not a higher, lower, and
lowest; for the Lord our God is one Deuteronomy. 6. 4. 1 Cor. 8. 6.
Lord; the Godhead or Essence of God, is one undivided.

Parmenides (who followed Pythagoras) is brought in by Plato, Philosophizing on
that old Axiom, (...), One, and Many; and determined thus, That God was (...),
i. e. one Divine Essence; He was (...), one Immutable Being; He was (...), one
Eternal Being. This Plato discourses in his Philebus at large, showing how
(...) was (...), and (...), One, was Many, and Many, One. And it is not only
good Philosophy, but sound Divinity, the Godhead considered diversely; for the
manner of Being, is Three Persons in One Essence; the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, 1 John 5. 7.

The Father is the First Person of the Trinity, having Foundation in none, of
Personal Substance.

(1.) (...), Not begotten to the Father.

The Son is the Second Person in the Trinity, having Foundation of Personal
Substance, of whom He is eternally begotten, Joh. 5. 26.

(2) (...), Begotten to the Son.

The Holy Ghost is the Third Person in the Trinity, having Foundation from the
Father, and the Son; from both which He especially proceeds, Joh. 14. 26.

(3.) (...), Proceeding to the Holy Ghost.

Here is a threefold Unity of Persons in One Nature, of Natures in One Person,
of Natures and Persons in One Quality.

In the First is one God. In the Second one Christ. In the Third one Spirit.
All this Unity is but to usher in a single Deity. St Paul concludes all with
an (...), There is One God, Ephesians. 4. 6.

And the Soul carries an Image of the Unity of the Godhead, and Trinity of
Persons, in that there is one Soul with three Faculties, of Understanding,
Will, and Memory. Let us all now lift up our Heart and Voice, and praise God,
chanting forth the Anthem of the Seraphims, for the Redemption of the World by
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the Trinity; concluding with St
Basil's Liturgy, (...), (...), O God our God, who have sent this Heavenly
Bread, the Food of all the World, Our Lord Jesus Christ, to be to us a Savior,
a Redeemer. Therefore, with Angels and Archangels, and all the Company of
Heaven, we laud and magnify thy Glorious Name, ever more praising Thee, and
saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory.

Secondly, As Spiritual, so Temporal Blessings are the Product of Heaven. This
Day is a Signal Instance, and carries with it the Pomp of Blaze and Splendor,
as it is the Anniversary of His Majesty's happy Birth and Nativity. And that
Divine Providence that brought him this day into the world, has led him by the
hand of his visible goodness. Ever since he entered the porch of life, and
walked upon the pavement of the Earth, He has had the Royal Charter of Heaven
and enjoyed the testimonies of God's special care, even a Writ of Protection, 1 Chronicles. 16. 22.
Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophet no harm. His life has been a continued
series of Divine Favor. The Adversary has not been able to do him violence;
the Son of wickedness could not hurt him: but he has smitten down his foes
before his face, clothed them with shame, and wounded them that hated him. The
great Majesty of Heaven was a Helmet of Salvation unto him, a strong Tower of
Defense against his cruel Enemies, Domestic and Foreign, at home and abroad.

First, Cruel Enemies at home, who invested their Sword with the Authority of
Law, and made themselves after the Image of a King, and usurped the Seat Royal,
changed the Kingdom unto a State, and Monarchy into a Commonwealth. This was in
the time of our late troubles and confusions, when Monarchy was shaken off,
Religion and Property were lost, and Laws and Liberty were with no small
violence invaded, (being as in the days of Jeroboam 1 Kings 13. 33.
) whoever would, were consecrated Priests of the high places. And when
Soldiers turned Preachers, every act of Providence that seems to favor their
Designs shall be the voice of God. Every opportunity to do mischief to such as
they oppose, shall be interpreted a Command from Heaven to do it Judge. 5. 23.
. Curse ye Meroz was the Texts, Rapine and Plunder the Comment and the Use.
Wars sounded as loud from the Pulpit as the Drum, as if it had been the task of
the Heavens to Kill and slay, and for its Arms hung in the Zodiac, Man's
Anatomy, to show they were born with those that arose of the Dragon's Teeth in
the Poet, Mutuis perire gladiis, to bleed to death on one another's Swords. And
here I may lead your thoughts to the unnatural Civil War in our British Isle;
and the sight of one Aceldama, one field of blood will raise up Men's careless
thoughts to a due valuation and grateful apprehension of the comforts we enjoy
under our most Gracions Sovereign. He that has escaped with him in Job to bring
news of Rapine and Violence, can best tell us what it is to see a flourishing
Land become a Sea of Blood; because War plays Pliny's Cockatrice, annoying
whatsoever it does touch. He can tell us what it is to see the Horse in equal
state with its rider, both of them weltering in their own gore* He can show us
what it is to see the obedient Son run over his slain Father to escape the
hands of his own Executioner. He can show us what it is to see the burning of
Cities, and the woeful Inhabitants Martyred in the flames. He can complain to us
(as the Orator to the Athenians) whatsoever they gain in their thrifty Peace,
they are deprived of by those consuming Tumults. Many in this Nation have
witnessed the Truth of it with their Eyes, and its Horror with their Tears: O
then pray for the Peace of Jerusalem that love her; and consequently, for the
Life and Prosperity of the Monarch of Great Britain, King Charles the Second,
our dread Sovereign, the light of our Eyes and the Lam. 4. 20.
breath of our Nostrils; who causes malignant vapors to vanish, and dispels
those clouds of mischief by his Princely power that would turn Religion into
Rebellion, and Faith into Faction, cry up privilege to invade Regal
Prerogative, and under the notion of the Preservers of our Peace, and Defenders
of our Liberties, reach out their hand to turn the stream of Royalty, and
subvert an excellent Monarchy into a Tyrannical Republic. The Fallacy having
been put on the Kingdom, and Cheat acted once before, it will not easily
prevail with men of sober and rational judgments, to renounce their Religion
(the best in the world) or their Loyalty and obedience to the best of Kings,
whose Princely Goodness is not more tender of the Imperial Crown and Dignity,
than of the Peace and tranquillity of the Subject. The one as it regards Royal
honor, the other the care of his people, to cause Religion happily to
flourish, and Liberty, Laws and Property to be safe and inviolable, (with the
Blessings of Heaven) notwithstanding the subtle insinuations and cunning
Stratagems of the old enemies of Monarchy and the Church to throw us back into
a relapse; which reminds us of the late Rebellion, when men in Buff durst
proclaim themselves the only Legal Authority of the Nation: and these like a
mighty Torrent did drive all before them, with an unruly violence, brake down
the banks of Ecclesiastical discipline, making no difference betwixt things
Sacred and Common, swallowed up Churches with their Revenues, and laid desolate
Sanctuaries of Piety and Religion. Here we may wail out an Epicedium, War and
desolation, Poverty and paleness, and Garments rolled in blood, hearing the
woeful groans of dying Men, and bitter lamentations of Children for their
Parents. The Orphan blubbers his cheeks, and sighs with Elisha, O my Father, my
Father. Now David breaths out an Elegy, and, O Absalom, Absalom! my Son, my
Son! And Rachel likewise weeps, and will not be comforted, because they are
not. These were the miseries this Kingdom groaned under, after the Barbarous
and horrid Murder of that Glorious Martyr King Charles the First, of ever
Blessed Memory. And so it continued under the heavy yoke of an insolent
Usurpation, till his Majesty's happy Restoration, actual Government, and
Gracious Reign over us in Peace and quietness, security and freedom. These
temporal enjoyments, we owe their happiness (under God) to the prudent Conduct
of Regal Majesty. And here take this Thesis or Doctrine by way of affirmative
position.

If the Church be deprived of Kingly Majesty, she is as apt to be infected with
homebred Errors as Foreign injuries; Judge. 17. 6.
for when there was no King in Israel, every man did what was right in his own
eyes. We see then the Office of a King is attended with as much burden as
jurisdiction. He must encounter with Adversaries. For has the Holy Oil been
poured upon his head, and the Crown settled upon it by Divine Providence, which
overrules Nature? He that has given him the Crown, gave the Sword also to
secure and guard it: and as it was Judah's Prerogative to sway the Royal
Scepter, so also to yield Protection; for the King is Custos utriusque Tabulae,
Defender of the Faith, and a Nursing Father to the Church. And the Princely
Power, and Sovereign Authority (with God's Blessing) may still preserve the
true and ancient constitution both of Church and State from Anarchy and
Disorder, from Popish Superstition and Fanatical Faction. For the King has his
Authority over us from Heaven (...), the Lord sets up Kings, says the Father:
And (...), Kings are from God, says the Heathen. Therefore I must be subject,
purely out of Conscience, for the Lord's sake. The Religion of the Church of
Rome (like the Laws of Draco) are written in Blood, advanced by Policy, and
propagated by Violence: whereas Christianity never used the Sword (the Kingdom
of Heaven is another kind of 2 Cor. 10. 4.
warfare) Christianity came attired into the world with the white of Meekness,
Humility, and Patience. Christ the Prince of Peace, never pulled the Crown from
any Prince's head, but commands the payment of all Duties to Caesar, and
acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above. Nor did any of his followers
ever rebel against their Prince, usurp the State, or disturb the Government;
and though it was their unhappy fate at first to be accused as Factious and
Seditious, yet none were better Subjects, nor testified their Allegiance more
to Authority. St Paul in the days of Heathen Persecution and Tyranny lays down
this Hypothesis, There is no Power but of God: the Powers that be (...), are
ordained of God. If Religion be pretended, an Heathen must not be resisted. If
Tyranny, it is damnation to oppose a Nero. They that resist Romans 1^. 1, 2.
, shall receive, (...), the wrath and judgment of God, says the Apostle. And
the Church of England teaches no other Doctrine than what was taught by the
Prophets and Apostles themselves, i. e* Obedience and Submission to Kings and
Governors. In the Prophecy of Obadiah, they are called (...), Saviors, or
Deliverers. In Ezekiel's Language they are (...) Shepherds, to Feed and Rule
the People. In St Paul's they are (...), God's Ministers; nay Elohim, Gods
Exodus 22. 28.
by Office and Deputation, to Govern the affairs of Men on Earth. The Apostles
also charged those whom they employed in settling of the Churches, to put them
in mind to be subject to Principalities Titus 3. 1.
and Powers, and to Obey Magistrates. And St Peter's Exhortation is, Submit
your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake 1 Pet. 2. 13.
, not only unto the King (...) as supreme, but unto Governors (...), as being
sent by him. Rebellion then is as the Sin of Witchcraft, and Disobedience as
the Iniquity of Idolatry 1 Samuel 15. 23.
. For whosoever disobeys the Viceroy, affronts the Sovereign; they fight
against God, and attempt to cross the decrees of Heaven, and frustrate the
Counsel of the Most High, who says, By me Kings Prove. 8. 15.
Reign. And it is the Assertion of Plato, That a Kingdom is (...), a Divine
Good, which imprints on our minds a double instruction, to Fear God and Honor
the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17. First to adorn the Christian Religion with Holiness and
Piety of life. It is Religion that ennobles Man, erects his affections, and
estates him in a happiness above nature; alters his very being, and puts him in
opposition to what he was before. Religion is the most effectual instrument to
reform men's lives, and bring them into an hatred of their Vices, which all
Moralists, especially the Pythagoreans, after all their Industry, despaired of.
What Reports Diogenes, Laertius, and Valerius Maximus, make of Polemus, the
Convert of Zeno, are but mean and low things, if compared with the Acts, and
glorious Success of Christianity; whose Virtue and Influence upon Men's
Consciences, inables them to subdue Self, overcome their Vices, check the
impetuous Force of their Passions, and withstand their own carnal and sensual
Inclinations, the greatest and most noble Conquest.

As the Luster of Christianity was thus bright and glorious, in the Primitive
Constitution; so was the Honor of its Professors, that they were of such Piety
and Integrity, that their Adversaries confessed, that their Religion was their
only Ruin.

Let us therefore be so steadfast in our Religion, unshaken in our Faith, so
constant in our Devotion, and holy and unspotted in our Lives, that Wisdom may
be justified not only of her Children, but Enemies also: which lays the
greatest Obligation on us, to live the most Holy and Religious Life toward
God: For were we more Holy and Righteous in our Ways, and did we walk in
Newness of Life, we should more convince the World of the Truth of our
Religion. Holiness (says the Psalmist) becomes (O Lord) thine House for Psalm.
93. 5.
ever. No Garment becomes the Church so well, as the Garment of Holiness. It is
Sanctity, that is the Churches Glory: It is the Ephod of Purity, that is the
Churches Excellency. Our first Creation set before us, as Hieroglyphics before
the Egyptians, whose very Shapes and Figures were Doctrinal; and by a kind of
Oratory, preached the Spectatours Duty. What else means the Image of God in the
Soul, but that it might continually act and work according to the Pattern, viz.
Godliness, after whose Likeness it was created according to Holiness and
Perfection, which it brought down from Heaven; that reflecting still upon the
same Image, it might be holy as He is 1 Pet. 1. 15.
holy. For a Holy Life, and Christian Works, are the very way to the glorious
Vision, and Fruition of the great God, in an everlasting blessed Life: Romans 6.
22.
Therefore, Fear God, and honor the King, which is the best Christian
Practice, and brings me to the next Gradation in our Discourse, viz. To crown
our Zeal with Loyalty to the King; for He is (...), wears God's Image, and
beautifies the World with Order and Government; whereby so many Millions of Men
do breath the Life of Peace and Comfort. For, Whither would the Fury of Men's
Passions lead them, if they were not bounded with Authority, and subdued to an
awful Subjection by the higher Powers? Religion would quickly feel a heavy
Destiny, and the World be drowned in Blood, as it was once in Water. The Sword
of Authority is put into the Hand of the King, by Almighty God. To the like
Sense also, is that of Nestor to Agamemnon: (...), (...)
(...) --


Jove lent thee thy Scepter and Jurisdiction. The King's Power is from God; and
for any private Person, or any Club of Subjects to wrest it out, is a double
Usurpation.

First, They invade God's Sovereignty, who says, Romans 12* 19.
Vengeance is mine.

Secondly, The Princes Prerogative, whose Office is to Protect and Punish:
Rewards to Virtue and Merit, as well as Punishment to Sin and Vice, are
dispensed: A 1 Pet. 2. 14.
Terror to evil doers (says the Text) and a Praise to them that do well.
Therefore, Honor the King.

Secondly, As the Goodness of Heaven shines in the Preservation of our Royal
Sovereign, from the Usurpation of cruel Enemies at Home; so likewise, Divine
Providence has guarded him from Foreign Attempts of unreasonabble Men Abroad;
and made the Plots and Conspiracies of these (worse than Heathens) of none
Effect; and delivered our King, and our Princes, our Nobles, and the Heads of
our Tribes, the Governors of our Church, and Judges of our Land; nay, the
whole Commons of this Realm, from a fearful Destruction, that would have
swallowed them up: For, when the Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree, to cut off
Sovereignty, and destroy the Lord's Anointed; the rest of the People, who are
the Branches, must expect lopping. The restless Emissaries of the Church of
Rome, whether Priests, Jesuits, or College of Cardinals, give daily Proof of
their inveterate Malice against the King, the Government, and Protestant
Religion; thinking that New Massacres are the most effectual course, to stop
the Cry of the Old; and that the readiest way to silence their Adversaries, is
to make them Instances of the Truth of the Accusation.

If the Great God of Heaven (who refrains the Spirits of Men that delight in
Blood) had not been gracious to our King and Kingdom, you had not this Day been
Auditors, nor I Speaker of this Theme; but all of us miserable Spectatours of
the contrary: And the Pope's Triple Crown would have been set with many
Red-Roses of great Triumphs in Protestant Blood. But Heaven has preserved our
Church from Ruin and Confusion, from the spreadings and prevailings of Errors,
Heresies and Schisms, Superstition and Idolatry, which strive to oppress us,
and to eclipse the Truth and Purity of Doctrine, which is our Churches Glory.

Lastly, As Divine Providence and Goodness did this Day bring into the World
our gracious Sovereign, and has hitherto preserved Him from all Enemies,
Domestic and Foreign: So the same special Grace and Favor of God, did this
Day bring home and restore to us our King; a Prince of so much Clemency and
Mercy, that He is inferior to none that sways a Scepter, or sits upon a
Throne. His Restoration was wonderful, without any Effusion of Blood. The
Voice of War is changed into Proclamations of Peace, the Clattering of Swords
and Spears is turned into the sweet Melody of Harps, and the harsh Tones of
Death into a Psalm of Thanksgiving. O Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy
Land, and have turned away the Captivity of Jacob: Praise therefore waits on
Thee in Zion, and unto Thee shall the Vow be performed in Jerusalem. We
celebrate the Memory of this thy Mercy, in restoring our King, and with Him the
free Profession of true Religion and Worship. What does God require now both
from Prince and People, but the Acknowledgment of his Favor? He that will not
glorify God, as the Father of Mercies; in the Rigor of Justice, God may
glorify Himself in his eternal Ruin. If we prove not the Heralds of his Glory,
Examples shall we be of his Just Indignation. All tasting Mercy, all should be
Thankful; and though all have not Frankincense, yet every one may have praise.
Te Deum laudamus, we praise thee, O God; our Souls do magnify the Lord. We
praise God in his Sanctuary, and in the Firmament of his Power, for his mighty
Acts, and according to his excellent Greatness. Praise him with the Sound of
the Trumpet, with Psaltery and Harp, with stringed Instruments and Organs; show
your selves joyful before the Lord the King. Let every thing that has Breath,
praise the Lord.

Let us now direct our Prayers and Supplications to the Glorious and Eternal
Trinity, that all Blessings, Divine and Human, Spiritual and Temporal, like the
precious Ointment of Aaron's, may be poured out on the Head of our Royal
Sovereign, Length of Days on his Right Hand, on his Left Riches and Honor;
That his Reign may be Glorious, and his Regal Virtues after this Life crowned
with Immortal Glory. And We, with the Residue of God's holy Church, may rise to
that incomprehensible endless Felicity; where the Blessings of the Trinity in
Unity, and Unity in Trinity, will gloriously shine upon our Souls for evermore.

Now, unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, and only Wise God, be
ascribed all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever,

AMEN.

