A Praefatory DISCOURSE TO A late PAMPHLET, Entitled, A MEMENTO FOR English
PROTESTANTS, etc.

BEING An ANSWER to that Part of the Compendium, which reflects upon the Bishop
of Lincoln's Book.

The Second Edition, with several Additions and Amendments.

TOGETHER With some Occasional Reflections on Mr. L'Estrange's Writings.

LONDON, Printed by Tho* Dawks, for the Author. 1681.

THIS IS HUMBLY DEDICATED TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD THOMAS LORD
BISHOP OF LINCOLN.

THE PREFACE.
THE Papists have of late given us such fresh Occasions by their horrid and
damnable Conspiracies against the Person of our King, our Government, and our
Religion; to renounce and detest the Communion of that Church, which does not
only allow men, but teaches them to be Murderers and Traitors. And we have yet
so great Reason to apprehend the dismal Consequences of their Secret and
Hellish Machinations, that I am confident no Discourse which tends to heighten
and improve the just Prejudices of English men, against that impious and absurd
Religion, will be thought at this time unnecessary by any good Protestant. I
shall not therefore make any Apology for the Collecting and Printing this
Epitome of the three great Massacres in Piedmont, France and Ireland, which is
intended chiefly for the Instruction of ignorant and unlearned People; for we
fear not that Scholars and men of Sense should be made Papists, except such
whose Morals are so wretchedly debauched, that they are ready at all times to
sacrifice their Consciences to their Civil Interests: and I hope there are not
so many of these desperate Prostitutes as the Papists are apt to imagine, and
as the Manners of the Age we live in, may (I confess) give us just cause to
fear: No, it is the ordinary Rank of men, who have not had the Advantage of
Learning and a generous Education, to defend themselves against the studied
Fallacies and specious pretenses of the Romish Agents, who commonly become the
Prey of those Wolves in Sheeps clothing.

To provide therefore for their Security, that they may not fall into the
snares that are laid for them, ought to be our chiefest Care, since as it is
more Charity to strengthen the hands of the weak, than to add force to the
strong; so in this case, it is more prudent too, in order to the support of the
common cause of Protestant Religion, the ignorant being by far the greater
number. Nor is this to be done a better way, then by furnishing them with such
plain Arguments as they are able to apprehend and manage themselves, to the
confusion of the common Enemy. And these can be no other than such as are drawn
from matters of Fact, they being easiest to be understood, and hardest to be
answered.

For this Reason it was, that this short Narrative of the bloody Butcheries and
inhumane Murders heretofore committed upon the persons of Protestants, by
Italian, French and Irish Papists, in cold blood, and by the Instigation of
their* Church, was prepared for the Press at the desire of a worthy Gentleman,
(whose Zeal for the Interest of his Country and the Protestant Religion
deserves a public mention, would his Modesty permit it) in order to the being
by him bestowed among his Country Neighbors, who, some of them perhaps have
never heard of, and others may have forgot the Story of these holy Popish
Cruelties, these religious Villainies; the design being to let such sort of
People see, what a horrid thing Popery is, when her Vernish is taken off; what
a deform*d and frightful face this gaudy painted whore, Rev. 17. 2, 5, 6.
With whom the Kings of the earth have committed Fornication, this Mother of
Abominations, made drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus; I say, What a deformed and frightful face she has when
her Paint is laid by, and she appears by true Lights in her proper Colors:
What monstrous and abominable Actions Papists are capable of, when the Interest
of that Idol of theirs (their Church) requires them. By which as well as by
their late Plots here in England, it is not hard for men of the meanest
Capacities to perceive, That their Religion cannot be the Religion of Christ,
while it justifies them in the grossest Immoralities, and engages them in the
most unchristian Practices. That those detestable Doctrines of Deposing and
Killing Kings, and extirpating Heretics, which have been so often objected to
the Church of Rome by Protestant Divines, are not Speculative Notions and
Propositions Problematical, as some of the Popish Writers, and particularly the
Author of that lying Libel, called Compend. page 77.
The Compendium, would make us believe; But such settled Maxims of their
barbarous Ecclesiastical Policy, as too often have been, and again will be put
in practice, whenever that proud uncharitable Church has a safe occasion to do
it; though at other times they must be disowned with the usual Popish
Impudence, especially to such Protestants as have so little wit to take what
they say on Trust, or so little Reading not to be able to disprove them.

I hope no man will understand me here, as if from the bare Actions of Papists*
and nothing else, I argued to the Principles of Popery, and conclude the one
from the other; this were bad Charity, and worse Logic, and one of their own
constant Topics in their Writings against Protestants: 'twere (to say the
worst that can be of it) to fall directly into the ridiculous way of Reasoning
used by the Compendianist, when he pretends to answer the Bp. of Lincoln's
Book, that admirable and learned Discourse; a Discourse of so great use at this
time, and which does with such undeniable Evidence convince the Religion of
Papists to be guilty of all their traitorous and bloody Designs against Kings
and Protestants, that I cannot but take this occasion to correct that
troublesome Impertinent, who has made such a senseless Buzze, and raised such
a dust about it, with design to puzzle and darken those Truths, which the
Bishop has there made so plain and clear, especially since the Bishop himself
has not thought him (as indeed he is not) worthy of his Notice, and no body
else that I know off, has yet exposed that part of his impudent Pamphlet, which
concerns this truly Venerable and Excellent Person.

First then, what a foolish Flourish dos he make against the Bishop,
endeavoring to throw that wicked Principle of Deposing Kings upon Protestants,
with this gross Fallacy of Arguing from men's Practices to the Principles of
their Religion? Is not his Lordships meaning, says Compend. page 77.
he, in truth this, that Protestant Principles (when really believed) are
destructive to all Kings, especially to Catholic ones? since we see that the
lawful Monarchs of England, Scotland, Swaedland, Denmark, the United Provinces,
Transylvania, Geneva, etc. have been actually deposed by their Protestant
Subjects. This (etc.) here I guess to be a Lie of the lowest price in their
Book of Rates for Sin; it is so pitiful and inconsiderable a trick. He puts it
down, as if there were a vast and tiresome number of Countries* behind, which
in kindness to his Reader he forbears to mention, where Princes have been
deposed by Protestants; when he knew in his Conscience he could scarce have
named one more, if it had been to gain the Popedom; if he could, I doubt not
but we should have had it at full length. Well; but in those Countries he has
named, Princes (it seems) have been actually deposed by their Protestant
Subjects. And what then? Does it therefore follow, that the Protestant Religion
teaches the Doctrine of Deposing Kings? Or, may it not indeed teach the quite
contrary for all that? Did this wretched Trifler never hear of men who have
acted contrary to the Principles of their Religion? where has he lived? In a
Convent without doubt, among the most Seraphick Saints of his Church; Dr.
Stillingfleet's Fanaticisme of the Church of Rome, page 276.
I mean those mad Fanatickes of the Sect of Abbot Joachim, who according to
their New Evangelium Aeternum, have been in a state of Perfection ever since
the year 1260. I wonder when his hand was in, and while he was industriously
stuffing out his thin Discourse with big and sounding words, he did not bring
all the Protestant Criminals, and other ill men, who have been any way Famous
since the Reformation, upon the stage, and then charge the Protestant Religion
with Felony, and Murder, and Treason, and Adultery, and Perjury, and what not?
The Consequence had been altogether as good, and the Triumph as just. We do not
reason at this loose and absurd Rate, when we accuse the Church of Rome of
Principles which justify the Deposing and Murdering of Princes, and the
Massacre of Millions of innocent People, whom with a ridiculous affectation she
terms Heretics. But we first prove her (as my Lord Bishop of Lincolae has
unanswerably done) to have such Principles; and this not only from the Books of
her most eminent Writers, upon whose Testimony we always lay the least weight)
allowed and commended by her self, but from that Law which is the Rule of
Justice in her Ecclesiastical Courts, from the Authentic Bulls and Decretals
of her Popes, and lastly (which is the greatest Evidence that is possible in
the case) from the Cannons of her general Councils. Then we urge matters of
Fact, conformable to them, to show that they are not things of bare Speculation
and dispute am^ng Casuists and Schoolmen, but such necessary Rules for support
of her Hierarchy, as have been frequently put in practice, to the great scandal
of the Christinn Profession.

To come to particulars: We should not lay to her Charge the Murders of Henry
III. and Henry IV. of France, because they were committed by Members of her
Communion, if (besides the public Applause of the one by the then Pope, in a
Set-speech to the College of Cardinals) we had not first convinced her of
holding such Principles as justify both. We should not accuse her of the
several Conspiracies of Papists here in England against the Lives of Queen
Elizabeth, King James, King Charles I. and his present Majesty, if (besides the
proving upon her the beforementioned Principles) she had not actually and
formally (as far as it lay in her Power) Excommunicated and Deposed them all,
and absolved their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. We should not
accuse her of the Massacres of Paris and Piedmont, because her Sons were there
the Brethren in Iniquity, the Sons of Violence, that acted unprovoked those
dismal Slaughters, if, as an additional proof of her holding the
beforementioned Principles, she had not Thuanus Hist. l. 53. p. 837.
commended the one, giving thanks to God for it, and History of the Waldenses.
commanded the other. Lastly, we should not place to her Account the late
Rebellion of Ireland, and all those murders which were the consequences of it,
because the Rebels were Papists, it (besides that the History of the Irish
Rebellon, printed 1680.
Pope's Nuncio was known to be the chief Guide, and Romish Priests the chief
Contrivers and Fomenters of that desperate and bloody Revolt) it were not most
notorious, that she has always ready an Armory of execrable Principles, suited
to such occasions, to satisfy the Consciences and encourage the Madness of her
Jewish Zealots.

This I am confident all impartial men will judge fair Dealing and just
discourse, and far different from the Method of the Compendianist; the Reader
may see we ground not our Charge of Popery upon the bare Actions of Papists,
but having found this degenerate Church teaching the most disloyal and inhumane
Doctrines; and then observing her followers in several famous Instances, to be
guilty of Facts which directly answer to them: We think we have reason to
conclude the one to be the cause of the other, and that many Papists had not
been so bad men, if their very Religion had not debauched them. May we not now
justly turn the Compendianist's own words of foolish Triumph upon himself and
his Party? Compend. page 77.
What Parity is there between us and our Adversaries, either in our Actions or
Books of this Nature? Though the Actions of many Protestants have (...) too had
to be justified, yet did they never go to the Church for Sanctuary. Though
Protestants have been Deposers and Murderers of Princes, (there are Rogues of
all Persuasions;) yet had they never any Encouragement from their Religion so
to do? nor did any of them ever so much as pretend it, except such Bedlam
Fanatics as Fifth Monarchy men, a Venner, or a John of Leyden: and these are
(properly speaking) as far from being right Protestants, as Papists are from
being right Christians. But can he show us where the Protestant Religion allows
the Deposing or murdering of Princes, or gives the least intimation of such a
Power in the Church? Can he show it us, (where only it ought to be looked
after, viz.) in the Confessions of our Faith, or in the Articles of our
Communion? Or, lastly can he show it us in the Writings of any considerable
Protestant Divines? though their private Opinions unlicenc'd and unauthoriz'd
by the Church, of which they are Members, cannot properly be a Charge against
the Protestant Religion, but (because we will give him more than he can justly
ask in this Controversy) I say, can he show it us, even here? I know indeed he
does affirm, That the Compend. page 76.
Prime Leaders (as he styles them) of the Reformation, Luther, Calvin,
Zuinglius, Beza, and have in express terms held, That Princes might be deposed
upon the account of Religion. But he has not quoted one of their Books to
direct us where this scandalous Tenet, which he fixes upon them, might be
found, but leaves us to hunt after it at large among the voluminous Writings of
those Authors. I do not therefore think my self obliged to take any more notice
of this Slander of his, than if he had never vented it: What? does he expect to
be believed upon his bare word? Upon the honor of a Popish Controvertist? --
sic notus Vlixes?
Does he think we know-them no better than to trust them? But we will not use
all the Advantages that we have against so bad a Cause, and so weak an
Adversary. Let us suppose then for once, That Luther, Calvin, and as many more
as he has a mind to take into his, etc. have held, That Princes may be deposed
upon the Account of Religion: By what new Logic can he make this pertinent to
the present Discourse? Does he think it the same thing to hold indefinitely,
That Princes may be deposed upon the Account of Religion; and to hold, That the
Church has a Right to depose them upon that Account? To hold that they may be
deposed by an Authority Civil, and to hold that they may be deposed by an
Authority Ecclesiastical? Let him now speak his Conscience without a
Dispensation. Does he in good earnest think these two Propositions equivalent,
or at least equivalent as to the point in controversy between him and the
Bishop of Lincoln, and that they equally disgrace the professed Religion of him
who affirms them. He cannot sure be so void of the ordinary reason of a Man,
though he has swallowed down never so many Roman Catholic Doctrines, as not to
perceive a palpable difference between them. It Is not but that the former of
these Positions is a very bad Principle, dangerous to Princes, and destructive
to the Peace and Settlement of a Nation, though not so much as the latter,
because it wants the Enforcement of Conscience and Religion to fix it in the
Mind, and thrust it out upon occasion into action with that Violence, which
usually accompanies a pretended Zeal for the Honor of God. But how bad soever
it may be still it is a Civil, not a Religious Principle; and though it may be
Sedition in the highest degree, it can never be Heresy; a man's Life and Estate
(who maintains it) is answerable for it, not his Religion. To make this a
little clearer, I say, It Is one thing to hold, That Princes may be dedepos'd by
the State, though upon the Account of Religion, (i. e. for being of a Religion
different from the established) grounding this Opinion upon the Laws and
Customs of some particular Civil Constitutions, or upon the ends of Government
in general; and quite another thing to hold, that they may be deposed by the
Church, grounding this Opinion upon the Laws of Religion, and a Power supposed
to be delegated to her by Christ. This last is the Principle we charge, and the
Bishop of Lincoln has proved upon the Church of Rome, which makes her Religion
it self dangerous to Princes. On the other side, though Luther, Calvin, or any
other Protestant Divines should hold the first, though it be a false and a bad,
yet (as I said before) it is a Civil Principle, and their holding it could no
more reflect on the Protestant Religion, than an Error they might be guilty of
in History or Mathematics. The Protestant Religion therefore remains clear
from any suspicion of allowing the Doctrine of Deposing Princes (the point I
undertook to make good) though it should be granted the Compendianist, that
Luther and Calvin, etc. have had ill Principles in Relation to Civil
Governments. If he could prove indeed, That Luther and Calvin or any other
Protestant Divines have held The Lawfulness of Deposing Princes, as a Principle
of their Religion, and placed the power of doing it the Church, he would say
something that were to the purpose, and parallel to what we accuse the Church
of Rome off, but in the Method he has taken, he does but beat the Air, and
fight with Shadows.

I shall explain this Distinction a little further by some famous Examples, in
order to meet with the other Cavils of this idle wrangler, and make the
Inconsequence of his Arguings (if it be possible) yet more apparent. He may
remember then, That here in England, Edward the II. and Richard the II. were
actually deposed in times of Popery, and by Papiits; yet did our Writers never
charge the Church of Rome, (though she held then the same doctrines, and had
the same Pride to trample on Princes that now she has) with those two disloyal
and unjust Usurpations upon the Sovereignty of the Kings of England. And for
what imaginable reason but this only, viz. because they were both acts of the
Civil Power, and carried on by men who grounded what they did upon Principles
(though grossly false and mistaken) drawn from the Constitution of the English
Government, and the Rights of the two Houses of Parliament; and the Church of
Rome, contrary to her Custom upon such occasions, was only a bare Spectator,
neither her Authority nor her Principles being made use of to further or
justify those proceedings. I would now a k this Collector of Impertinences,
this teadious Compendianist, whether he thinks this a good reason to clear the
Church of Rome from being concerned in the deposing of these two unfortunate
Princes. If he says, It Is, as no doubt he will, with what face can he pretend
to charge the Church of England, (as he would be understood to do, page 76 lin.
38.) with the Endeavors that were used to keep Queen Mary from the Crown, the
Death of the Queen of Scots, and the Bill of the late House of Commons against
the Duke of York's succession, since the Cases are directly parellel; I mean
parallel in all that concerns the present Question. Were they not every one of
the Acts of the Civil Power, and carried on by men who grounded what they did
on Civil, not Religious Principles; Was not the setting up of* the Lady Jane
Gray, and the raising an Army to oppose Queen Mary, an Act of the Privy Council
in persuance of King Edward's Will, and a Law made in the Reign of Henry the
VIII. for the Illegitimating of this Princess, as the Lords of the Council
themselves declare in their Answer to her Letter writ from Bakers* Chron.
Framingham Castle? Was not the Death of the Queen of Scots most notoriously an
act of the State, and justified by the Laws of the Land? Was she not indicted
for Treason, and known to pretend a better Title to the Crown than Queen
Elizabeth? Lastly, was not the Bill against the Duke of York grounded on a
supposed Legal Power in the King and the Two Houses, to alter the Course of the
Succession when they think fit? Have not all the Pamphlets that have been writ
in Vindication of that Bill argued the Lawfulness of it from the Constitution
of the Civil Government, and wholly disclaimed the Interesting of Religion at
all in the business, as to the justifying of it in the least degree,
endeavoring with great pains to prove, That true Religion does not meddle
with the Civil Rights of Princes, but leaves them to be determined by the Laws
and Customs of particular Countries? By what strange consequence then can he
entitle the Church of England, or the Protestant Religion, to things that are
so perfectly of a Civil nature, unless he will make them answerable for all the
Actions of Protestants of what kind soever, and resolve to maintain that
childish Sophisme I first took notice of, as the chief ground of all his
extravagant Raving against the Bishops Book, viz. The concluding the Principles
of a Religion from the Practices of her Professors? Which is the very Dregs of
Folly, the last Running of Impertinence.

It Is true, the Protestant Religion (i. e. the care of preserving it) was, no
doubt, the great Motive of doing what was done in every one of these three
Cases, but that is not here to the purpose; for, it is not the Reason for which,
but the Authority by which, a Prince is deposed, and the kind of Principle
(i.e. whether Civil, or Religious) it is justified upon, that must condemn, or
acquit a Church of the Guilt of it; though this man endeavor all along to
insinuate the contrary, by such a fallacious way of representing the Position
charged on the Church of Rome, as makes that seem to be the chief Point in the
Controversy between her and the Bishop of Lincoln, which is in truth no part of
it, viz. the Motive or end of deposing Princes. But it is not the Business of
this little Pamphleter to state things fairly, and reason clearly, but to amuse
the Reader, and puzzle the Question; a close way of arguing will not suit
either with his Cause or his Understanding: a good proof of which he gives us
at the very first, in these words; See the Compend. page 76.
If on the other-side (says he) the Bishop means that there have been Popish
Doctors of the Opinion, That Princes might be Depos*d upon the account of
Religion, what Advantage, I would fain know, can that be to his Lordship, or
his Treatise, since not only all the Prime Leaders of the Reformation, etc. Is
it to be imagined now, that a man should get so far out of his way, unless he
purposely designed to ramble, or write things so grossly impertinent to the
matter he was treating of; unless he studied to confound it, and render it as
little intelligible as was possible? This is properly playing at Cross Purposes
(which he very foolishly, and very unjustly accuses the Bishop off) when men
talk what is foreign to the Question and wander from the business out of
design. Never did any man take more true pains to understand a Discourse
difficult in it self, than he has to misunderstand the Bishop's, which was
plain and easy, or at least to make his Reader do so; for he cannot be so
dull himself in this point as he would seem. It Is not possible that he, or any
man who has read the Bishop's Book, should think, it was the Bishop's meaning
only to charge the popish Doctors with holding indefinitely, That Princes might
be Deposed upon the account of Religion, when it is so palpably evident in a
hundred places of his Book, that he only brings their Opinions as a collateral
proof of his Charge of their Church and Religion, and that with a quite
different Tenet, as I have already showed. And as it is the Roman Church, and
not the Doctors, only, or chiefly, which the Bishop charges with holding, that
Princes may be Deposed by her Authority, not with holding indefinitely that
they may be Deposed upon the account of Religion: So it is the present popish
Canon Law, the Bulls and Decretals of Popes, and the Canons of General
Councils, which are the Testimonies he relies upon for the making good of his
Charge, and not the private Opinions of Popish Doctors, though being cited out
of Books licensed and approved by that Church, they are of considerable weight
in the Argument. Now what says the Compendianist to these strong and most
convincing Proofs? Why in fine (as Mr. Bays says upon another occasion) he
wont tell us. He has not one word, not one Syllable of Answer to them, but
passes them over with as deep a silence, and as good a grace, as if they were,
like most of his own, not at all to the purpose. This discreet and necessary
Resolution being taken, he bends all his little Wit, and with a great deal of
Cheerfulness goes about to invalidate what the Bishop urges from the Writings
of the Popish Doctors, which yet the poor impotent Scribler is by no means able
to do; as I have made appear in my Answer to his Charge of Luther and Calvin.
The Attempt however was just as wise, and as likely to satisfy reasonable men,
as if a General, who had a great and well disciplined Army to fight with,
should neglect the Main Body, and with his whole strength set upon the Forlorn
Hope.

Before I proceed any farther, I cannot but take Notice of a very extraordinary
Passage, which I meet with, page 77. li. 12. Where the Compendianist would make
the World believe, That we our selves confess, That our Monarchy is weakened by
our Religion; That Popery must be called back to support it, and that Papists
are hated by many on this Account, all which is in it self so notorious a
Falsehood, and in him (who could not but know the contrary) so base a Slander
of the Protestant Faith in general, and of the People of England in particular,
that I am confident no true Protestant can read it without Indignation, nor any
sensible man without Astonishment at the strange Impudence of this prostitute
Writer* His Words are these: Can it be said, That the Monarchy has gotten by
the Reforformation, when Protestants themselves acknowledge (and what desperate
Enemies that has created us, may be easily imagined) that nothing but Popery,
or at least its Principles, can make it again emerge, or lasting? Was there
ever such a complication of Malice and Folly as this Period affords us? There
is a vein of impertinent arguing, contrary to the known Rules of Discourse,
and shameless affirming, contrary to the known Truth of Fact, which runs
through the whole Mass of his crude and indigested Pamphlet: But this is a
Nompareillo (to use Mr* Bayse's Phrase) of want of Modesty, and want of Sense;
one of his bold Strokes. It Is usual with him to tell Tales for Arguments, and
lay down confident Assertions in stead of Proofs: but let him now rake together
all the Dirt he can meet with, and practice himself in Compendiums, i. e. in
lamentable ill reasoned, lying Discourses; Let him make Extracts of the Lives
of popish Saints, and abridge the Legends of Monks; let him take short Heads of
Mr. Cressy's Mystical Divinity in his Sancta Sophia, and write Epitomes of the
Controversies of the Schoolmen, he shall never again be able to crowd so much
Nonsense, Libel, and Untruth into so few Words, as long as he lives. Can it be
said (says he) That the Monarchy has gotten by the Reformation, etc?)
Prodigious Impudence! Can any thing else be said with the least color of
Reason, or Truth? He cannot but know too, that this has always been said by
Protestant Writers, and proved beyond all contradiction, except that of absurd
and illogical men, from whom Saint Paul prayed to be delivered. However since
he will needs make a New Question of it, I shall take this occasion to inform
the ignorant Reader (for none else can need it) how much the Monarchy has
gotten by the Reformation in point of Civil Advantage, and consequently, how
great a Loser it will be every way, if by some fatal Infatuation, any Successor
of his Majesty should again bring the Crown, and the Nation under the Romish
Yoke, that worse than Egyptian Darkness, and Slavery, which neither our
Fathers, nor We are able to bear.

In the first place the, The Monarchy has by the Reformation, gotten an
absolute Freedom from the Tyranny of the Popes Spiritual Supremacy, and his
pretended Temporal Power in ordine ad Spiritualia, to which it was before
subject, and in persuance of which several of our Kings have been summoned to
appear personally at Rome, and King John forced to resign his Crown to a
Legate, to the high Dishonor of the Regal Majesty, and the apparent Prejudice
of that Reverence it ought to have in the minds of the People: Nay further,
all that Part of the Pope's Spiritual Power, which was either Necessary, or
useful for the Government of the Church, is, by the Reformation, become the
King's, so that no Authority but God Almighty's is now above him, nor any in
England independent of him. He is equally Head both of the Church and the
State: No Appeals can be made from his Courts, nor any sort of Persons
priviledg'd from his Justice; In a word, He is no longer a Feauditary Vassal
to the Popes* as in effect all Popish Princes are; since the Pope has an
allowed Right to command them in whatever he will call Spiritual, or will say
has any relation to Spiritual Matters, and by declaring them Heretics, he can
(according to the Romish Religion) depose them, and destroy them when he
pleases. Now the being delivered from such a low, unworthy Servitude, and the
acquiring such a large Increase both of Honor, and Power is certainly no small
addition to the Monarchy, yet this it has gotten purely by the Reformation.

Secondly, The Monarchy has by the Reformation gotten a greater Security than
it had before, both for the King's Person, and his Crown; those Hellish Papal
Doctrines, which I have been hitherto discoursing off, did, in times of Popery,
perpetually hang over their Heads, like Damocles's Sword, ready to do
Execution upon the least irregular Motion, and they were neither of them any
longer safe than the Pope pleased. But since the Reformation, the Popes
Excommunications, and Bulls of Deposition are of no Force, and can have little
effect in England; some they will have while Papists are suffered to live among
us, and, by enjoying Estates, to have an Interest in the Kingdom, as the
present popish PLOT does but too plainly prove, however by many degrees less
than if Popery were again the established Religion; so that I say, The King of
England has by means of the Protestant Religion, at least a greater Security
for his Life, and his Crown, than he had before, an absolute one he must not
expect while he has any popish Subjects.

Thirdly, The Monarchy has by the Reformation gotten to the King of England,
the Government of all English men, of what Order or Profession soever, which
heretofore he had not, the Ciergy being exempt from the Civil Jurisdiction, and
depending chiefly on the Pope (who bestowed most of the Bishoprics; and great
Benefices) both for Protection and Preferment: the King had little power either
to punish or reward them, as the Historyes and Records of those times do
sufficiently demonstrate. But it is notoriously known to what a degree the
Reformation has altered the state of things in that point, and how much the
Interests of Clergy men do now tie them, more than others, to the Service of
the Crown, as also how well they undestand, and how zealously they pursue
those Interests, whenas heretofore they were the constant Raisers of Factions
against their Princes, in favor of Rome, and obstinate maintainers of the
Pope's Encroachments upon their Regal Rights. Nay, the Laity themselves were
the Pope's Subjects in Spiritual matters, and for the most Part, wholely guided
by their Priests, the Pope's Dependants (by Reason of the great command they
had over their Consciences) in their Civil concerns also; So that the King
under these and other circumstances of Popery was but a Servant to the Church,
and little more in Effect than the Popes Viceroy. But the Reformation has
freed both him, and his people from this base, dishonorable Subjection, and
most inconvenient Dependence on a foreign Power.

These are things which all the World must acknowledge to be very considerable
in themselves, and very great acquisitions to the Monarchy, yet are they such
as have naturally, and necessarily fallen into it upon the establishment of
Protestant Religion in the room of Popery, and that too, as it is this
particular form of Government called a Monarchy, distinguished from all other
Kinds; if I should take notice of the Advantages it has received by this
change, as it is a Civil Government, in general, I might observe many more; as
first, an Increase of the Trade, and consequently of the Riches, of the
Kingdom, as well by the taking away that vast number of unnecessary, senseless
Holydaies, imposed on the People by the Church of Rome, which must needs be a
great hinderance to the carrying on of public Business, and Commerce, as by
the application of many Thousands of Persons to the ways, and means of raising
a Fortune to maintain themselves, who were heretofore maintained, and lived
wholely, like idle Drones, upon the labor and industry of others, and by being
shut up in a Cloister, and sequestered from the common Employments of other men,
were made every way useless Members of the State, and a burden to it. Secondly,
Another advantage the Monarchy (considered in the general as a body Politic)
has received by this Change, is an Increase of the Strength, and Safety of the
Kingdom, by the great Increase of People (which also always increases Trade)
since the Clergy have been allowed to marry, and the Folly of Monkery and Vows
of pepetual Caelibacy (as they call it) in either Sex has been both forbidden
and scorned.

'Twere easy for me to enlarge upon this Argument, and further show, how
friendly an Institution, and how highly serviceable the Protestant Religion,
when rightly understood, is to the Civil Interests, both of this and all other
Kingdoms and States as well by the great gentleness, and moderation of her
external Discipline; as by the peaceable temper, and Loyalty of her Doctrines:
And that on the other side Popery does not only make the Prince himself a
Dependant, and unsafe, but his people few, ignorant and poor; She robbes him
first of his Authority, and then of his Subjects; her Monasteries decoy the
zealous, her Inquisitions drives away the wise, and both together enslave and
beggar the foolish Issachars, that stay behend, to bow down their servile
shoulders to the Burden of an oppressive Government. But I think what I have
already discoursed is more than enough to prove the present Point, viz* That
the Monarchy of England has gotten by the Reformation, and that no body, but a
man, who either understands not, or cares not what he says, would affirm the
contrary.

The Compendianist, possibly, may here object, as he seems to do, page 77. lib
9. That popish Princes abroad are not sensible of these Inconveniences in their
Religion, nor do they perceive any such ill Consequences to arise from the
Profession of it, as the Bishop of Lincoln's Book, and this Preface charges it
with, but altogether the contrary; For, Who (says He) find themselves so
flourishing, and great as they? I suppose he speaks this of the French King
(for I know no other popish Prince that is at present, either flourishing, or
great) and if he means that Popery has been the cause of his Greatness, I shall
not dispute it with him, but this, I will affirm, and maintain against all
the World, That 'twas neither his own Popery, nor that of his Subjects; though
every Body knows the French Popery is much gentler, and more converseable sort
of thing than the Spanish, or Italian: more plyant, and submissive to the Civil
Magistrate, and more hospitable to Strangers, and Dissenters, and consequently
less prejudicial to the growth of Power, and the greatness of a State than the
other. The Privileges of the Gallican Church, and the Doctrines of the
Sorbonne, together with the manners of the people, and the Exclusion of the
Inquisition, have a little qualified this pernicious Imposture; and tempered
the Malignity of her Influence; as the most destructive Plants do sometimes
lose the Virulence of their poisons by a change of Soil, and Mercury it self,
by a mixture of Ingredients, is rendered innocent Physic I grant therefore that
Popery in some places, and under some Circumstances of alloy, may not
absolutely hinder, but it can never be the cause, nor of it self, in any degree
contribute to, the prosperity of either Prince, or people; for it is plain,
That the Principles it teaches, and the Consequences it draws after it, do
evidently tend (as I have already made appear) to the lessening of the one, and
the impoverishing of the other, indeed to the ruin of both; and if Popery have
not at all times, and in all Places so bad an effect, it must be attributed to
some such causes as I have now mentioned, which do in France, serve to take out
the sting of this monstrous beast, this Spawn of the Old Serpent, and prevent
the Mischief, which it is otherwise so apt to do, the Blast it would
infallibly bring upon the ordinary fruits of good Government, and the common
ends of Civil Societies. To conclude this point, if any Prince or State happen
(by some favorable conjuncture, and fortunate Accidents) to be great with, or,
rather notwithstanding, Popery, there is no doubt but they would be either of
them, much greater without it.

It Is now left to the Reader to judge, upon a due considerat ion of the Whole,
what an excellent Engine this Popery would prove to buoy up a sinking Monarchy,
and make it again emerge (as the Compendianist calls it in his pedantical Latin
phrase) were ours in that desperate low condition to need it, which I hope it is
far from, or, if it do at present decline, I am sure no man in his right wits,
except this Author, will say, it is for want of Popery. What kind of men are
those Protestants then, who (if we may take the Compendianist's own word for
it) would recommend to his Majesty, in a case of extremity, this dry antiquated
Drugge, this useless Lump of Formality, and Foppery, this discovered Cheat,
this Insulter and Braver of Crowned Heads, this Usurper upon the Rights of
Princes, this Enemy to God's Anointed. I say what kind of Creatures must these
be? They are certainly a Species by themselves, and have not the same common
Faculties, and ways of understanding with other Christian people; if at least
there be any such, which I will not be overpositive in, upon the Authority of
this Writer; for some of his stories are as unlikely (to use his own words
about the Plot) as any Romance Extant. But Protestants does he term them? It is
impossible! Why will he abuse his Friends at this Rate, and call them out of
their Names? I Will warrant them they are as good Catholics as himself. Does he
indeed think to put this upon us, that Protestants are for the bringing in
Popery? He may as well hope to make us believe Transubstantiation it self, it is
a Contradiction in Terms, an errant Bull. However, upon this occasion, I cannot
but reflect that I have sometimes met with a sort of ridiculous Animals,
commonly called Protestants indeed, whose Heads are giddy, and whose Brains
turn round with the Notion of a Catholic Church, and a visible succession of
Bishops ever since the Apostles, Who run stark mad in love with reverend Words,
holy Places, consecrated Habits, and godly Gestures, who have abundance of
odd, superstitious Zeal, with not one grain of true sense, Disciples of
Heylin, and Thornedike, in a word, a kind of L'Estrange Protestants, men who
have listed themselves in our Service, and ranked on our side only to betray
our cause, and give our Enemies the Victory. They seem to have no other design
in the Church of England than Sampson had in the Philistines Temple, viz. to
pull it down upon our Heads, and bury us in the Ruins* Now what discourse
these sort of men have had with the Compendianist, I cannot tell, nor am much
concerned, I will not dispute, but that it is possible, they may have
acknowledged some such thing as he affirms, for their Politics are much of a
pitch with their Divinity, and I know they will say, or confess any thing, that
tends to undermine, and weaken the Protestant Faith, and Interest, though it be
never so foolish, and absurd. Yet do they take it hainously ill to be thought
Papists, and particularly Mr. L'Estrange seems more than ordinarily disturbed,
when he finds himself charged with this Imputation; how does he fling, and
flounce in his late Pamphlets, like a gaull'd Hackney, who can neither bear the
whipp, nor mend his dull Dog-Trot. But let him bestow the foamings of his Rage
never so fast among the Rabble, and in hasty, uncorrect Libells throw about the
e^pty Froth of his Anger; Let him fret himself never so lean, and talk like a
mad man in the overboyling of his Passion; Let him make never so many
professions of a Protestant Faith, and never so many Good-Morrows to the Church
of England, we shall still believe him a Papist, while he so notoriously
promotes the Designs, and serves the Interests of that Party. I think nothing
is plainer than that the great Endeavor of the Papists, ever since the
Discovery of the Plot, has been by all kind of means, and artifices, to turn
off the Public Odium (under which they have so justly suffered) as much as was
possible, from Themselves upon the Fanatics, and to stir up an ignorant,
outrageous clamor against them; the Presbyterian Plot sound in the Meal Tub,
and all the late Pamplets, and discourses of the popish Agents, are, but so
many continued, and undeniable Proofs of this. Now were L'Estrange their
Pensioner (as it is not improbable but he is) and as much engaged in their
Service as Nevil-Payne; he could not have more effectually assisted them in the
carrying on of this base and Villainous Project than he has along done. How
earnestly has he labored to revive the Memory of forty, in contemptof the Act
of Oblivion, and terrified the people with groundless Apprehensions of a new
Fanatic War? How constantly has he patched up his loose Discouses with
unseasonable threadbare Comments on the Disorders of the late times, and
colored his malicious enmity to the Liberties of England with violent
Invectives against Fanatics? Their Defamation has been the chief aim of all
his Writings since the Plot, the Burden of his overflowing Impertinence, and
the Common place Topic of his Railing. Now let us suppose the Fanatics as
errant Devils as this Inquisitionman has a mind to paint them, yet what have
they done of late, what new provocation have they given since his Majesty's
Restanartion, nay since the PLOT, (I mean the Fanatics of England,) that we
should thus fall upon them Pell Mell, without either Fear or wit, Rhyme or
Reason. I say, what is the matter, That just after the Discovery, and in the
midst of the Examination of a Horrid Popish PLOT, we should all of a sudden be
hounded on Fanatickes? There is sure some Mystery in this. Alas! The Artifice
is evident and gross. Who sees not that the Design of it is, to save the
Papists from the growing Rage of the Peoples Hate, with which their whole
Faction was almost run down, and brought to a Bay, by starting, and inviting
their Prosecutors to fresh Grame? This, it seems, is the Under-PLOT to their
great Tragedy, and Mr. L'Estrange, next to some Provincial Jesuit, the chief
Manager.

Can there be any Doubt then, however he appear a Protestant, in show and
Profession, but that he is a PAPIST, either in Principle or Interest, if not in
both: and these Interest-Papists are the most dangerous ol all. For his
Panegyric of the Religion established, and his high Expressions of Zeal for
it, with which at every turn, he flourishes his Mischievous Pamphlets, and
guilds the poison he would have the People Swallow, they are like the
Complement of Judas when he betrayed his Master, and like the Courtesy of Joab
when he murdered Abner. But, God be thanked, Protestants now know him too well,
to believe in his Flatery, or be wheadled to their Ruin by his soft Words. His
Writings have discovered so palpable an Ill Will to the true Interest of the
true Protestant Cause, and the Constitution of the Government (for they are at
present both wound up in the same Bottom) and he has pursued his Malice with so
restless a diligence, and so furious a Zeal, that he is grown a Common Nuisance
to all good Englishmen, and ripe for (...) Correction.

I doubt not therefore (besides what he may expect from a Parliament) but some
new Marvel will rise, to bridle the Intemperance of his Mercenary Pen, and put
his poor prostitute wit out of countenance, an Adversary who shall baffle him
more notoriously than Mr. Bagshaw, and persecute him worse than my Lady
Boltinglasse, who shall crush his little Plausibilities with a Masterly Reason,
and shame him into silence by the Justness of his Satyr. I shall leave him
then to the Fate of Bays, which he cannot long escape, and to the severe
Reprimands of his own Conscience* that full confutation of all his Works, and
that only one too which he wants confidence to reply to, and begging the
Reader's pardon for this long (but perhaps useful) Digression, return to the
Compendianist. And, as to what concerns the present Argument between him and
me, I question not, but upon an impartial weighing of what is here offered, it
will appear to every reasonable man, That nothing is more perfectly opposite to
our Civil, as well as Religious Interests than Popery, that nothing could be
more prejudicial to the Mona rchy, nor more fatal to the prosperity of England,
than if, after having with so just abhorrence spewed up that filthy Load of
Superstition, and Idolatry, with which she was so long oppressed, she should be
forced, either by conquest from abroad, or by a Popish Succession at home, to
return once more like the Dog to his Vomit, or like the Sow when she has been
washed to her wallowing in the Mire.

For his Objections of the Protestant Rebellion in Hungary, the late Rising in
Scotland, the Murder of the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, and that Home-Blow of
his, the Gazette Advertisement of The Tryalk of twenty nine Protestant
Regicides, they are of the same nature, and grounded on the same pitiful
Fallacy with those I have already answered; and when he can show us any
Principle of the Prostant Religion that justifies Rebellion or Murder,
especially that of Princes, or does but in the remotest degree encourage men to
commit those Detestable Crimes, I shall again consider them: In the mean time,
let him not waste his Paper, and tire his Reader with the Repetition of such
fulsome Sophistry.

But perhaps it may not be amiss to give a more particular Answer to his
Home-blow, because he has such an opinion of its force, and does so triumph
with the conceit of his Victory: I shall endeavor therefore to take him down
in the height of his Rapture, and shame his ignorant Malice. The Reader will
remember the Point he should prove, is, That Protestant Principles are
destructive to Kings; for those are the very words of the Introduction to his
terrible Argument of Instances of Fact. Now did the Twenty nine Protestant
Regicides ever pretend to justify their abominable Villainy by any Principle of
their Religion? Nay, did they not pretend the quite contrary, and ground it
wholly upon a Civil Authority? Did they not argue the lawfulness and justice
of it from a Power they fancied in the People, to call the King to an Account
for his Actions? Though in this they were as absurd Logicians as the
Compendianist has all along showed himself, and reasoned not only against the
very first Principle of Civil Policy; but point blank contrary to the most
fundamental Maxims of the Law of England, which says, That the King can do no
wrong; and therefore makes his Ministers questionable for the miscarriages in
Government, because he himself is in his own Person, inviolable and sacred: but
this concerns not the present business. These men, I say, (as bad as they
were) had not the impudence to interest the Protestant Religion, or any
Protestant Church whatever, in the guilt of their impious Treason, by
pretending to derive any Warrant or Encouragement for it from them; or if they
had, it would have signified nothing to the Compendianist's purpose, since
there is no King-Deposing, or King-Killing Principle to be found in any
Protestant Confessions of Faith, or Articles of Communion, (which are the only
proper Evidences to convince a Protestant Church of any Principle or Doctrine
that is laid to her Charge) and so it would have amounted to no more than their
particular mistaking or perverting the Principles of their Religion, as grossly
and as wilfully as they did the Laws of their Country. But this is not the
Case; for they did not so much as pretend any Warrant from the Protestant
Religion for what they did:

How then can He charge Protestant Principles with the Personal Crimes of these
men? Or what does his Home-Blow, and all his other Instances prove, except this
only, viz. That several Protestants have been Rogues, very great Rogues,
Murderers, Rebels, Traitors, etc. Does He not know that they are all mortal men
too, and subject to many other Vices, which he might very clearly have proved
upon them (if he he had pleased) by undeniable Examples? There Is not a Sin the
Pope pardons, of what Price soever, but it is too sadly true, that Protestants
have been guilty of it at some time or other, if that will do him any service.
But now in the name of a little common sense, Who, or what does this Raver
oppose in this strenuous Argument? Did ever any of our Writers assert that all
the Protestants in the World were good Men, and pious Christians? Or is there
any sort of people among us besides Quakers, i. e. mad men, who hold a state of
Absolute Perfection in this Life? He has put himself into an extraordinary
Heat, and made strange violent Assaults, and yet no Enemy appears near him.
What ails the man? he has sure been combating some Giant in imagination, like
Don Quixote when he hacked down the Walls of his Chamber. Well, whoever he be,
though it were Malambruno himself, I Will warrant him he is killed outright, this
La Mancha has so laid about him with Home-Blows.

Another great quarrel he has to the Bishop is, that he does not answer four
Books (named in the Compendium's margin) writ (it seems) by the Catholics of
England since the Kings Restoration, about the Deposing Power of the Church;
Compend. page 78.
His Lordship (says he) is so far from answering these Authors, that he never
so much as cites them to this purpose, (a great fault indeed) so that we must
conclude them unanswerable. Well argued of my word; I see he deals in nothing
but Home-Blows. Mr. Bays and this Compendianist would have made a couple of
rare Disputants, if they had not been spoiled by their Tutors, and ill-grounded
at first; they have both an admirable natural talent at Reasoning, all the
difference between them is, Bays loved it in Rhyme, and this man's altogether
for it in Prose. But without Raillery, does he believe the Bishop of Lincoln
obliged to take particular notice of every idle Pamphlet of theirs, that keeps
a Pudder about the Deposing Power of the Church, (with design to make the
business intricate and dark) and to think them as considerable, as his Party
always do their own Books? No doubt he takes it monstrous ill too, that the
Bishop has not thought him worth his Answering, and perhaps concludes himself
unanswerable. But I hope I shall hinder him from falling into that mistake, and
make him sensible what an Impar Congressus Achilli, what a poor contemptible
thing he is, when he appears in the Lists against so great a Scholar as the
Bishop of Lincoln. For the Pamphlets he mentions, they are more than answered*
in the Bishops Book, though it does not particularly name them; and when he, or
any other Factor for Popery, gives a tolerable Answer to those clear
Testimonies I told him of before, (and which he never so much as cites to this
purpose) by which the Bishop does so plainly prove the Doctrine of Deposing
Kings upon the Church of Rome, I here engage my word to him, these Pamphlets
shall be made ridiculous by name, and their Authors showed to the people in the
Fools Coat they deserve.

In the next place he tells us, Compend. page 78.
That the Venetians have openly in their very Writings denied this Deposing
Power of the Church without Censure: And, That several Authors have been
censured in France and elsewhere for writing for it. In answer to which, First,
we know very well, that the Church of Rome does always accommodate her Allowing
and Condemning of Books to the Circumstances of her present condition; and as
Princes are sometimes forced by the necessity of their Affairs to disavow the
Actions of their Ministers, though done by their most express Command; so is
this interested Church frequently reduced to connive at Books which she does by
no means like, and to Censure others which she does not only approve, but
(underhand) directs. A good instance of this we have in the case of
Sanctarellus's Book (one of those he mentions) which though at first Printed by
the Approbation and special License of See Sanctarellus himself.
Mutius Vittellescus, then General of the Jesuits, and by the Order of the
Master of the Popes Palace; yet when the Pope found it would not be endured in
France, but that both the Sorbonne had condemned it, and the Parliament of
Paris had ordered it to be burnt, he thought fit (after it had been out so
long, that the Copies were almost all bought up) to forbid the Sale of it at
Rome, but without any manner of Censure, either upon the Author or Doctrine,
See more of this in the Preface to the Jesuits Loyalty.
which is generally their way of condemning these kind of Books, when Civil
Considerations at last oblige them to it, viz. a bare prohibition of them,
after every body has read them that cares for them. Such a Condemnation as this
did Mariana meet with in Spain; and of this gentle nature was Becanus's
Correction at Rome, not for the Doctrines he maintained, but for Ove^lashing,
(as Bishop Montague expresses it in his Preface to King James's Works) i. e.
for speaking the mind of their Church more plainly than was at that time
convenient. For, Secondly, we know well enough that those Principles of
Deposing and Killing Kings, and Extirpating Heretics, are thought too precious
Truths, and too high Points to be ordinarily exposed to the Vulgar, and pressed
upon all Occasions; that they are the Arcana Imperii of their Kingdom of
Darkness, and kept like Warrants Dormant among the Cabala of their wicked
Mysteries, to justify Rebellions, Assassinates, and Massacres, when the Church
has very great need of them, and finds it her Interest to own these Doctrines
of Devils; at other times it may suit better with her Designs to preach up
Loyalty and Obedience to Princes, and universal Charity to Mankind. Lastly, we
know that the Venetians and the French have been always Opposers of the Pope's
Encroachments upon civil Sovereigns, and that they do not submit to these sort
of Doctrines, which are so directly calculated for his attaining an Absolute
Dominion over the Christian World, a long projected Fifth Monarchy, at least in
the same degree, that other Countries which are more Jesuited and enslaved to
the Pope, are forced to do; which by the way may serve for a good Argument to
convince them of Differences among themselves, and overthrow their glorious
pretense of Union, which they do so magnify upon all occasions to our
reproach, but cannot signify any thing to the purpose, for which the
Compendianist here intends it, viz. to show the Bishop of Lincoln, in Answer to
his Challenge at the end of his Book, That the Church of Rome has by public
Acts and Declarations disowned and condemned those Principles which His
Lordship charges upon her. He very confidently indeed affirms, that the
Censures of those Authors he mentions p: 78. l. 32. are such. But what? does he
hope by positivenesse to face us down, that the Venetians and the French are
the Roman Church? Or that the Universities of France and the Parliament of
Paris are her Representatives? Is it possible he should believe we have not
Logic enough to distinguish between the Parts and Branches of a Church, and
the Church her self in her public Authority and Representations? Does he
indeed imagine, that he can at this time of day make the Judgments of
particular Universities and Civil Assemblies pass upon us for public Acts and
Declarations of the Church of Rome? He must needs pardon us; we have been too
often told it upon other occasions; to be ignorant now, that nothing but the
Decrees of a Pope or a General Council are the public Acts and Declarations of
the Church of Rome; and he has not so much as pretended to show either of
these, for the Condemnation of those Principles which the Bishop has proved
upon his Religion by both. What scorn then can be vile enough to throw upon his
impudent Claim of the Bishop's conditional promise of turning Papist, when the
terms upon which that promise was given are so far from being made good? And
why does he run over such a Bead-role of names -- The College of the Sorbonne,
Paris, Caen, Rheimes, etc. I say to what end does he stun us with this vast Din
of insignificant Words, and rattle in our ears with empty Sounds?

I thought to have passed by his Quibble upon the Bishop's Title, it is so very
senseless and thin a conceit; but because I find he is apt to think every
thing unanswerable that is not particularly taken notice of, I shall do him the
favor to make the Reader observe this ridiculous Criticism: Who could think
(says Compend. page 76.
he) that His Lordships Heat against us should force him even to a Title that
has confuted his whole Book, viz. That Popish Principles and Positions (when
really believed) are destructive and dangerous to all Kings, especially
Protestants; for he cannot term them Principles of Faith, because they were
never thus Believed, etc. I suppose by Principles of Faith here, he means what
is commonly understood by Articles of Faith, i. e. Points necessary to
Salvation; for the words are equivocal, and may bear several senses: but
because this is most favorable to his Objection, I shall understand them so.
Now why cannot the Bishop term these Positions Principles of Faith? He has
proved them to have been decreed both by Popes and Councils; and if that be not
enough to make any Point a Principle of Faith in their Church I know not where
or how we shall find any Principles of Faith among them. He says indeed here
(and in other places would insinuate the same) That they were never thus
believed by any Catholic, nor never thus approved of by the Church. But that is
only his word against the Bishop's Proof, and signifies nothing but to convince
the World of the shameless Impudence of Popish Writers, who can even in Print,
and in the face of a learned and inquiring People, affirm things contrary to
direct Proofs, without ever so much as endeavoring to answer those Proofs. I
see no reason therefore why the Bishop might not have termed them Principles of
Faith, if he had pleased, but that it was not at all material to the design of
his Discourse so to do; 'twas enough for his purpose to prove them Principles
of their Religion, (which he has most clearly done) no matter whether they hold
them necessary to Salvation or not; their very holding them as Principles of
their Religion, does make that sufficiently dangerous to Princes, which was
what the Bishop undertook to show. But let us suppose now, that the Bishop
cannot term these Positions Principles of Faith, I Will engage it shall do his
Title no more hurt, than it is plain it would his Book; indeed neither of them
any at all. This Title (says he) That Popish Principles and Positions (when
really believed) are destructive, etc. has confuted his whole Book. Why?
Because he cannot term them (pray mark the Reason) Principles of Faith, etc.
Can any unprejudiced man now, whose Brains lie in their right place, perceive
any sort of Consequence in this Argument? for my own part I can find none. But
if there be any little sense at the bottom of this awkard blunder, it must be
this, viz. a supposal, that the real Belief of any Principle of Religion makes
it immediately a Principle of Faith, (i. e. in his sense of those Terms, a
point necessary to Salvation) though it was not so before: which is certainly
the most extravagant Whimsey that ever got hold of any man's Imagination, but
our confused Compendianists; and if this be not his meaning, he talks Wild
Irish, and is utterly unintelligible. I think I need not go about to confute
such self-evident Foolery as this; the very Offer were an affront to the
meanest Readers Understanding; there is hardly a Schoolboy, but knows that
Christian Religion teaches many useful and true Doctrines, which are not
necessary to Salvation, that yet are really believed by all those that are
really of the Christian Religion. The Bishop's Title therefore is very proper,
and very consistent with the design of his Book, and this man's exception to it
most abfurd and frivolous. It Is indeed not only proper, but charitable and
modest; it implies the Bishop does not believe, that all who live in the
external Communion of the Church of Rome, are either so disloyal to their
Prince, or so unmerciful to their Friends and Neighbors, as those Doctrines he
charges upon her, really and heartily assented to, must needs make them. He
hopes possibly, that Humane Nature it self in some may check at their
harshoesse and a particular sweetness of temper in others, very much allay the
Malignancy of their Poison, and hinder them from having their full effect upon
the Understanding, at least such an effect as is justly to be dreaded from
them, when they seize upon the minds of Melancholy Recluses, or sink deep into
the affections of her ignorant hot headed Devoto's, those Christian A Sect of
Religious Murderers among the Turks. See an Account of them in Tavernier's Six
Voyages, page 199.
Faquirs.

For the Promise he makes us at last, in imitation of the Pishop's, Compend.
page 79.
That he himself will turn Protestant, if the Bishop shows him but one single
Paragraph in all his Book, in relation to their dangerous Principles that he
has not fully answered, etc. I will be so civil to him at parting, to let him
know he need not be in any pain about it; for though the Condition of his
Obligation be not in the least measure, nor is ever likely to be performed, yet
I can assure him there is no body intends to take any advantage of the
Forfeiture. Though he has been so far from answering every single Paragraph of
the Bishop's Book, that he has not in truth answered one single word of it to
any purpose, as I have already showed him; yet we will not be so unmercifully
rigorous to require a Person of his Form of Parts to turn Protestant, and force
him to be a reasonable man, and a good Christian against his Conscience; no,
no, let him stay where he is; we are not at all fond of his Company, and the
Religion he has will best suit with his Wit.

His little Stroke of Common Place Arguments being now spent, he is at last
reduced to Story telling, and the conclusion of his loose Ramble in this
Paragraph against the Bishop is an incredible scandalous Tale about a Friend of
his, and Doctor Tailor, by which he represents that late famous and worthy
Divine, not only as a Papist but a Knave, and implicitly throws the same dirt
upon the Bishop; maliciously insinuating as if neither of them believed their
own Books. His words are these; To conclude (says He) let me once more reminde
his Lordship of his Promise, and then tell him (for I know he is a man of
Parts) what Dr. Tailor said to a Friend of mine concerning his Dissu^sive from
Popery, viz. That though 'twere liked, yet 'twas but turning the Tables, and he
could write a Book twice as good. This Story has the very complexion of a
Popish Lie, all the Lineaments and Features of (...) Jesuitical Slander, it is a
known Artifice of the Romish Agents, when they cannot deal with their
Adversaries Reasons, to assault their Reputations by all kind of unjust
Calumnies, and impudent Forgeries; and finding that the absurdness of their
Tenets cannot be disguised to men, who have the use of their Faculties, their
despair to proselyte the Living, sends them among the Charnel Houses to make
Converts of the dead. This is a trick they have perpetually put upon us ever
since the Reformation; all Protestants of any note who dye either in their
Acquaintance or Neighborhood are sure to be of their Faith after their Deaths,
though all their lives they abhorred it? the Dead are as constantly reported
theirs, as if they had been Baptized in their Names, according to the custom
of the Primitive Corinthians, or as is they were to be reckoned natural
Escheats to that Church, which (contrary to the Scripture) prays for them; and
most commonly the dying too, when they are no longer able to contradict their
whispers, are hooked within the Toyls of their Universality; no sooner does a
man's Reason and his Sense begin to leave him, but presently the Catholic
Religion lays claim to him; and indeed he is then most fit for that Communion,
and a proper Tool for Priests and Jesuits to work their ends by, and
Sanctified Rogues to make their Markets of. Wheresoever the Carcass is, there
will these Roman Eagles be gathered together for their Prey. Protestants cannot
dye quietly in their Beds, nor so much as rest in their Graves for the
unwearied practices of the Popes Emissaries, and the endless Persecution of
their false Tongues, who think it meritorious to Lie for the Propagation of
their Faith, and a piece of Godly Zeal to defame their Neighbors for the
Honor of their Church. But this is one of the small Games their ill success
has forced them to play at, rather than stick out, a despicable shift to keep
up some little rest of Credit to their baffled Cause; and would they observe
any sort of Bounds in the Spoil and Havoc they make of men's good Names, and
their Invasions of the best and most lasting Property of Mankind in their
Unchristian Violations of the Honor of the Dead; Would these lawless Church
Corsairs, these desperate Picaroons for Popery, rob with modesty, and be
satisfied with making private men their Prize, we should perhaps content our
selves to despise their little Pyracies, and laugh at their feeble Inroades.
But when they endeavor to sink our strongest Men of War, and take our very
Admirals in the Port; when they will needs have our chief Leaders to be their
Followers, and our most famous Champions at the Wheels of their Triumphal
Chariots, when like the Tartar's Scotch Captive, they will pretend to hold
their Goalers Prisoners, and erect their ridiculous Trophies upon the Tombs of
their Conquerours. When nothing will serve their turns but that Chillingworth
himself must be believed to dye a Papist, and Bishop King to be reconciled to
their Church in Articulo mortis; when Dr. Tailor must now after his Death be
thought a Friend to Popery, who in his life was both an Honor and a Defense to
the Protestant Faith, their impudence is intolerable, and their Lies grow
mischievous; it is then necessary to expose the folly of their vain Pretenses,
and warn the people of their large Dispensations.

I shall now appeal to the Judgment of any unprejudiced man, who has read Dr.
Tailors Dissuasive from Popery, and if he thinks there is the least probability
that the Author of that excellent Book should say he could write one twice as
good against Protestants, or indeed any possibility that either He, or any man
else, though never so willing, should be able to do it. I will hereafter
believe that Jesuits can speak Truth, and that Popish Controvertists may be
sometimes in the right, Dr. Tailors Relations, and those who did particularly
know him (which I had not the happiness to do, otherwise than by his Reputation
and his Writings) are able; without doubt, to say much more upon this Subject
than. I can pretend to, and I question not but some of them will take care in
convenient time to vindicate his Memory from so foul a scandal as that of
being a concealed Papist, and of Writing what he did not think. I shall
therefore leave it to them, whose proper concern it is, not having at present
the means to make any enquiry my self into the business. In the mean time let
us suppose this Story to be true, which, according to all appearance is next to
impossible, what is here pretended to have been said by Dr. Tailor, was I
perceive, a thing said in private conversation, and probably, in great trust
and confidence of the person to whom 'twas spoke; how to Print this to the
World, with Design to blast the Reputation of a Divine, after his Death, is
such a piece of honesty and good nature, as is no where to be met with, but in
the Moralls of a Jesuit, and the Christianity of a Romish Zealot.

For what is intended in this malicious Passage to reflect on the Bishop of
Lincoln, as if he were as bad a Hypocrite, as Dr. Tailor is here represented
to have been, and could have writ (if he had pleased) a better Book on the
Papists side, it is so witless a Libel, such silly Slander, that I think there
is no need of answering it to any, who have ever heard of his great Name, and
he must have lived very remote from Company, who is in England a Stranger to
that. His Life is a sufficient proof of the honesty of his Writings, and a full
confutation of this, and all other Lies, which the Instruments of Rome or Hell
can invent to asperse him; in vain do they think to answer him, as they have
done other men, by reflections on his Person, and to overthrow his Reasons by
ridiculous Stories, and absurd Romance: these Argumenta ad Hominem, which are
usually their best Refuge, will miserably fail them here? they look like the
frettings of a gaul'd Faction, and do but betray an impotent Spite; the Bishop
of Lincolne's Honor is as much above the reach of their malice, as their
deserts, and they may then hope to make the World think ill of him when they
can so far cozen it as to be thought well off themselves. It Is true his
Abilities are extraordinary enough to recommend almost any thing he would
appear for, though never so unreasonable, and no doubt, he knows how to write
Sophistries as well as to confute them; but we are satisfied his Piety* will no
more suffer him to plead a bad Cause than his Learning will let him prejudice a
good one. Besides, let them not flatter themselves, the Knavery of theirs is
now so palpably obvious, their Religion has, by long and constant delays, grown
so monstrously deformed, it has at last outlived the help of Art. The Writings
of their best Wits, and their most eminent Scholars have, in my Opinion, done
it more hurt than good; when they have adorned it all they can with strained
pieces of Rhetoric out of the Fathers, and daubed it as much as possible with
the forced Flatteries of Councils; when they have set it forth in the specious
colors of pretended Union and Universality, and covered it all over with
School-Distinction^s, what can an indifferent man conclude but that such vast
pains would not, nor need not be taken, except it were to hide some notorious
Defects; such extreme studied Ornaments are evident proofs of great want of
natural Beauty: in a word, this Spiritual Whore does but appear the more
Strumpet through the gross Artifice of her Dress, and the thickness of her
Paint.

I have now done with the Compendianist, and shall enlarge this Discourse no
farther but to join with all good English men in offering up my hearty prayers
to God Almighty, that He would still preserve the Protestant Religion among us,
and continue to render fruitless the contrary Endeavors and Contrivances of
wicked and unreasonable Men; fallacious Writers, and Traitorous Plotters; that
He would keep the most knowing, and best civilized Nation in the World from
falling again under the Barbarism of Popery, from being Oppressed by the Tyranny,
and cumber'd with the Weight of this huge unweildy Mass of Nonsense, and
Puppetry. This farce of Ceremonies, this Counterfeit Christianity, this Enemy
to true Learning, and free Philosophy; this Discourager of Trade and useful
Industry, this Troubler of agreeable Conversation, and reasonable Living, this
Prohibiter of good Sense, and this Extinguisher of good Nature; in a word this
Un-Christian, and this Immoral Religion, or rather this new Species of
Irreligion, which by her Doctrines of dispensing with Oaths, and absolving from
all manner of Crimes upon slight and ridiculous Penances, as well as by those
the Bishop of Lincoln has convinced her of, has not only overthrown the
Foundations of real Goodness and true Piety, but even of necessary Faith, and
common Honesty, loosening the very Bands and Ligaments, and undermining the
Props of Civil Communities.

FINIS.

