AN ACCOUNT OF THE Late Action and Defeat, IN Waterford-Bay, in Ireland. By
Three of Their Majesty's Men of War.
AS ALSO, Of their Taking a French Ship of 70 Tuns, in the River; and of their
Landing Men, near Dungannon; and of their releasing several Protestant
Prisoners.
WITH A large and full Account of the State of King James's Affairs in Dublin,
And his late Proclamation about Protestant Churches.
A Vessel arrived at Milford, on Saturday last, the Master whereof brings this
following Account: That Three of Their Majesty's Men of War, the Dover, St.
Alban's, and the Experiment, with Tenders, steering their Course for the Bay of
Waterford, having a fair Wind that came up with it; and after a small time,
they put Sixty chosen resolute Men on Shore, within a Mile of a small place
called Horkter, which had Fifty Soldiers in it; which on the Landing of our
Men, (it being a Place of no Strength,) they immediately fled to Waterford:
After which, our Men returned to their Ships, bringing off with them, besides a
great Booty, several Protestants: Our Men verily believed, that had they had
but Five Hundred Men, they could at that Juncture easily have surpised and
taken the strong Fort of Dungannon. We could not descry the appearance of any
Parties, either of the Garrison of Waterford, or Dungannon, 'till some time
after our Men were abroad again, they supposing, as we imagine, that we had
some considerable Force to Land. At our putting to Sea again, we took a French
Ship of Seventy Tuns, Laden with Brandy and Salt; she was just steering for
Waterford.

On Saturday last passed through Chester, for London, two Gentlemen, who lately
made their escape from Dublin; by whom, among other Relations, we have it
confirmed, that Three Regiments of French marched into Dublin; upon whose
arrival, King JAMES ordered Coll. Darrington, and Coll. Fitz-James, to march
their Regiments toward Droghedagh, and to deliver their Posts to the French;
which so alarmed the Chief of the Irish, that after a short Consultation
amongst the Principal of their Officers, it was agreed, That Darrington,
accompanied with some others, should wait upon the Late KING, to know, if by
this His Majesty's Orders, it was intended the French should have the Guard of
his Person: Which, after some small time of Cabinet-Consultation, The KING
declared it to be His Pleasure: Which Words so surprised and incensed
Darrington and his Party, that immediately himself, Colonel Baker, and about
Twelve other Chief Officers went to the KING, and delivered up their
Commissions; telling him withal, that many more resolved to do the like. The
Proceedings starttled the Late KING and his Council; and put them on t^^
Medicum, to prevent the evil Con^^quences of disobliging either Faction That
the Oldest Battalion of Ir^^^ Guards should keep their Place, as before, and
that a Battalion of Fren^^ should join with them. But this D^cision pleased
neither Party; and some high words happened, even almost (...) blows, though
Tyrconnel did not Pu^lickly appear in these Disturbance neither was he
imprisoned as has be said.

King James, to sooth up the Protestants in order to put a new face on h^^
Proceedings, has lately issued forth (...) Proclamation, commanding many (...)
their Churches in Dublin to be restore^ again: According to which, Dr. Li^bourn
Dean of St. Patricks ascending his Pulpit to Preach, was pulled down by the
Priests, and his Vestments tor^ from his Back: On which, Complain^ being made
to King JAMES, the principal Rioters received a slight Reprimand: But the
Doctor attempting to Preach the Sunday following, wa^ treated with the like, or
rather wors^ Barbarity, and the Authors vindicate^ their Actions to King JAMES;
and declared, That if in the least he countenanced, or pretended to Countenance
Heresy in the Nation, he could never expect a Blessing on his Army neither
could or would adhere to hi^ Interest.

London, Printed for R.H. in Little Britain, 1690.


