Ananias and Saphira discovered. Or, The true intent of a PAMPHLET CALLED OMNIA
COMESTA BELO: IN A LETTER By way of ANSWER.

LAMENT. iv. 16. The anger of the Lord has divided them, he will no more regard
them; they respected not the persons of the Priefts.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1679.

SIR,
I Have rceiv'd so many Libels and other Pamphlets from you; that I am both
ashamed of troubling you any farther, and weary of Reading so many words with
so little sense or common honesty. But my great grief is to find it so much the
humor to lessen the Credit and Reputation of Authority, and by weakening the
Government, in alienating men's hearts from it; to cut the Grass from underneath
our own feet: and whilst the Enemy is pushing sore at us, our selves to shake,
if not remove the Foundations whereon we stand. And in the midst of this wilful
murder, no wound seems to me so envenomed and mortal, as that which pierces the
Soul and Conscience of the Nation, the bitter words wherewith the Church is
daily slandered. Is it a time to strive among our selves for Reformation, when
Antichrist is at the Gates? Is it a time to divide and scatter, to pull and
tear one another, just when the common Enemy is upon our backs? To mind our
defense least, when he is most at leisure to Assault us? It must certainly be
the Gall of bitterness, that shall disturb and distract us at this time.

Amongst other ungracious Libels against the Church, there is one called Omnia
Comesta a Bello. The Author intended Belo: but happened to be more right then he
was aware of. For the late unhappy Times plainly show what the issues of War
are like to be. Then were the Rich and Wealthy the only marks of Violence and
Oppression; none but the Profligate and those that delighted in troubled waters
became Rich: then the worst of events befell us, if the Proverb says true; for
Beggars were set on Thrones and mounted on Horsback, whilst Princes went on
Foot. And if we consider the Original of this Book, it was first Printed at the
beinning of the Rebellion, to Usher in the Covenant, and so accessory, as much
as such a poor spiteful Pamphlet could be, to all the bloodshed and wickedness
that then followed. God be thanked the memory of those licentious days, when no
man could say, ought was his, is by woeful experience so fresh now upon the
minds of thousands, that without most fatal Infatuation, it will be impossible
to be deluded into the same snare again. And yet what endeavors there are to
destroy us with the grievous wounds of Friends, and under pretense of
Regulation overwhelm us once more with the same Confusion! What is Liberty,
when the multitude is made judge of it, but an Inundation of Disorders, and
letting the wildness of Corrupt Nature loose to all extravagance. And yet what
courting of the people at this day to take the matter into their own hands!
Though, God knows, it is not that these Incendiaries care for the people: but
knowing that the reigns of Government must be placed in some hands, they hope
by getting them loose, to catch hold of them themselves. And as this is
evidently the course the Pope or Devil himself would advise to destroy us by,
Divisions: so I shall show you in the conclusion that this is their advise, and
that they do work together with the disturbers of our Peace, and principally
with those that strike at our Church.

First, he charges the impoverishing the Nation, ruin of Trade, and general
Consumption of Comfort, Setlement and Content, which, as he says, has brought
the Nation to a mere Anatomy; upon the Pride, Luxury and Oppression of the
Prelates. To which may easily be answered. 1. That the first assertion is
false. For never was there more money in the Nation, and if it be not so equally
divided, the Gentry and Nobility living so much at London, are the great cause
of it. As for Trade it never run so high as of late years, of which, experience
is so evident a judge, that I can only wonder at the Confidence of the contrary
declaration. But then where the Consumption of Comfort, etc. lies, who can
tell? I am sure if a Prince detesting Bloodshed and Oppression, and for fear
of being hard upon his people, suffering his Prerogative to run lower than ever
any Kings or Queens of England did before him, would be a Comfort, we have it
in the highest degree. If the Clergy have contributed to this Consumption, let
them show the man, and he shall be punished. But I see none but the envious, and
them that are given to change, discontented: and how you will please them, I
cannot tell. And I fear the Nation is rather like Jeshurun, than any of
Pharaohs lean Kine, if we observe truly. Nay but the pride of the Prelates has
done this thing, which indeed is not done. It must be a beggarly pride in many
of them, if they are proud: and that can do mischief to none but to themselves.
However I would have this Learned Author show who they are. For general
reflections are the most unjust; and by Consequence the most Unchristian
proceeding in the World. The Innocent as well as Guilty are Condemned, and know
not how to kelp themselves. But Luxury indeed is the wasting Vice, and I would
it were not so much in fashion as it is. However there are not many Bishops
that have wherewithal, and those few that have, are, I make no doubt, ready to
give an account, to the shame of their Accusers. Where the Oppression lies,
that I am to seek: unless be such, to punish injustice as wrongful dealing. But
of these particulars more hereafter.

2. in the next Query there is as much falsehood and ignorance put together, as
well could be comprehended in so few terms. He tells you that all the Reformed
Churches in Europe cast off Episcopacy with Popery, and why did not England?
England did not do it, because it has been the Universal and constant
Church Government for the first fifteen hundred years, derived from the
Apostles by as Authentic Testimony as any part of our Religion. England did
not do it, because it is an Order that stands most in the Popes light, and
which therefore Rome has always opposed, most eminently in the Council of
Trent, and most injuriously by exempt jurisdictions, whereby to have creatures
more immediately depending upon Rome, the Government of the Church is broken,
and its Ancient Constitutions and Canons violated. And I wish this Rag of
Popery were removed from us. But lastly, England did not do it, because many of
the Reformed Churches did not do it, as Sueden, Denmark, the Protestant Church
in Poland, the Protestant Switzers, the Lutherans in Germany, besides the Greek
Churches, etc. many that did it, have acknowledged it to be out of pure
necessity, and the learned men among them have ever approved Episcopal
Government, and the best, if not absolutely necessary, when it could be had.

The third Query is, Why all this waste? Why not sold and given to the poor?
The Bishops having 2.3.4.5.6.7.8. thousand pounds per ann. a man. Had he said
2.3.4.5.6.7.8. hundred pounds a year, he had come nearer the truth. For so it
is indeed with most of them: except some very few, the best of which come
hardly up to four. But it is a Judas Query, and so I leave St. John to explain
it.

4. The fourth is soon answered, Whether other Nations without Bishops have
succeeded in any particular, better than England with Bishops: let the World
judge. And had this Author been endowed with as much knowledge and understanding,
as he is with Malice and Covetousness, he would nver have put a question so
disadvantagious for his purpose.

5. The fifth and last Query, is begging the Question upon a false supposition:
as you will see by what follows.

Now his Queries are done, he comes to prove his Assertions: which he does by
the same Arguments that will Establish Anarchy for a Law, and overthrow all
Government.

He tells you the Bishops keep Chaplains: and I believe as eminent for Learning
and Piety have come out of that Rank, as from any places whatever. But their
several Officers keeping Courts, etc. What, would he have jurisdictions look
after themselves? or rather would he have the Clergy be left to the wide World
without Laws and Authority to protect them. Had this Author as much concern for
the next World, as he has for this, he would then think, that to honor God
with our substance, and to adorn his worship with a grateful share of what he
has bleft us with, might be of as much advantage to us, under the dispensation
of Providence as other layings out; and that the Judges of the Land with the
innumerable Officers and Dependences upon the Executive part of the Justice of
this Nation, even to the Constables and Overseers of the Poor, might as well be
reckoned a burden, because their Gains in a full Computation are ten times more
than the Clergies; and yet I hope no man in his senses can think it possible
for us to subfist without such a Constitution. If he will number Parishes, let
him Compute what is gathered for the Poor in all the Parishes of England; and
see what a prodigious sum is spent to maintain numbers in idleness. But he
reckons and computes at so strange a rate, as if nothing were to be done to
right the Church, as if its Officers were to live upon the Air, and that
whatever were received, went into a great Gulf never to return by procuring the
Necessaries of Nature, Meat, Drink, and Clothing, by providing for their
Families, and if they provide not for the Poor above any other sort of men, let
others take their Office. Now if unreasonable and wilful men have suffered by
Censures for resisting the Laws: why are not Thieves, Robbers and Murderers as
well pitied for their losses. For where a Law may be obeyed with the same
Liberty of Conscience, as for pretense it is broken, that Offender is as
unjustifiable as a Thief and a Robber. That this is the Case with all
Dissenters is plain from the Statute, which allows Meetings to such a number.
And yet how little disturbance do even the greatest Offenders in this kind meet
with? But you say men are Prosecuted for three pences and six pences: more
Knaves they, that will Cheat and put to trouble their Neighbors for so slight
a sum, by withholding another right.

The vast sums of money the Bishops, Deans, etc. heaped up at the Kings coming
in, is a great Eyesore to him. And that the evil Eye of Judas may manifestly
appear, he tells you a grievance. Those that bought Church Lands are undone: if
he durst, he would say Crown Lands too. So here is the Case, Our Progenitors
out of a just resentment of Religion, gave many Endowments to the Church for
the more Comfortable and Honorable maintenance of those that Ministered in it,
lest the Service of God should become vile in the Eyes of the people, if he
should still be Worshipped in Dens and Caves, while the Professors of his
Worship dwelt in stately Palaces and fared plentifully. It is a sign we will
not acknowledge the hand that gave it, if we grudg a grateful return. But in
comes an usurped power, by means of an execrable Rebellion, and divides the
spoil of Church and Crown Lands, Gods and the Kings Inheritance: and when it
pleases God to restore the right again, it must be Oppression to turn these
young Ahabs out of their Sacrilegious and Traitorous Possessions. Neither was
this envyed sum, which the Church got, near of that value this Author would
have it; and what Charges were upon it, let any judge, when they that came in,
had for many years before been stripped naked for their Loyalty, Cathedrals
pulled down or let fall, Houses wasted and ruined, Dilapidations to a
prodigious Charge: and yet if the Government had taken a more narrow
inspection, perchance it might have been better. Still Judas proceeds, why all
this cost? What have we for it? You have a splendid Church suitable to the
prosperity God has blessed us with, the wonder and rejoicing of all our Friends
abroad, and the envy of Rome and its adherents, and such as work under a Cloak
for Popery here at home. You have a Learned, Orthodox and a Godly Clergy, such
as are not afraid to speak with their Enemy in the Gate, but challenge either
single or in a body the whole Herd of Sectary-Ministers, to see if they can
answer them one word of a thousand. If they have color of truth, why do they
not desire a free Synod? Why do they not seek Conferences? If they are so
Sober, why do they go Drunk home ten or twenty Teachers of them every Sunday
night, after they have ended their Conventicles? I hear no such thing of the
Conforming Clergy: and if they know any such, let them prove it, and he shall
be cast out. But we can prove this of a greater number of theirs, than has yet
been named, even within the Walls of London, and make it appear, that part of
their Congregations know of it.

But I am sick of this stuff, full of nothing besides railing false suggestions
and upholding stubbornness and disobedience: so that I am resolved no longer to
answer a Fool according to his folly, lest I should become such another. Only
this let me say, that all he urges, were it as true as it is false, amounts to
no more, than what the several Authorities, he quotes at the end, do amount
unto, which is, That the prosperity of this World is a great snare, and that
the Church as well as other Bodies, is liable to abuse it. And therefore great
care ought to be taken, to reform and moderate the manners of such as are
entrusted with the Wealth or Power of the Church. And in Gods name, let the
strictest scrutiny be made to heal the broken, and purge out the corrupt. But
to cut off the thing abused with him that does abuse it, the Office with him
that is entrusted with it, is neither Sober, Just nor Rational. And whenever it
was so done, you will find it in all Ages to have been done, in a tumultuous
and rash way, and by such disorders as have cut off the Just with the Unjust,
when it has succeeded well to none but the violent. So that for the sins of the
people such things may come to pass: but I beseech you never let it be imposed
upon us, as a prudent or justifiable proceeding.

Ananias and Saphira were ten times juster, than this man of Belus. For they
only kept back part of what they had not yet parted with. Whereas this
Gentleman would take away, not of his one gift, but what our Ancestors either
found already bestowed, or themselves of pious intention gave to the honor of
God and his worship.

But to conclude that you may be truly convinced out of whose Quiver this Arrow
comes, take the Deposition and Evidence of Dr. Oats in his true Narrative of
the Horrid Plot, where you will find the Papist to be the manager of all this
Controversy. And indeed what party else can benefit by it? For when the Clergy
are brought low and despicable, distracted with Sects and Heresies, Scattered,
Rent, and Divided: What mischiefs are they not exposed to? Can the Pope and all
his Conclave direct us an easier way to fool our selves into their hands? The
words of the Doctor are these. Art. 1. Richard Strange Provincial, John Keins,
Basil Langworth, John Fenwick, and Mr. Harcourt Jesuits, did write a
Treasonable Letter to one Father Suiman, an Irish Jesuit, at Madrid, in the
Kingdom of Spain, in which was contained their plotting and contriving a
Rebellion in Scotland of the Presbyterians against the Episcopal Government. In
order to which they had employed one Matthew Wright and William Morgan, and one
Ireland, to go and Preach under the notion of Presbyterians, and give the
disaffected Scots a true understanding of their sad state and condition, in
which they were, by reason of the Episcopal Tyranny exercised over them; and
withal to tell them, they had now a fair oppoctunity to vindicate their Liberty
and Religion; and that it could be done by no other way, but by the Sword. Art.
2. Other Letters from the Jesuits to Father Leshee the French Kings Confessor,
in which they told him, that they had stirred up the Presbyterians in Scotland
to a Rebellion, and that twenty thousand would be in Arms, if His Majesty of
France would break with the King of England. Art. 22. A Letter for Whitebread
Provincial, Father Mico, etc. That they had received Letters from Scotland, in
which they were informed that the people would rise to oppose Duke Lauderdale
and the Royal Party, and also that they would endeavor by themselves, their
Agents and their Purse to provoke the Scots against the English. Art. 25. Their
designs, the Jesuits say in another Letter, went on well in Scotland. Art. 35.
Upon a Conference of the Jesuits, by order of the Provincial, they are to send
new Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Commotions there, and inform the
people of the great Tyranny they lay under by reason of their being denied
Liberty of Conscience, and that not being to be procured but by the Sword, they
must take that course to purchase their Liberty. By which means, said the
Fathers so assembled, we shall weaken both the Presbyterian and Episcopal
Faction. Art. 43. That two new Messengers were sent into Scotland, one by the
name of Father Moor, and the other Father Saunders alias Brown, with
instructions to carry themselves like Nonconformist Ministers, and to Preach to
the disaffected Scots the necessity of taking up the Sword for the defense of
Liberty of Conscience. These the Deponent saw dispatched, and ordered to go by
Father Harcourt, in the name of Thomas White Provincial. Art. 50. They renew
their hopes of success in Scotland upon assurance of the Papists there, that
they would keep up the Commotions to their utmost. Art. 51. They own that the
Provincial had taken great care to keep alive the difference betwixt the
disaffected Scots and Duke Lauderdale, etc. and likewise to beget a difference
betwixt the Dutch and the Prince of Orange. Art. 54. That one Matthew Metbourn,
Mr. Penny, Mr. Mannock, etc. meeting upon Thursday and Sunday nights at a Club,
are employed by the Jesuits to vilify the House of Commons, and go about the
City of London to incense the people against them and against the Bishops of
the Nation. Art. 55. Mr. Jennison boasted, that he had put several out of love
with the Kings interest, and would so continue. Art. 73. The Fathers in
Scotland write, that their party was ready to join with the disaffected Scots:
and that one Westby was destroyed by one that was servant to Lovel the Jesuit,
for endeavoring to detect the Rebellion, with its Authors and Contrivers to
the Council in Scotland. Page 64.. 6. They would weaken and divide the Kingdoms
by Civil Wars and Rebellions, as in the late Kings time. Page 67.. 1. They
would charge the King with Tyranny and designs of Oppressing, governing by the
Sword and without Parliaments.. 4. They would misreport and raise false News of
the Kings affairs.. 6. They would disturb Trade.. 7. They would disaffect the
Kings Subjects by Seditious Preachers set up, sent out, maintained and directed
what to Preach in their own or other private or public Conventicles and Field
Meetings. And now see whether the Church of England or others work most for the
Popish Interest. You shall know them by their Fruit.

FINIS.

