The Ancient Manner of Electing Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, and other
Officers Yearly, at the Guild Hall on the 24th of June, offered to the
Consideration of all sober Citizens, etc.
A SHERIFF is an Officer of great Antiquity, high Authority and Trust, having
from the King the Custody and Government of the whole County committed to him.
My Lord Coke upon Lit. (page 168) says, that the Sheriff has triplicem
Custodiam, viz. Vitae Justitiae, to serve Process, and to return indifferent
Juries for the Trial of Men's Lives, Liberties, Lands and Goods: Vitae Legis, to
execute Process and make Execution, which is the Life of the Law; and Vitae
Reipublicae, to keep the Peace, etc. He is partly a Judicial, and partly a
Ministerial Officer; and by the Statute 5 Edw. 6. cap. 16. it is provided, that
none may bargain or fell any Office, if the Office concern the Administration
or Execution of Justice. By the 12 Ri. 2d. it is provided, that the Chancellor,
Treasurer, Keeper of Privy Seal, Lord Steward, King's Chamberlain, Clerk of the
Rolls, Justices of the Benches, Barons of the Exchequer, and all others, called
to name and ordain Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, etc. shall be sworn that they
shall not make or ordain any such for any Gift or Brocage, Favor or Affection,
etc. but that they make all such Officers and Ministers of the best and most
lawful and sufficient Men in their Judgments: Thus carefully has our Law
provided for the free and equal Administration and Execution of Justice all
over England.

Now to come to the Ancient Usage and Practice of Electing Sheriffs in London
for that City and the County of Middlesex, Midsummer Day, on what Day of the
Week soever it fell, was used to be the Day for Electing two Sheriffs for the
City of London and County of Middlesex, until June 15. 1694. when it was by
Common Council enacted and provided, that whenever Midsummer Day shall happen
to be on the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, that the Election of Sheriffs,
etc. shall be on the next Day following. Accordingly the Lord Mayor has
constantly sent out Precepts of Summons; the last of which follows in these
Words.

By the MAYOR.
To the Master and Wardens of the Company of These are in his Maiesty's Name to
require you, that you give notice to the Livery of your Company, that on Monday
next, being the 24th Instant, at Eight of the Clock in the Forenoon, They
assemble and come to the Guild Hall in the usual manner, there to elect
Sheriffs and other Officers, customarily chosen on that Day.

Dated this 20th of June 1695. GOODFELLOW.


The Master and Wardens, in Obedience to the Precepts from the Lord Mayor,
order their Beadles to deliver to the Livery-men of their respective Companies,
in a printed Form, to the Purport following, viz.

Sir, On Monday the 24th of June 1695. you are desired, by the Master and
Wardens of the Worshipful Company of London, to meet at Guild Hall, at 9 of the
Clock in the Morning, in your Livery-Gown, for the Election of Sheriffs, etc.
to serve the City of London for the Year ensuing. N. H. Beadle.

When the several Liveries are met together in the Guild Hall, the 24th of
June: About 11 or 12 of the Clock the Hall is then usually full, containing
about 3000 Persons, besides great Numbers that are in other Places near at
hand, to Poll if occasion require. After 2 or 3 cries, A Hall, a Hall, to give
notice to the Lord Mayor that the Assembly are ready; The Mayor, Aldermen and
Sheriffs come out of the Council Chamger, with the City-Sword and Mace carried
before them, and go to the Hustings at the upper end of the Hall. When the
Lord Mayor is there seated in his Chair, and the Aldermen are also seated, the
Sword laid down before his Lordship, the Common Crier of the City, with his
Mace before him, by order makes three loud O Yes's, and from an Officer
dictating to him, goes on to this Purport, viz. You good Men of the Liveries of
this City, summoned to appear here this Day, for the Election of Sheriffs, and
other Officers of this City for the Year ensuing, draw near and attend to your
Election. God save the King. Then he further by order pronounces, with a loud
Voice; All you that are not of the Livery, depart the Hall upon pain of
Imprisonment. This done, the Recorder rises from his Seat, and moves toward
the Edg of the Hustings; and first turns about toward the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, and bows; and then toward the Livery-men, and bows; then he makes an
Eloquent and Learned Speech to them, of the great Privileges and high Trusts
reposed and vested in them by many Kings and Parliaments, and particularly in
allowing them the free Choice of their Sheriff; and learnedly explains to them
the high Authority, both Judicial and Ministerial of that Ancient Officer; and
exhorts them to take great Care to make choice of wise, honest, and able Men
for that Office, which so much concerns the Security, Peace and Safety of the
City, their Lives, Liberties, Estates and Posterity: And sometimes puts them in
mind of the fatal Mischiefs that have happened when bad Men have got into that
Office. After this the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rise and go up to the
Council Chamger, having the Sword carried before them, but not the Mace, it
being placed before the Common Crier on the middle of the Hustings. Then the
Sheriffs with the Common Sergeant, move to the edg of the Hustings, where the
Common Sergeant makes another Speech to the Livery-men, reminding them what the
Recorder had already said, and enlarges thereon, to show to them the great
Privileges, high Trusts, excellent Liberties granted to them, exhorting them to
choose honest and able Men: And at last desires them to give him the Names of
such Persons as they would have put up in Nomination for the Vote of the
Common Hall for Sheriffs, etc.

When they have given the Names of all the Persons they would have put in
Nomination, the Common Sergeant says, Gentlemen, I will read to you the Names
of the Persons that you have put in nomination for Sheriffs. Then after he has
audibly read the same, he says, Gentlemen, Will you have any more Persons put
in nomination for Sheriffs? If they cry, No, no, the Common Crier, with his
Mace before him, standing near the Edg on the middle of the Hustings, (three
other Officers standing on convenient Places along to the other End of the
Hall, to take the Proclamation one from the other, that all the Assembly may
distinctly hear) begins, being as before dictated to by the Officer, viz. So
many of you as will have -- A. B. Mercer -- to be one of the Sheriffs for the
City of London, and County of Middlesex for the Year ensuing, Hold up your
Hands? These Words being repeated by the three aforesaid Officers. When all the
Names of those put in Nomination have been severally put up to the Common Hall
in manner as aforesaid; the Sheriffs do consult betwixt themselves, and the
Common Sergeant declares their Opinions on whom the Election has fallen: and
if it be clear and apparent, they do declare it by their Officers to the
Common Hall; if any Doubt be, it is put up again to the Common Hall betwixt
those Persons where the Doubt lies: If still there be any dissatisfaction, it is
put up again and again; and at last if a Poll be demanded, it is always granted,
and then 6 or 8 Books are provided, and two Livery-men desired to overlook the
Clerks at each Book, and to examine the Qualification of the Pollers, where the
Mayor and Aldermen poll as Liverymen and no otherwise. When the Poll is over,
the Books are cast up with great exactness; And if any Candidate or other
Person be unsatisfied, and demand a Scrutiny of the Poll, it must be granted;
and then the Lord Mayor uses to send his Precept to the Masters and Wardens of
the several Livery Companies in these words, viz.

Stamp Mayor,
Jovis die, etc.
It is ordered by this Court, that every Clerk of the several Livery Companies
of this City, do return the Names of the several LiveryMen of their respective
Companies Alphabetically, on or before Tuesday next, upon Oath to be made by
the said Clerks before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, or this Court.

GOODFELLOW.


Which Lists are delivered afterward to such as are appointed to examine and
scrutin^^ the Poll-Books. These two Circumstances following have used to
unqualify one that has been of the Livery of this City: First, if he have so
fallen to Decay, that he has had back his Livery-Fine; or secondly (though he
has not had back his Livery-Fine) in Case he be a Pensioner. After a full
Examination and Scrutiny the Books are again carefully cast up, and then the
Poll upon Scrutiny is declared for the due Election of them that have the
Majority of Votes. Nor is any Common-Councilman allowed to poll unless he be of
the Livery, nor any Livery-man unless he be a Freeman: So exact and solemn has
the Election of Sheriffs for the City of London and County of Middlesex used to
be, to the Peace, Honor and Safety of the said City and County for above 200
Years.

The Reverend Judges in the 40th and 41st of Eliz. upon mature Deliberation,
did conclude, that this ancient Usage in Elections (though no Record thereof
could be shown) came at first from common Assent, and was therefore well
warranted by Law and their Charters.

It may be observed, that when Sheriffs were chose by the (...), none but
Freeholders were to choose, as being Men of Substance in the County, in
imitation whereof our wise Predecessors in this City did ordain that none but
such as were of Substance should come upon the Liveries, to elect Sheriffs, etc.

And whereas London is now swelled much beyond its Wards; so that near one half
of the Citizens of London do live out of any of the Wards of the City, who do
all constantly pay scot and bear lot in their respective Companies, and are at
like Charge and Service in attending the Lord Mayor, and on other solemn
Occasions, for the Wealth and Honor of the City, and are as liable to serve
the Office of Sheriffs; etc. as those that live within the Wards, (as may
appear by Mr. Clark, Mr. Langham, etc. last Year, who were induced to pay Fines
to be discharged from holding the Office of Sheriff, though they lived in
distant Counties) and have for some hundreds of Years constantly represented in
Common Hall their Fellow-Citizens, (for these Purposes) who are in no wise
represented by the Common Council of London, who are only chosen by the Freemen
within the Wards: The Lord Mayor and Aldermen will, no doubt (before they
undertake to undo what themselves have so solemnly acted in conjunction with
the Liveries that are about 6 or 7 thousand) consider of the Warrantableness as
well as the Justness thereof.

Besides the Judges Opinions in 40 and 41 Eliz. there is a Case recorded lib.
H. fol. 45. in the 50th of Edward the IIId, where Richard Lions Alderman of
Breadstreet-Ward, John Peche Alderman of Walbrook-Ward, Adam Bury Alderman of
Langborn-Ward, were all disfranchited, and put out of their Offices for
Irregularities in the same, and afterward severely punished. It is hoped the
Common Council of the City will look back (upon this Intimation) that in an Act
of Common Council, made in the Mayoralty of Sir William Pritchard, these Words
are contained, being part of a Report of the then Committee, viz. We have seen
several Entries in the Journal of this Court; (inter alia) Jan. 24, 1644. It
was declared by the Mayor and Aldermen, that they had a negative Voice in
Common Council by the anient Custom and Charters of this City: and we having
also seen the Opinions of diverse learned Counsels heretofore given to the Court
of Aldermen under their Hands, viz. the present L. C. J. Pemberton, Sir William
Dolbin, Sergeant Maynard, Sir William Jones, Sir G. Jefferies, and Sir Fr.
Winington, That the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have a negative Voice in making
Laws and Orders, and admitting of Officers in Common Council, we humbly
propound (to take away all Disputes in this matter for the time to come) that
the same may have the Approbation and Concurrence of this honor able Court.
Subscribed William Turner, James Edwards, John Moor, Henry Tulce, Tho. Langham,
Fr. Griffith, Nath. Hawes, Hen. Loades, Peter Ailworth, Nic. Charlton, Tho.
Vernon.

After reading of which Report here openly in this Court, the same was by this
Court (in the several Particulars thereof) well approved of, and agreed to and
confirmed. It Is conceived this ought to have been repealed as well as the other
Clauses that were therein repealed, 15 June, 1694.

The many Inconveniences that the negative Voice aforesaid (which is contrary
to Law and Reason) may produce, can easily be foreseen.

It may not be amiss to put the Common-Council-men in mind to examine why these
Words in the Sheriffs Oath are left off, viz. Ye shall also swear that ye shall
freely give all fit^h Rooms and Offices of ^e^jeants and Yeomen as shall happen
to become void during be time ye shall remain in Office of Shrievalty, to such
apt and able Person or Persons as shall be by you nominated to the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen, and by them admitted without any Money or other Reward,
to be had, taken, or hoped for, in respect thereof, according to the Act of
Common Council made and provided in that behalf the 29th of April, in the 26th
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, etc. So God you help.

If those Common-Council-men (many being otherwise inclin^d) that have been so
ready to embrace Fines to discharge Sheriffs, etc. this way from the Obligation
of their Offices, and have openly declared that in 44 Years they have raised
above 150000 l. would heartily join with others that are against it, and would
diligently search out Concealments, Appropriations, Withdrawings, and
Misapplications of the City's Revenues, they might in a short time find out an
honorable and plentiful Income to maintain the Government thereof, which they
are doubly obliged to by then Oaths of Freemen and Common-Council-men.

King Edward III, in the 15th Year of his Reign granted to the Mayor and
Commonalty to make Ordinances (with this Proviso) so as they were not
prejudicial to the Citizens, nor to other his Liege People; from whence this
Question may be made: If A. B. Common Council man shall make Agreement that for
400 l C. D. (already duly elected to and charged with the Sinievalty) shall be
thereof discharged: And afterward E. F. Livery-man, living in Westminster, is
chose into that chargeable Office by the Vote and Poll of the said A. B.
Quaere, whether E. F. may not maintain an Action against A. B.
Common-Council-man, for his Damages herein sustained? It was said of Old Rome,
that her Citizens spread themselves over the whole World: It may be said of
London, her Citizens spread themselves over all England; and no doubt but
London is knit in League with the rest of the Realm, (some peculiar Customs
excepted) and no Laws there made can be valid that thwart their Charters, or
the Laws of the Land: which, with what has been already published, may serve
for Answer to all that has hitherto been alleged in Vindication of the Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council in their late Proceedings in Common Hall. If any
one still be in any doubt, let him, for his full Satisfaction, read over the
Act of Parliament for restoring the City's Charter. If the King should propose
to discharge his Appointments of Sheriffs in the Counties at a declared certain
rate, he might raise great Sums of Money that way, but it is believed it would
not be grateful to the Parliament, who may probably take Cognizance of this
Affair for the Example's sake.

Fellow-Citizens; You were told by the Recorder, that the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen would take care of your Privileges, you will certainly think them as
safe in your own Hands as any where else; and by your constant adhering to your
former Choice, as by your Oath you are obliged, you will manifest to the World
you are worthy of so high a Trust reposed in you, as the free Election of
Sheriffs for the City of London and County of Middlesex, which is a Trust that
no ingenuous Citizen but should abhor to abuse. The Lord Mayor and Aldermen
(notwithstanding all the Vindicator and Dialogue-maker have said) will
doubtless weigh the City's Charters, Acts of Parliament, and other Laws and
Customs of this City and Nation in the Balance with it, and the several
Solemnities of Precepts, Summons, Polls, and Scrutinies, etc. lest Bystanders
should interpret them all mere Pageantries, if 7 or 8 Aldermen may afterward
make them all void, under color of Bylaws, made in the late Arbitrary Times,
which are made null and void by the Act of Parliament of 2 William and Mary,
for restoring to the Citizens of London all their Rights, Liberties, Charters,
etc. which Act is to be reputed a public Act of Parliament, and to be so taken
notice of by the Judges, as if relating to the whole Kingdom. Tho some Men of
arrogating and arbitrary Humors have contemptuously termed the Common Hall a
Mob, and said that its Insolence must be curbed, you, by your sober and settled
Constancy to your Point, will the soonest convince them of the Falseness of
that Imputation, that you are neither Mob nor insolent, but resolved to depend
for Redress on your Parliaments and Laws. You need not be put in mind what
Endeavors some have used by Feastings and Caresses of proper Instruments to
wheedle and induce them, to persuade the Citizens not to insist on their Rights
at this time, the King being out of the Land. But those Persons ought to take
notice, that the Steadiness and Loyalty of the Common Hall to King William and
his Government, has sounded throughout this Kingdom, and is and will be a
Terror to all those that are Enemies to their Country: now to abridg those
Citizens in their free Elections, is the most effectual Way to render them
unserviceable to his Majesty and Kingdom in this most important Affair, and to
bring in such Magistrates as are disaffected to the present Government. The
Midsummer elected Sheriffs that are pretended to have paid their Fines, have
done so on condition the Common Hall shall agree to it; forasmuch as by their
proceeding to a fresh Choice they tacitly consent to the Discharge of the two
former: The English whereof is, that the Common Hall do make another Election
of two others, and so work their Discharge that way, which if they should do,
it may give color for a Forfeiture of their Charters and Privileges, which
every Citizen is solemnly swom to avoid. Thus much has been thought convenient
to be said as to Matter of Fact and Caution thereupon, the Matter in Law may be
expected to come to hand in a little time.

FINIS.

