An ACCOUNT of the LAND-BANK, SHOWING The Design and Manner of the Settlement.
The Profits to the Subscribers. The Advantage to the Borrowers. The Convenience
to the Lenders. That it will be the Support of the Nobility and Gentry of
ENGLAND, and A Public Good to the whole Nation.
BILLS or Notes of Credit, secured on a valuable and certain Fund, are of great
Advantage to Commerce and Trade, Payments being thereby made easy, quick, and
certain: but if such Notes or Bills of Credit are not so strictly Limited, as
they cannot exceed the Values of their Funds, they may prove a Damage to
Traffic, and a Loss to the Trader; for, Bills given out upon an Unlimited
Credit, must chiefly have for their Security the Profit of those Undertakings
wherein the Moneys are employed for which those Bills of Credit were given, and
therefore differ little from the Trust or Credit that is given to private
Traders, which is good or bad, as they are fortunate or unfortunate, and so
grow Rich or Poor by their Trades.

Therefore that the Lands of England may be made a Solid, Certain and
Well-Limited Fund of Credit: As useful to the Owners as so much Ready Money,
And of greater value: Is the design of the Land Bank, as will appear by the
manner of the Settlement and Consequences of it.

The Manner of the Settlement.
1. The Governors of the Land-Bank will Lend Money on Land or Houses, at 3 l.
10 s. per Cent. per Ann. to all Persons that shall Convey their Estates
according to the Settlement, which is thus: Their Estates are to be conveyed in
Trust for the payment of the Principal and Interest to the Governors of the
Land-Bank; And upon further Trust, That the said Governors may have Power to
charge the said Lands with Notes or Bills of Credit for the said Moneys so
borrowed, and Interest for the same.

2. That the Bills of Credit charged on the Land and given out by the Governors
for the taking in of Money, shall be paid on demand, with Interest after the
rate of 2 l. per Cent. per Ann. For which purpose One Hundred Thousand Pounds
is Subscribing, That there may be a sufficient Cash lie ready to answer such
Bills.

3. That the Funds of Credit may be certain, and well limited, The Governors
are not to lend or charge any Bills of Credit for more than Three fourths of
the Value of the Land or Houses. And every Bill will have Reference, by a
Letter and Figure, to the Book and Place where the Land is Registered on which
that Bill is charged.

4. That no Loss may for ever happen to any of their Bills of Credit, through
Deficiency of Title, or Want of Value; The Governors are immediately to lay out
Ten thousand Pounds, part of the One hundred thousand Pounds subscribed, as a
Collateral Security to Ensure the Value of their Bills; And also every Year to
lay out Ten Shillings of the Interest of the 3 l. 10 s. to increase the said
Security.

5. The Borrowers of Money may at any time, without giving Notice, pay in the
Money borrowed, or any part of it, and their Lands will be accordingly
discharged: Or they may continue it (paying the Interest) till three years
after the first notice to be given for the payment of the Principal in, by a
Monthly Account. The Interest of 3 l. 10 s. is to be paid Quarterly; but in
case it be not paid within One month after the Six months is due, then they
must pay after the rate of 5 per Cent. for the Six months.

6. There will be a Monthly Account from the Land-Bank printed and published
the first Monday in every Month, which is the Notice, by the Settlement, for
all Matters relating to the Bank; And it will be also used for the publishing
of the Sale of Land and Houses, which will be beneficial for the Buyer and
Seller. They are to pay Ten Shillings per Cent. according to the Value of the
Land or House sold. The manner will be to this effect:

7. The Rentall or Value of the Land or Houses: The Price that they will be set
up (...). The Money that is to be Bid, And the Day of Sale: Shall be ^hrice
published in the Monthly Account, That all Persons may have timely notice to
Examine and Enquire into the Value of the said Land or Houses; and the Persons
that intend to purchase are to give in their Proposal in Writing, sealed up, at
the day of Sale, which Proposal shall be opened in their presence, and the
fairest Bidder shall be the Purchaser. And, that the Sale of Land or Houses may
be as quickly dispatched as the Sale of Goods; If the Purchaser will pay down
One-fourth part of the Value, the Governors of the Bank will lend him the other
Three fourths, and continue the same at Interest.

8. The Governors of the Bank are to be chosen yearly by the Majority of Votes:
Every Subscriber for 100 l. to have One Vote, and none more than Ten Votes. The
number of the Governors are to be Twenty one, and Six of them that have the
fewest Votes are to go off every Year, and not be capable of being chosen till
the third Year after. Twenty Pounds of the Subscription-Money to be paid down
when she Governors are Chosen.

The Profit to the Subscribers: Will be 1 l. 10 s. per Cent. for all the Moneys
that the Bank shall Lend, and 10 s. per Cent. of the Value of all the Estates
they shall Sell; which, according to the computation that some Persons make,
that there is two or three Millions at Interest upon the Land, may make the
Stock to produce thirty or forty per Cent. Profit yearly; for how great soever
the Sums are that are owing at Interest upon Land, it may be all lent by the
Bank, and the Bills paid on demand, and circulated with One hundred thousand
Pounds; but yet, if by Experience it shall be found not sufficient; There is a
provision in the Settlement For the subscribing One hundred thousand Pounds
more, for which the first Subscribers are to have the Preferrence.

The Advantages to the Borrowers: Are, That they may have Money at 3 l. 10 s.
per Cent. Three fourths of the Value of their Lands: And may pay back the Money
at any time; Either the whole or part; which last Advantage is so great, that
for want of it, the Borrowers often suffer very great Losses; for when the Sums
lent on the Land are great, They are difficult to be borrowed; More Persons
having Small Sums than Great; and the Interest being greater than the ^ent of
the Land, and so being not paid, the Sum is increased. And because it must be
repaid together, The Borrowers are put under such Difficulty in paying it, that
before they can get it, they are often foreclosed of their Equity of
Redemption, and many times Lose a Fourth part of the Value of their Estates.
And if they get it, they are very great Losers by the Interest of the Money
lying dead while they make up the Whole Sum.

The Convenience to the Lenders, that Take the Bills of Credit, Are, That though
the Interest be small, yet their Security is on the Land, And the Money at
demand; Which may be a greater Convenience to them, when an Opportunity is
offered, either in Purchasing Goods or Land, than if they had a greater
Interest on the same Land, and their Money not at command.

I will be the Support of the Nobility and Gentry of England: By Lowering the
Interest of Money, and Raising the Value of their Estates; For in all Countries
the Price of Land is governed by the Rate of the Interest of Money. When Money
in England was at 8 per Cent. Land generally sold for Fifteen or Sixteen Years
Purchase: when it was reduced to 6 per Cent. Land was raised to Twenty Years
Purchase; and after, Plenty of Money reducing Interest on Real Securities to 5
per Cent. Land sold for Twenty four or Twenty five Years Purchase. And when the
Land-Bank shall lend Money at 3 l. 10 s. per Cent. Interest must be reduced to
the same Rate; And Land, by the same Rule, must rise to Thirty one and Thirty
two Years Purchase. Besides the other Advantages by this Settlement, which will
be. By The Quick and Easy Borrowing of Money, and Buying and Selling Land,
which will add to the Value of Land, and make it better than Ready Money, and
may in time raise it to Forty Years Purchase.

It will be a Public Good to the Whole Nation: For the Land of England is the
Fund and Riches of the Nation, by which the Government is supported, and the
Nation defended; and whatsoever raises the Value of Land, increases the
Riches and Strength of the Nation.

It Is expected that the Settlement will be in a few Days sealed; therefore
those Persons that have occasion to borrow Money of the Bank, or sell their
Estates, may Enter at the Office the Value of their Estates, and the Sum of
Money they would borrow, and the Price they will sell their Estates at; for
it is intended to prevent all Exceptions, that the Securities shall be proceeded
on, and all Matters dispatched in Order, as they shall stand Entered in the
Office.

The Register Office for Entering Estates, and Lending of Money, is kept in
Lincoln's Inn, over the Stamp Office, where the Subscription Book lies; and the
Bank-Office for Paying and Taking in of Money, and giving out of the
Bank-Bills, will be kept in the Upper Part of Exeter-Change in the Strand.

London, Printed by T. Milbourn in Jewen-Street, 1695.


