REMARKS UPON THE Present Confederary. AND Late Revolution IN ENGLAND, etc.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCIII.

REMARKS UPON THE Present Confederacy, etc.
THE most formidable Enterprise, no doubt, that ever was levelled against the
growing Grandeur of France, during the long and successful Reign of Lewis le
Grande, was this late Confederacy, formed by the most powerful Princes in all
Europe: An Undertaking of so dangerous consequence to that Prince, that if
their Carier had not been stopped by a surprising Providence, and diverted by the
wonderful Vigilance and Activity of that truly greatest Prince in all these
parts of the World, that Monarchy by this time had laid expiring. As the
Confederates had resolutely, and with prodigious Prospects of Advantage to
themselves agreed upon this Design; so to facilitate it had sagaciously enough
foreseen what Remoraes might lie in their way, and as resolutely determined to
remove them, right or wrong. England, which had for some years past skreen'd
them from those violent, and otherwise irresistible, shocks they were exposed
to from France, was most feared at this time would stand in their way; and to
speak the Truth, from the Experience we have had of the French Power and Policy
during this War, the least Assistance from her, or a mere Neutrality, had left
them to the Mercy and entire Disposal of their Enemy. This, I say, was
politickly enough foreseen, and by most wicked and unjust means for some time
at least prevented; though by comparing the Successes on both sides hitherto,
cannot in all humane probability be long protracted: But more of this
afterward. To accomplish this Grand Design of theirs, King James must be
deposed, to make way for the Ambition and Pride of another, the most likely to
carry on the War against France; if we either consider that height of Malice
which he had long ago conceived against that Monarch, chiefly from his being so
frequently baffled in Holland and Flanders, by the Bravery of his Generals
there; or that Natural Malignity in his very Constitution, derived from his
Ancestors, who had never been famous for their Loyalty to their own Princes, or
Affection for Crowned Heads. This they concluded feasible enough, not being
ignorant of the ambitious Designs the Prince of Orange had been carrying on for
several years in England of mounting that Throne, by having a hand in all the
Plots against King Charles the Second; but especially his Father in-law, to
exclude him, and what not; and the Dispositions he had laid in order to that
End, by his corrupting the greatest Ministers of State under that unfortunate
Prince, to take advantage from his Religion, to which the English are naturally
averse, to put him upon some Acts which would in all likelihood alienate his
Subjects Affections from him, and make the P. or O's Access the more easy. All
this being well known to many of the Confederate Princes, they had no more to
do but to sound his Inclination somewhat nearer, and proffer him their
Assistance for the obtaining of what he so eagerly desired, and by all indirect
means pursued. To this end having engaged themselves and him in the strict
bonds of a Confederacy, they immediately lent him such Assistance as was
requisite to land him in England, where all things were ready to his hand, and
there most wickedly deposed King James II.

I confess some are apt to allege that the Prince of Orange exceeded his
Commission, and acted directly contrary to the Determination of the
Confederacy, their sole Aim being only by this Invasion to draw King James in
to their Designs: But if we consider those notable Hints in the foreign Papers
upon this occasion, particularly The General History of Europe, published in
French, at the Hague, by the Authority of the States of Holland and West
Friesland, we may be easily inclined to believe the contrary, out of which I
shall present the Reader with some remarkable Passages, and leave it to him to
judge, whether what I have laid down for my Principle does not look highly
probable.

Historical Account for the Month of November, in the Article of Advice from
England, 1688.

The King's Fleet (that is, King James's,) is about forty three Men of War, ten
Fireships; but though commanded by the Earl of Dartmouth, who is entirely for
the King's Interest, it is thought the Seamen, and many of the Officers, will
not perform that Duty which the King expects from them.

Reflections upon the Advice from Holland, the same Month.

The Expense that has been bestowed upon the Fleet and Army set forth from
Holland, is a sign they are morally assured of the Success of the Enterprise,
which I am apt to believe has been a long time ago in Agitation, though it was
carried on with that Prudence and Secrecy, as not to be discovered till it
could not be longer concealed.

Advice from Germany, December. 1688.

The Confederates are arrived in Franconia, where they stay till General
Dunewald comes up to join them with the Emperor's Forces, to the end they may
march together, etc. Nevertheless when they are joined, there is great
probability they will do nothing till they hear what the Prince of Orange does
in England; for he is at present the primum Mobile of all things.

Reflections upon the Advice from France, December. 1688.

It Is thought that Monsieur Seignalay's Journey to visit the Coasts was
particularly occasioned by the turn of Affairs in England, etc. But now all
those Journeys will signify little; for if Heaven continues Prosperity to the
Prince of Orange, of necessity the most Christian King must quit the Ocean.

Reflections upon the Advice from England the same Month.

So soon as the Enterprise of the Prince of Orange was discoursed of all Men
imagined that he was sure of the greatest part of the Nobility of England. Some
put the question whether he will dethrone his Father in Law, or whether, etc.
he will be contented with the Honor of having saved the Protestant Religion, and
the Liberty of the English Nation. -- For my part I believe an Accommodation
will be a difficult thing. -- I make no question but the next Parliament King
James will be declared to have forfeited his Crown.

Reflections on the Advice from Germany, February 1689.

I am apt to believe they are not to be called by the name of Politicians, who
imagine that the Emperor caused the Marquess of Lucignan to be seized, that he
might have an opportunity to enter into a Negotiation. Then again, What was
befaln the Emperor since unknown to us that should enforce him to alter his
Conduct? If it had been that the Affairs in England went ill on the P. of O's
side, that had been a Reason indeed; -- but all the World knows there is no
such thing; the Prince of Orange has been crowned, etc. To all which I shall
add a remarkable Passage out of the French King's Declaration of War against
Spain: Amongst other Motives he declares, That he is informed what share the
Governor of the Spanish Low Countries had in the Prince of Orange's Enterprise
against England; but not believing what he did was done by his Master's
Command, his Majesty was in good hopes to have persuaded his most Catholic
Majesty to have joined with him for the Restoration of the lawful King of
England, etc. To which purpose he made several Proposals that were all received
whilst the Success of the Prince of Orange continued doubtful; but when 'twas
known at Madrid that the King of England had left his Kingdom, then nothing was
thought of but War with France. That his Majesty was also farther informed,
that the Spanish Ambassador in England visited the Prince of Orange every day,
and importuned him to declare War against France, etc. But finding that his
most Catholic Majesty was resolved, etc. Genesis Hist. of Europe, Vol. 1. Month
Apr. 89.

As to this last passage I am sensible many prejudiced persons will be ready to
object the little Reputation the French King and his Ministers have had for
their Veracity these many Years; but if we reflect on the vast Charge he is
constantly at for Intelligence in all places where he is concerned, and how
much it imported him to find out the Mystery of the Confederacy, it ought in
some measure at least to incline us to credit him, especially when it is
notoriously known he had intimated to King James, some considerable time before
he could give credit to it, the Design of the Prince of Orange, and the States
General, against him; and proffered him such Assistance, that if he had
complied with it, would have effectually prevented this late Revolution in
Great Britain, and consequently this bloody and desperate War, which has been
the sad Effect of it. And there are some persons now living, of unquestionable
Integrity, and sufficient Interest to know the truth of it, who assert, that
Don Ronquillo, the late Spanish Ambassador, plainly told King James, that if
we would not be induced to join in the Confederacy with the Empire and Spain,
against France, he would run the hazard of losing his Crown; so certain it is
that the Revolution here was an immediate Effect of the Consultations and
Resolutions of the Confederacy, though not publicly enough hitherto
understood, to the great injury of the King, and perversion of his Subjects.

These Passages out of a public Account of the Affairs of Europe, allowed to
be published, and (as we are obliged to suppose) approved by the States General
for the present, (till something more material be offered by more capable and
intelligent Persons,) may seem to any reasonable man a sufficient Proof of my
Assertion, that what the Pr. of Orange has lately transacted there, was not
managed by him alone against the Intentions of the rest of the Confederacy: If
so, why did not they remonstrate against his Proceedings, by their Ambassadors
to King James, and the Prince of Orange too; and, as in Honor bound,
contribute their Assistence, when especially requested to it, toward his
Restoration? Nay, why did they on the contrary by their respective Ambassadors
and Envoys congratulate the Prince and Princess of Orange's Accession to the
Throne, and by this means virtually declare to all the World, that King James
was justly deposed, and that the Prince and Princess of Orange were become the
lawful and rightful King and Queen of England? So that the more nicely we
examine the methods of the Prince of Orange's Proceedings, the greater reason
we have to conclude this Objection to be a mere Sham and Excuse. His charging
his Father in law with Maladministration, Violating the Fundamental Laws of
the Realm, with setting up the Roman Catholic Religion, imposing a
Supposititious Heir upon the Three Kingdoms, in order to put by the Succession
of his own Children, merely on the account of Religion, etc. What was all this
to the business of France and the Confederates? The only thing in the Prince of
Orange's Daclaration, that makes for the business pretended, is the Private
League Offensive and Defensive between King James and France; which
notwithstanding could never be produced, and exposed to the view of the World;
and if it had been so, could never be any just pretense for their assisting to
invade him, unless it had been contrary to former Alliances between him and
them; none of which appearing, it is altogether as frivolous as many other
Shams in that Masterpiece of Villainy, the forementioned Declaration. Upon
these Suppositions then it is apparent, that that which was to give Life unto
the Confederacy, and bring it into Act, was the pulling down King James, and
setting up the Prince of Orange; so that before all this was accomplished, the
Confederacy was but an Embrio, and no better than a Conditional Stipulation;
and upon the unsuccessfulness of the Prince of Orange would have been stisled
and vanished into nothing. There was no War declared, before this Gentleman was
most Traitorously Proclaimed King; but by the Duke of Bavaria, Nov. 10. as you
may see in the London Gazette: The Emperor and Dutch did not till March -- 89.
and in all probability it had not been done afterward on the Confederates side,
if this Praeludium to all the rest had miscarried. To this effect we may
remember that the Dutch Ambassador when charged by King James in the behalf of
his Masters, the States General, with assisting the Prince of Orange with Men,
Money, Arms, etc. for his Expedition, (against the express Articles of Peace
and Alliance made between King Charles the Second, of blessed Memory, and the
States of the United Netherlands, 1667. particularly the 11th Article, wherein
it was agreed, That the said King of Great Britain, and the said States
General, remain Friends, Confederates, united and allied for the Defense, and
Preservation of the Rights, Liberties, and Immunities of either Allie, and
their Subjects, against all who shall endeavor to disturb the Peace of either
by Sea or Land. And Artie. 13. That neither the said King, nor the said
Commonwealth, nor any of the Subjects of either, inhabiting or residing within
their Jurisdiction, shall cherish and assist the Rebels of either party, with
any Succor, Counsel, or Favor whatsoever; but shall expose and effectually
hinder all persons abiding, residing, or dwelling in either of their Dominions,
from supplying or furnishing any of those foresaid Rebels by Sea or Land with
Arms, Succor or Assistance either in Men, Ships, Arms, or Warlike Furniture,
etc. And Article 14. That the King of Great Britain, and the said States
General shall Mutually, Sincerely and Faithfully as there is occasion, assist
each other against the Rebels of either by Sea or Land, with Men, Ships, etc.
Article 15. That neither the said King, nor the said Commonwealth, nor the
Subjects of either, shall in any of their Jurisdictions, Countries, etc.
receive any Rebel or Rebels, Fugitive or Fugitives declared, or to be declared,
etc.) pretended to know nothing of it; which is a plain Indication they would
have insisted upon that denial, and urged it in their own Vindication, if that
Project had not succeeded, to prevent a Storm from King James and the K. of
France; and it would have equally served the rest of the Confederates too: But
as soon as they heard his Enterprise had its desired effect, the next thing we
heard of, was the States Manifesto owning the whole business, justifying
themselves, and applauding the Heroic Attempt of the Prince of Orange. From
what has been hitherto said, I shall beg leave to infer, That this Revolution
was the Contrivance of the Confederates in general, and not the Prince of
Orange's separately from them, but in Conjunction with them; That all his
Motives, of what nature soever, were merely introductory to it; and that the
most principal of them that seemed the most justifiable of his Proceedings,
were calculated only to serve the Malicious and Disaffected part of the Nation,
and to wheedle and amuse the rest into a Compliance with him; That if those had
not been subtly thought on, others would not have been wanting; That he had
no design to secure Religion, vindicate Justice, to assert the Liberties, or
secure the Properties of the People, but to execute the Designs of the
Confederates in general, and to serve his own Ambition, and unsatisfied Thirst
after Empire in particular; That therefore the Grand Presumptions (as he terms
it) of the Supposititiousness of the Prince of Wales, of the Private League
between K. James and the K. of France, the introducing of Arbitrary Power,
Popery, etc. were mere Cant, and nothing to the purpose, he having not
performed any thing promised in that Declaration, but acted quite contrary; and
for corroborating my main Position, I shall proceed to show what peculiar
Advantages the rest of the Confederates proposed to themselves by such a
Revolution in England, which may induce all impartial Readers to subscribe to
the Truth of what I have hitherto said.

The principal Advantage the Confederates in general, exclusive of the P. of
Orange proposed to themselves by this Revolution, was to have the Kingdom of
Great Britain, one of the Strongest and most Flourishing Monarchies in Europe,
at their entire Devotion, to draw off Men and Money at their pleasure, so long
as they could keep this new set-up King in the Throne; an advantage so
considerable, that whilst they can do this, and any Wealth remains in England,
they are sure to make the cheapest Experiment they could possibly devise, and
withal the most powerful effort imaginable toward the reducing the growing
Power of France, and retrieving their former losses: And however the infatuated
and easily deluded Populace of England may seem to despise the Confederates in
their Discourse; yet it is evident enough, that so long as this Confederacy
holds, and no longer, shall they keep their new King; it being sufficiently
apparent to any one of common Sense, that if the whole and entire Confederacy
have had hitherto enough to do, to oppose France even in the lowest degree, it
is more than demonstration, that she alone will be able to do it least; for I
must take it as granted, that if England breaks from the Confederacy, the
Confederates must of necessity knock quite off, and make their best terms at
any rate, and consequently unite with France against England, which we are well
assured that King will oblige them to, in order to the completing that most
Glorious Resolution which he has so often made, and will eternize his Memory,
of the Restoring that Unfortunate Prince and Martyr for his sake, the true and
lawful King of England. This supposition, I hope, will without much difficulty
be granted me, if we consider the great losses of the Confederates on all
sides, their apparent Poverty, and Inability to carry on the War at their sole
Charge, that England is their principal support, and has been all this War,
that without the continuation of Assistance from hence, they must break, and
England compelled to submit to her Lawful and most Injured Sovereign again,
which all these Allies know they would not be easily or suddenly inclined to
from the Sense of their horrid Guilt, and dread of his just Resentment; and
therefore till mere Necessity and the utmost Extremity drives them to it, they
are sure to drain them at their pleasure.

Another advantage the Confederates proposed to reap by the late Revolution
here, and by engaging these Nations into the Confederacy is this, (supposing
their successfulness in Attacking France) that whatever Cities or Territories
should be recovered, or won from the French, should either revert to their old
respective Owners, or be acquired to some of the rest of the Confederates
exclusive of the Prince of Orange, as should be agreed by them. This is natural
and easy enough to be supposed; for can any one imagine, should the late
pretended Design of the Prince of Orange to attempt the taking of Dunkirk,
Ipres, or Namur, have been effected, that the King of Spain would have resigned
his right in them to him, and permitted them to be annexed to the Crown of
England, since it is evident beyond all contradiction, that the ground of this
Confederacy as is published by them to all the World, was to make War upon
France, in order to recover what they urged was some time since so unjustly
ravished from them by that Monarch; and nothing of this nature could ever be
pretended with truth by the Prince of Orange as King of England, we have not
lost one single Town to the French? So that it is manifest, all the Prodigious
Expense we have been at to carry on the War in Flanders and Piedmont, was not
in order to recover any thing from France that we had any right to, but only to
assist the rest of the Confederates in regaining what was lately theirs; and
pray what advantage is this to us? And let the War in the conclusion, be as
successful as can be wished, we shall only have the honor in assisting to
debilitate France by weakening our selves, and enriching the Confederates by
impoverishing and reducing poor England. But perhaps it may be alleged, that
what has been urged in reference to the retaking of such places as have been
unjustly taken from the Confederates by France, will be readily granted; but
what Acquists the English shall make in France it self, will be their own. As
to this I answer: By the late Project of Invading France, we may be satisfied
that there was no manner of appearance it would be so, if it had been
attempted, and really succeeded: For supposing they had landed at Bayonne,
marched into Provence and Dauphine, it was with a design to join the Duke of
Savoy's and the rest of the Confederate Forces, to make Reprisals for what the
French had acted in Savoy, and Piedmont, or in order to retake such places as
formerly belonged to that Prince, now in the Possession of the French. This is
so probable, nay, next to certain, that it is nonsense to think otherwise, no
possible Acquists on that side being answerable either to the Charge of taking
or keeping by the English: Neither can it be congruous to common Sense, that it
could be of any Interest to the Duke of Savoy to assist the others in
Subjugating any part of France to the English, whilst most of his own Country
was already subdued, and in the hands of the French. Again, granting that the
other design of Beseiging Dunkirk with the Transport Forces from England, had
answered common expectation, Dunkirk all the World knows was formerly the
Spaniards, the most important Garrison and Port that belonged to Flanders; and
can any one so much as fancy that the King of Spain would ever have been
contented it should be an Appendage to England, when it was alone of greater
consequence to that Monarch to recover, than half of what he had hitherto lost
in Flanders? Or do we think the English Army alone was in a capacity to
undertake the Seige of such a Garrison, and carry it; or if it were jointly
performed with the rest of the Confederate Army, that they would tamely let the
Prince of Orange have the sole honor of winning and wearing it too? This can
never enter into the Head of the meanest Dotard, and therefore the direct
contrary must necessarily be admitted.

The next Advantage, and that of no mean consequence neither, that the
Confederates have from our Revolution, besides that of making these Experiments
upon France at the vast expense of our Blood and Treasure, is, that if no
possible hopes remain of attaining their Ends upon their common Enemy, as they
phrase it, they have a fair opportunity of making their Peace, whether England
consent or not: This must be acknowledged a prodigious one, if duly considered;
for when the worst comes to the worst, the leaving England (which in reality
has been the most powerful as well as the most malicious Enemy) to the just
Resentments of France, will almost amount to an Expiation for all the envious
Designs they have all this while formed against her, and by a timely Desertion
of her, or in conjuction with France against her, will in some measure atone
for those Injuries they have done to her lawful Monarch, and indeed to
themselves, and all the Crowned Heads in the World, by so wicked a Precedent as
they have given: This is a plain Case, and must be owned a singular Advantage
on their side. All will agree it is no way feasible for England, resolving to
maintain the P. of O. in the possession of the Crown he has basely usurpt, ever
to come to any sort of an Accommodation with France, exclusive of them; and
that they, if necessitated, can and will, without him; it being impossible for
us to wage War against France and them to, when we with all the united Forces
of the Allies were not able to make the least impression against the former.

The Objection that may be made to this Advantage of the Confederates,
exclusive of England, is this, viz. That by the Articles of the Confederacy
it is stipulated that no one of them shall make a separate Peace.

To this it may be replied, That this Provision or Caution at first sight may
seem to be of some force, to keep such of them who are the weakest, and the
most contiguous, within the bounds of it, for fear of being outraged, and
treated as Enemies by the rest; but as for the more potent or remote, it can be
of little moment, especially after the sad Experience of their declining
Condition, and the sensible and irresistible Growth of the hitherto so much
envied Power of France. The utmost Fury of the Allies has been already spent,
and their utmost Efforts by Sea and Land, and all to their own loss, and the
Interest of their Enemy. That brave Army under the Command of the Duke of
Lorrain, a great part of which consisted of those veterane Troops that for
several years had signalised themselves against the Turks, were broken and
shattered in pieces the very first Campaign; by which means the Emperor has
been extremely weakened both in Hungary and Germany, and the Enemy left at
liberty to do what he pleases on the Rhine and the Mosell ever since; the
strongest part of Flanders lost; the Duke of Savoy upon the brink of Ruin; all
Savoy gone; Piedmont in a sinking Condition; the Commerce in all these Princes
Countries destroyed: So that what they took to be one of the surest Methods of
reducing France, has fallen most heavy upon themselves; nothing but Misery and an
universal Discontent, with an utter despair of ever succeeding in their
Enterprises against their Enemy multiplying among them; and England, which has
been their best Support, hitherto growing less able and willing to go on with
the War, and more disappointed perhaps than any of the rest. These
Considerations laid together, and seriously weighed, will more than evince my
Assertion, and confute the Objection, since what has been for the most part
practiced in the like Cases, may be now; That it has been no unusual thing for
some of a Confederacy (when altogether worsted, and ready to be overrun by
their Adversaries,) to make their best Advantage of a separate Peace, when they
could not bring down the haughty and stubborn Spirits of the rest to their
Sentiments and Resolutions; especially when convinced by woeful Experience,
that it would be their only Honor and Interest so to do, whereas at first
they were really trickt into it against both. That this may be the Case of some
of these united Princes, will be no hard task to demonstrate; as for instance:
What Honor was it for the Duke of Savoy to enter into the Confederacy against
his Uncle, the best and most potent Friend he had, whose annual Pension to him
for some years amounted to a greater Sum than the Revenues of his
Principality? What Honor to his Religion to entertain a hodgpodg of all
Opinions, contrary to the Principles of his own; to permit them to preach up
their filthy Cant where ever they go, and to gratify their Gothish and brutish
Zeal in the profaning all that is sacred, and looks like good, by their
irreligious and unchristian Behavior, and such Villainies as are not fit to be
named among Christians? What Honor was it for him to let out his own native
Country for a Cockpit to the rest of the Confederates, (and in particular to
the K of Spain, and the Dutch, for I must reckon the P of O. among them,) who
had violated all their former Leagues with two Crowned Heads, to try tricks
whether they could by that means divert the War from their own doors, to the
Devastation of his Territories, and Ruin of himself and poor Subjects, beyond
any Recompense all of them together can ever make him, when he had such
Advantages at the same time offered him by France, of increasing his own and
Subjects Wealth and Prosperity beyond any of his Ancestors? What Honor is it
for him to bring upon himself the just Hatred and Indignation of all his
neighboring Princes, for the perpetual Insults, Ravages, and Plunderings they
are exposed to in quartering Foreigners upon his Account? What Honor for that
miserable infatuated Prince to be complemented by the Emperor and the King of
Spain with the empty Title of Generalissimo, and yet be overruled in all his
Projects and Designs by their Generals, as is evident from their refusing to
attack Briancon and Queiras, where he might have put in strong Garrisons, and
from thence have summoned in the Country to bring in their Contributions, and
have ordered every thing to better Advantage, and with more Reputation than he
has done; and all this perhaps with as little loss as the taking of Guillestre
and Ambrun, which he has been forct at last to quit shamefully? What Honor was
it to him, that the Germans against his Consent, and Remonstrances to the
contrary, should commit such horrid Barbarities by their burning and
destroying, for which he and his half ruined Country must be accountable, to
the utter Destruction of it; or at least be forced to such an Accommodation
(unless the French King be superlatively generous) as will in all probability
leave only the empty Title of Dukes of Savoy to him and his Posterity? To
conclude, What Honor has it been to him, by the Importunities of his
perfidious and impotent Allies, to persist in his Stubbornness, and to refuse
so many good Overtures as have been made him, (since the loss of all Savoy, and
the perpetual Disappointments of competent Succors articled for in the very
Alliances between him, the Emperor, and Spain, etc. after his most pressing
instances made for them at their respective Courts, and as many empty Promises
from them,) and opportunities of healing himself again in due time, (the French
King having proffered him blanks to write his own Conditions,) and this since
he was, humanely speaking, past all hopes of regaining any thing by the
greatest Opposition he could make? Since then it is evident that this Prince has
engaged himself against his Honor and Interest, unless we will suppose him
incapable of the least degree of good Sense, and irrecoverably desperate, he
will not after so many fruitless Attempts, and the base Disappointments of all
that Assistance promised him from the Empire, Spain, and England, reject those
Offers which are now made him of an Accommodation by the Fr. King and his
Holiness. All that he can expect from the Confederacy is only a little
Subsistence-money, to act defensively, since the French Forces daily augment
upon him, and all imaginable Care is taken to strengthen the Garrisons on that
side by new Works, and to shut him out of Provence and Dauphine for the time to
come. And since the rest of the Confederates have been hitherto,
notwithstanding their utmost Endeavors to increase their Forces, inferior to
their Enemy, and he grows stronger, and they weaker, and out of condition
either to repair his Losses, or prevent their own; there is no other Method left
him, but either to comply, or fall dishonourably and unpitied. There is no
great difficulty to show this to be the State of that deluded Prince, since all
the World is convinced, that he had the best prospect of disembarassing his
Affairs this last Campaign that ever he could or can expect: The P. of O.
promised him to land an Army at Bayonne, thence to march into Provence and
Dauphine to join him; as did likewise the K. of Spain. England by that casual
Advantage at Sea was entirely Mistress in that Element all the year, (at least
for that purpose,) had a powerful Navy wholly at lessure ever since to
prosecute it, there being no probability of any Opposition, and 16000 Men, with
a vast Train of Artillery, and Munitions of both sorts, originally designed for
that Enterprise, which if it had been put in Execution, would in the opinion of
all Mankind have exercised the Fineness and Politics of France, more than any
thing that ever was, or can be attempted for the future. This, I say, was the
only nicking Opportunity for Savoy, while the French were visibly weak at Sea,
and altogether unprovided to make any resistance at Land on that side; but by
what Fate I cannot tell, all these Prospects utterly vanished, to the
astonishment of all Europe, without leaving the least Effect but want of
Policy, and the indelible Character of a panick Fear, downright Cowardice or
Desperation, and more than an Improbability of ever having the same opportunity
again; besides the sad Prognostic, that all is running down on the Confederates
Side, and Providence clearly on that of France. As to what may be pretended,
that the same Designs may be prosecuted the next Campaign, etc. it is easy to
urge that there is no manner of likelihood it can be, since it is well known that
France will be provided of as good, or a much better Fleet than she ever had,
by that time; and that since the World is now convinced that they can and will
fight, and dare attempt any thing; and that 44 of their Men of War were able to
make good their parts against 99 of their Enemies, and with the Addition but of
20 more in all probability had worsted them; that a Fleet of the French by 20
inferior to the others, for the future will be match enough for them: Nay, if
we may credit our foreign Advices, they will have by the next Spring a Fleet every
way equal to that of England and Holland, let them both build, and put out what
they can make; and then it is a clear Case that the Design of landing an Army to
join Savoy, or any where else on the French Coasts, will be impracticable. But
then again let us consider, Is there any greater likelihood that the
Confederates will be superior to the French by Land the ensuing Campaign than
this last? They had made, we all know, their utmost Efforts in order to it
before, and yet the Pr. of O. told the States at his parting, that the cause of
all the miscarriages of this last must be imputed to the Inferiority of their
Forces to those of France; and we may modestly suppose, that 30000 Men will
hardly recruit the Confederates Loss, by the Sword, Sickness, and Desertion;
and that their Augmentation will not be near half part so great as that of
their Enemy; so that they must be inferior yet in a double respect, both in
Men, and Conduct; and if so, of doing less than ever: For France has not lost a
quarter part so many as they, and it is reasonable enough to suppose they have
raised near as many since the Campaign was opened upon the Account of the
Descent from England, besides the standing regular Troops of Irish, etc. in
Normandy, and other Provinces, that never came into any Service; and his
Augmentation, besides Recruits, our Monthly Account tells us will amount to
above 40000 Men, (though I am inclined to think, by comparing the foreign
Accounts, they cannot amount to much less than 80000.) Besides, his Cavalry
will be prodigiously reinforced: We are told the Jews at Mets, Treves, and
Luxemburgh, have engaged to procure him 20 or 30000 Horses, which with the 2000
the Marquess d' Harcourt took from the Lunenburghers, those taken by de Lorge
in the Defeat of the Prince of Wirtenburgh, and which Bouffleurs drove away
from the Territories of Liege, Bois le Duc, etc, will be able to mount 40000
Men, without reckoning what France and all his new Conquests will afford him.
Add to these last Considerations the vast Wealth of France, as may appear by
the free Gift of several Provinces, the numerous Edicts for erecting new
Offices, (which we hear never want Purchasers,) Augmentations of Salaries, and
his Standing Revenues, besides the great Sums of Money, or Equivalents to
Money, brought in by way of Contribution, the multitudes of English and Dutch
Prizes, the Prodigious Wariness and Sagacity of that Prince in providing all
sorts of Ammunition and Provisions for the use of the Fleet and Armies at the
lowest Rates, and managing all to the best Advantage; here are such Funds laid
up for the carrying on all his Designs, that humanely speaking he cannot
readily miscarry in the Execution of them, and such a Prospect of Success as
all the Power and Malice of the Confederates can never defeat. In short, the
Inference I draw from the Premises is this, That in all probability Savoy must
break off from his hitherto unfortunate Alliance, and submit; that if he will
do it, it is his true and only Interest; that his Allies have most
ignominiously, and contrary to their Treaty exposed him to Ruin, by failing in
assisting him in those Enterprises which were most likely to serve him; by
overruling his wisest Resolutions and Methods in managing the Expedition into
Dauphine for his Advantage; that Confederates cannot obstruct an Accommodation
between him and France, neither can they propose to themselves or him to be in
a better condition to assist him, having lost their only Opportunity, and
being less able to stand upon their own Defense for the future, much less to
protect him.

To return: As to the Confederates that are more contiguous, it being a Point
of somewhat less Importance, though I first proposed it, yet shall take leave
to speak to it now. I said in reference to them, that they could not so easily
enter upon a Treaty of a separate Peace, without being liable to the Insults of
their neighboring Allies: This is true; but then we ought to consider what may
be done in such a Case, and that honestly and justly; if a Confederate Prince
finds himself exposed to the common Enemy, by the Negligence or Perfidiousness
of the rest, (Confederacies generally importing mutual Defense and Protection,)
in such a Case common Reason and Equity will dictate that he is at liberty to
make the best Provision he can for himself; and if upon reiterated Applications
and Entreaties he finds no Relief, his Interest will compel him to make the
best Terms he can with his Enemy. So that all that can be pretended from the
Articles of the Confederacy providing that no one of them shall make a separate
Peace, can be of no Obligation to any one of the Allies to expose himself to
certain and miserable Destruction against the Dictates of Reason and
Self-preservation, nor can any of the Confederates be supposed so devoid of all
sense of Justice to themselves. All this being, as I humbly conceive,
undeniable, we are in the next place to consider what is proper to be done in
such instances in order to prevent their being treated by their Fellows as
common Enemies, and then make a particular Application of it to those of them
who seem to be under such Circumstances as render it altogether necessary, and
their only Interest to act accordingly. In these Cases the most secure Method
is to join with their Enemy, or at least to endeavor to maintain themselves in
a Neutrality; by which means they will easily secure themselves, and perhaps reap
such Advantages by a timely Conjunction with the prevailing side, as may in a
great measure compensate their former Losses both from their new Allie, and
their old ones too, in the concluding a Peace: by the former they will be in a
condition to make Reprisals on their perfidious self-interested Confederates,
who compelled them, or wheedled them into the War to their great Detriment; or
at least be enabled with their new Allie to drive them to the necessity of
making a Peace, from which they may exceedingly profit themselves: By the
latter maintain themselves in present Security, and gain by both; which is far
more eligible than to be devoured by their Friends and Enemy too. This is all I
can imagine at present advisable in this point; and this seems to be the
present Case of some of the Allies, in particular the Bp. of Liege, the Elector
Palatine, the Administrator of Wirtenbergh, the Electors of Treves and Cologne,
and the K. of Spain himself. What Devastations have been in those parts, and
what Acquists the French have made, is too notorious to be recited here. How
meanly the Confederates have acquitted themselves in defending those Countries,
is so well known, particularly in relieving Mons and Namur, when besieged; in
preventing Excursions into the Territories of Liege, the Palatinate, the Duchy
of Wirtenbergh, Juliers, etc. is a Shame, and grand Reflection upon them to
recount. And what Motives should induce these respective Princes to go on with
the War is the greatest riddle in the World. We have not one single Instance of
the Unity of their Councils yet in making one generous Attempt on this side, in
attacking or relieving any place of Moment for these three years; so that
hitherto they have done nothing answerable to the Designs they have given out,
and common Expectation; and there are but small hopes, as has been hinted
already, that they will ever be more unanimous or capable. So that if these
last mentioned Allies should yet be inclinable to proceed with the War, it
seems to be against all appearance of Reason, and what Prudence and Foresight
cannot persuade them to submit to, Time and Necessity will compel them, to
their greater Dishonor as well as Disappointment.

Thus I have endeavored to prove my first Assertion, That the Revolution in
England was the Contrivance of the Confederacy in general, and not the P. of
O's separately from the rest of the Allies, or effected by his sole Interest,
and insisted upon those singular Advantages they proposed to themselves by it.
But hitherto, I confess they have not obtained any but the first; they have
indeed drained our Wealth, and occasioned our Blood to be spilt most profusely;
but as to their Acquists upon France, or regaining their former Losses, not a
tittle is to be bragged of, they having not been able hitherto to defend
themselves: All Savoy gone, Piedmont in danger, Mons and Namur, with most of
their Dependencies, in the Hands of the French, and the rest of Flanders in a
tottering Condition; the Palatinate, Territories of Liege, and the Duchy of
Wertenberg most miserably harassed and impoverished: In a word, the State of
the Confederacy so feeble in all parts, that although they had exerted their
utmost this last Campaign, and given out strange Reports of grand Attacks to be
made upon France, nay in the sensible part too, they have been able to do just
nothing. So that instead of carrying on a vigorous War against France, and
humbling her, they have stood merely upon the Defensive, which is only to
suffer and endure the Evils of War, Waging War implying assaulting, attacking,
or offending; but nothing of this hitherto, unless lately in Dauphine, which
has been sensibly retaliated in Germany, Liege, and the Palatinate, and without
all peradventure in Piedmont, unless prevented by a sudden Compliance.

But what shall we say to poor England? What Advantages will she get by
engaging her self into the Confederacy, and by the late Revolution? Why truly I
believe it would puzzle Men and Angels too to name one at present; but since we
are taught to call things by false names, I shall mention that presumed and
most celebrated one, The Happiness of having a Prince of the greatest
Reputation in the whole World for Justice, Religion, Valor, Conduct, and an
indefatigable Studiousness in promoting the Good of his natural-born Subjects.
This is an Advantage indeed, and no doubt worth the purchasing at the dearest
Rate. These are great Characters, I confess, and would be extremely charming,
if as true as easily said. If his Invading his Father's Throne was rather owing
to the Contrivance of the Confederacy, than the Pretenses he made in his
Declaration; then it is manifest to all Mankind, that he acted such a
Masterpiece of Injustice as can scarce be paralleled, and beyond all Apology:
To name some; he charged his Father and Mother with imposing a supposititious
Heir upon the three Kingdoms, which himself never made the least doubt or
scruple of, before he published his Declaration, and he had invaded the
Kingdom, upon whose Birth he congratulated the King and Queen, and caused him
to be prayed for by name in his own Chapel at the Hague, till a little before
his Expedition hither; and although in the aforesaid Declaration he promised
the Nation he would refer the Enquiry into the Birth of the Prince of Wales,
and all things relating to it, and to the Right of Succession; yet it is
notoriously known, the Parliament never so much as went about it, nor himself
ever moved it to them; neither could the reiterated Petitions and Desires of a
great many Persons of Quality ever procure any such Favor from them or him, to
the great Dissatisfaction of no inconsiderable part of this Kingdom. Besides,
let any one compare his Declaration with the Original Contract with him, or
Instrument of Government since, and I challenge all the World to produce such an
Instance of Injustice, and Violation of Promises, as this pretended Saint, and
Mirror of Justice has afforded us. And though three preceding Kings have been
blackened by a set of Villains and Profligates, that are a scandal to all the
rest of Mankind, as Neroes, Julians, and Imps of Hell, to set off their dull,
gloomy Hero; yet we may with truth defy them to produce such Instances of
Arbitrariness, and Violation of Property, since Henry the VIII. as his four
Years Tyranny have produced. It may be said, I own, he is a severe Punisher of
Thieves and Clippers; but then if we do but reflect what a necessity he has
reduced some thousands of People unto for want of Trade, and the ill Example he
has given himself, by invading three Crowns, and sending the Wealth out of the
Nation never to return again, and notwithstanding cried up by the
Theologo-Politicoes for a Saint, a Savior, a Deliverer, etc. he has
contributed exceedingly toward the taking off the edge of all religious
Restraint, and the searing Men's Consciences, and confirming them in Wickedness;
so that nothing but the Terror of civil Punishment remains to put a stop to all
manner of Injustice: And since it is undoubted that by the severe Infliction of
Punishment in such Cases he chiefly aims at his own Interest, as Usurpers and
Tyrants seldom do otherwise, I am afraid, notwithstanding such pretended
Justice, he will hardly avoid the imputation of being guilty of their Blood, as
well as in a great measure accessory to their Crime. And I believe it will not
be forgotten in haste, how one poor Fellow laid his Death to his Charge at the
very Gallows, as being the sad occasion of it; and prayed for his true Master,
intimating, that if he had not been driven away, in all probability he had
never come to that dismal end. Again, let us call to mind the many Sham Plots
that have been forged by his Mirmidons, to keep up the Rankour and Malice of
the People against their King and his Friends, the illegal sining of Persons
beyond their known Abilities, contrary to the Instrument of Government be
subscribed as the Condition of his having the Crown, for mere Trifles, as
drinking K. James's Health, or praying for him; in murdering that worthy
Gentleman and excellent Christian, Mr. Ashton, the poor Chairman, and Mr.
Cross; in suborning and protecting from Justice those bloody Rascals,
Blackhead, Young, and Fuller, Fellows that were elected out of all the Gaols in
Town by one Pearson, and at his Expense no doubt discharged of their Debts,
etc. and afterward allowed Salaries on purpose to swear all that he hates or
fears out of their Lives, when he thinks it expedient; the frequent illegal
Imprisonments of Persons of the greatest Quality, as well as others, and by all
that does appear to the contrary, himself alone being the Evidence, Accuser,
and Judge; his shamefully detaining the Soldiers and Seamens Pay, by
misapplying it, contrary to the very Acts of Parliament that granted it; his
vast Debts to the Transport Ships ever since the beginning of the Revolution;
the frequent Embargoes; the refusal of Convoys to secure the public Trade of
the Nation, notwithstanding the Custom and vast Taxes granted upon that, as
well as any other Account; the ordering the public Moneys to contrary uses in
general than originally designed, against the frequent Promises in his Speeches
to both Houses of Parliament: These are such notorious Violations of Justice,
that we may with as much Truth give him the Reputation of the handsomest Man in
the World, as the Character of just.

Then again for his Religion: According to the Rules of Method I should have
mentioned it first; but it is no great matter whether it be considered first or
last, or indeed at all. What mortal Wight can tell what Religion he is of; or
rather, Is it not a contradiction to say he has any? It Is impossible he should
be of the Communion of the true Church of England, which he found established
by Law, because he persecutes those with the utmost Violence he can, whose
Defense he made one of the most specious Pretenses in his Declaration. Decl.
Parag. 15. and so readily consented to the rooting out Episcopacy in Scotland,
settled by several Acts of Convocation and Parliament; and though he with his
usual Arts of Dissimulation seemed to be very squeamish, when he came to that
Clause of the Scotch Coronation Oath, We shall be careful to root out
Heretics, by declaring he did not mean by those Words that he was under any
Obligation to become a Persecuter, yet never made any scruple to set on foot
and encourage one of the most violent Persecutions we ever read of against the
Episcopal Clergy there. Neither can we indeed with any certainty determine to
what side he is really most inclined, whether the Presbyterian or Episcoparian,
he constantly varying his Favors to either, according to the Emergencies of
his present Interests in Scotland itself. Sometimes he would seem to have good
Inclinations toward the Episcopal Party, when he has any just reason either to
fear them or caress them; for we are all sensible enough that the main Body of
the Nobility and Gentry, and the better sort even of the Commonalty of that
Kingdom, are most addicted to them, and though in the hurry and Confusion of
Affairs there in the beginning of the Revolution, to gain the Presbyterians,
and other Sectaries, he under hand encouraged them to fall upon the Bishops and
regular Clergy in a tumultuous manner, which was the most blessed juncture they
could wish to vent their innate Malice, and over boiling Zeal, against a Party
they hated, if possibly, more than the Devil himself, that he might have an
opportunity to make good his Engagements to those their Agitators, who had been
for some years plotting and juggling with him in Holland, to bring about this
Great Deliverance; yet finding at length the impossibility of maintaining his
Interest there upon that foot, he has several times endeavored by his Letters,
etc. to procure an Accommodation between them, by settling some of the
Episcopal Clergy in Livings, etc. resolving, no doubt, as soon as he can
conveniently, to determine himself for that Party which he can most safely rely
upon. Neither has his Management here in England been much different; he found
the greatest part of the Nation addicted to the Principles of the Church of
England, as established by Law, and some of their Principles and Doctrines
opposite in the highest degree to his Designs; therefore like a true
Machiavelist, he found it absolutely necessary to bring those Principles into
Disreputation, and extirpate them, if possible, right or wrong; and to this
purpuse set up the noted Latitudinarian Gang, by the easy Allurement of his
Favor, and the assurance of the best Preferments, to decoy the rest of their
Brethren into a ready Compliance with him, who immediately in their Preachings
and Writings confessed and owned their former Errors to the People, and in a
short time rendered their so much celebrated Passive Obedience and Nonresistence
the most ridiculous Doctrine and dangerous Error in the World, gave us new
Comments on Romans 13. telling us that higher Powers must be obeyed, without any
regard to lawful or unlawful; that Allegiance and Submission were all one;
that in some Cases it is lawful to violate the Commandments of God; that
Religion and the public Good knew no Relations; that it is lawful to swear
with Reservation, or to take public Oaths in private senses; that an Oath to
the present Government did not interfere with the former to K. James, etc. Nay,
any Pretenses in the beginning were allowed and admitted of, provided they
could but hook them into the interest of the Government, and bring them off in
some measure from their former Principles; so firmly had it been resolved by
this Gentleman, and his Cabinet, to ruin the old Church of England, and let
loose her Discipline, and by all imaginable Arts and Devices to render her
odious and contemptible. Neither has this wicked and atheistical Project wanted
its Success; in a moment of time her Face was so altered, and scarce to be
known again, her Priesthood perjured and turned schismatical, and like
Renegades, their new Zeal and Malice boiled up to that degree, that the Liturgy
must be altered, her ancient Creeds expunged, her Ceremonies lest at liberty,
or laid aside, and a Comprehension established for bringing all their Reverend
Brethren, the Gifted Cobblers, Tirkers, Tailors, etc. with the Foreign Reformed
Schismatics into Church-Preferments; all the Fences and Hedges must be pulled
down in order to unite these Brethren in Iniquity against the common Enemy,
though indeed the only design was to extirpate and run down those Principles,
which whenever it pleases God Almighty to pull off the Scales of the Eyes of
the honest and well meaning though deluded People of this Nation would set his
Worship a packing, notwithstanding that Security which he has promised himself
from those horrid Perjuries he has been the occasion of, and which themselves
in all their common Discourses own to have so little Obligation, and shamefully
call Garrison Oaths. Thus having, as far as possible he could, dissolved the
True Old Church of England, and erected a new One upon a mere civil Basis, such
as it is, of Rebellion, Perjury and Usurpation, and rendered it impossible to
retrieve the Discipline of the Church, and her Sacred Offices during his
Government here; the next thing he endeavors is to profit himself of all
Parties in Religion (notwithstanding his popular Pretense of uniting them all
against the common Enemy, viz. Popery,) to this purpose he studies privately to
dash them one against the other, by reviving old Stories under the former
Reigns, and to keep up some necessary Feuds amongst them, for fear of a good
Understanding, and Uunion, perhaps in time to throw him out of the Saddle, when
once they perceive their true Interest; and therefore never omits to caress
them, as his only Friends he can rely upon when he has a prospect of making a
particular Advantage upon them, as in the management of the Election of Mayors,
Sheriffs, and Aldermen in the City of London, (and in the Elections of
Burgesses for Parliament all over the Nation) is too notorious to be insisted
upon, in order to oblige them to lend or grant Money, etc. When one Party
begins to grow cold and indifferent, by Disappointments, etc. then he underhand
applies himself to another, and by stirring up Animosities and Quarrels among
them, casts Mists before their Eyes, that being intent upon their private
Revenge, and little Plots and Contrivances one against another, they may take
the less cognizance of the more public Concerns, and be the more eager and
emulous of serving him, in hopes of drawing him in to favor and assist their
Party. Thus he plays Tricks, and juggles with Religion, and that is the most
Orthodox which conduces most to the establishing himself in the Government, and
is always ready to vary his Religion with his Fortune, let it be what it will;
and I dare engage Arch John, and the rest of the John's shall readily concur
with him at any time to set up what Religion he pleases, provided it will suit
their Turn, as well as his. But I shall have occasion to speak more to this
Point afterward, and therefore shall proceed to enquire, whether Valor ought
to be admitted as an Ingredient of his Reputation.

And as to this Quality, which I must grant never wants its Charms to get into
the Affection of the Noblest as well as Popular and Meanest Minds; I would fain
know what Right he can put in for it? or what gallant Proofs he has given of
Personal Bravery, especially since his being amongst us? The Victory at the
Boyne indeed has made a great Noise among his deluded bigoted Mob: But its
well known he never ran the least risk in it, or passed the River (which was
the greatest danger) till most of the Army were over, nor ever was within reach
of, much less gently kissed with a Cannon-Ball, or received the least hurt
there, whatever his Parasitical Mufti, and the pretended Thanksgiving Prayer
roared out among the Mob by his Atheistical Priests, a clear Evidence of his
and their Religion to dare to affront Heaven so profanely, merely to delude the
poor Innocent Sheep, as if they believed there was no God to take Vengeance of
such open Blasphemies, as well as of the rest of their Impieties. Just such a
silly Story we had of his Deliverance last Year, when he lay encam'd near
Beaumont, of a Bullet that fell in the very place where he stood under an Oak
the very instant after he went from it, though I have been informed it was
several Hours after, which was cried up too for a Signal Deliverance. And as to
the Engagement at Steinkirk, though all the Dutch Courants are full of Encomiums
of his Bravery in leading up of Battalion after Battalion, and of
Thanksgivings, and many Godly Ejaculations for his wonderful Deliverance, we
never for all that could be assured he was in the Action at all, or in the
least Danger; and some who had reason enough to know, positively assert he was
not. So that these are all nonsensical silly Stories, made on purpose to keep
up the Hearts of the King-making Rabble, and to instill into their credulous
Minds, that easily digest every Report that makes for their Side, without
considering the Truth or Probability of what they hear, and to preserve the
Reputation of their Idol's being the Darling of Heaven; and two or three such
whisking Romances is all the return for four Millions per Annum, and all we
must look for.

As little as we have to alledg for his Personal Valor, and Bravery, yet I am
sure much less can be produced for his pretended Masterpeice Conduct, which we
are all told strikes such Terror on all occasions into the French King. Pray
what Instances have we of it? As to the Business at the Boyne, the grand
Divertisement for the Bartholomew Mob, and not worthy to be taken notice of any
way else, all sensible People are convinced that advantage was got by mere
Treachery, by the Germans laying down their Arms, and absolutely refusing to
fight, consequently betraying their Posts, and that Arch-Traytor Hamilton his,
the Treachery of both giving such reason of Distrust to the poor Irish, that
they turning Tail, the General Officers with much ado persuaded the King to
comsent to a Retreat, and leave the Field to his usurping Son-in-law, though
with such Order, that the great Hero, with his crew of Rebels, could not do any
considerable Damage upon them, or have the Honor of a pursuit to any effect;
and besides, as his own Officers are not afraid to own, after Schomberg's
death, a sensible want of Conduct attended all his Enterprises all the
remaining Campaign. Was ever any thing more weakly undertaken than the Siege of
Limerick, more foolishly and inexpertly attackt? Or did ever any Army under
such an incomparable General come off so basely? What warlike Policy to
undertake such a piece of Work without heavy Canon and Ammunition, etc. and to
commit them to the care of so slender a Guard? To lose about 8000 Men to no
purpose, and at last through a pannick fear to run away incognito from his
Army, and steal over in a Meal-boat? He who never saw Siege in his Life might
have managed it in all points to better purpose; and yet, to our mortal Grief,
all this owing to the sage Management and Bravery of our Hogan Mogan William.
But the next Campaign must make Amends for former oversights: The P. of O. was
to be early at the Hague, to consult in all haste of the most effectual means
to humble the Pride of France, and while a parcel of grave, dull Germans and
Dutch were sucking their Whiskers, and stuffing their Paunches, the grand
Hector of France had the confidence to sit down before Mons. The noise of this
bold Attempt reaching the Ears of the Butterboxes, and the Prosound thinking
Noddle of the Britannick Hero, away he goes to Hall, and before he could
bethink himself what to do, or get out of his Amuzement, the Town was
surrendered; which so confounded his Intellectuals, and stunned his considering
Pate, that he never could come to any Resolution what to do the whole Campaign
after; but marched and counter marched from place to Place, advancing,
retiring, and running away, till he had spent all his Money and Provisions, and
cunningly took his leave of the Army as soon as he perceived Luxemburgh had
pounded 'em up near Leuse, and was ready to give them a Parting Blow, noised it
about immediately after, that this Miscarriage was owing to the Misconduct of
the Generals in his absence, the cowardly French taking the Advantage of it,
and so returned to his Parliament, and told them, That truly the French King
was very powerful. And yet we may remember that in the beginning of that
Summer it was rumored about that Mons was to be retaken, Dinant or Philipville
besiged, the French Army to be beaten, the Confederates having got together a
much more powerful Army than the Enemy, who was reported all along that
Campaign to be hard put to it for want of Money, Forage, Provisions, and the
Lord knows what; but then, as Mischief would have it, they always had the luck
to be so strongly intrencht, (which our unthinking Slaves were made to believe
was out of fear to be attackt by his Britannick Majesty, asy the call him, and
his Bear-skins,) that the Confederates could not come at them; as if that could
be a Disgrace to the French, which was ever the Glory of the greatest Generals,
to encamp themselves so as not to be compelled to fight without a great
Advantage, especially when inferior in Forces, and merely defensive, which is
well known was Luxemburgh's Case all along the two last Summer Campaigns; and
yet in the former of these, though much inferior in number, he made a shift to
fall upon their Rear, and put them to the rout, killing a considerable number,
and taking diverse Prisoners, and to conclude the Campaign gloriously; and this
last, by a sudden March to take Possession of the very Ground, where there was
plenty of Forage that was untoucht, which our brave Generalissimo designed for
his Army, who wanted it exceedingly, entrencht himself; and in regard it could
not be well avoided but our Protestant Knight Errant must either pass that way,
or march round about, (which would have proved a horrid Disgrace to him,) by
this means forced him to attack him with his own Men, his Allies positively
refusing to second him, and looking on the whole time; himself in the mean time
being sensible of the great danger, and very prudently keeping out of harms
way: So that this attacking of the Enemy was merely the Effect of an absolute
necessity of his doing something, though to no purpose, and the Conduct and
Foresight of the Crook-backt General, as this Thirsites called him, and his own
Folly besides in making an unaccountable (and ought to be an unpardonable)
Experiment too, in sacrificing the Lives of so many thousands of English,
Scotch, and Danes, to make an empty flash, and to keep up the undue Opinion of
his Valor among the abused Mob; for in one word all the Politics he is guilty
of lies in caressing them; and so little sense he has, that so long as he can
keep them on his side, he concludes all is safe and well. Here is conduct with
a Vengeance, and puts me in mind of a short passage in an excellent Author, who
comparing Alexander the Great and Caesar together, writes thus: The Prudence of
a General has two parts; the first respects the Conservation of his own Forces,
and the other the Destruction of his Enemies. Alexander was defective in the
former, because he frequently led his Army into places where they sometimes
dyed of Hunger, or Thirst, or by Stones, (as in some narrow Passages, with
Mountains on each side,) where he was forced to engage his Enemies at all
Disadvantages of Ground, etc. and consequently brought his Men oftentimes
merely to be butchered: Wherefore that Speech of the grand Scipio will ever be
applauded, That he had rather save one Citizen, than slay a thousand of his
Enemies. Again, Alexander was wanting in the second; for whereas two things are
necessary to the Destruction of an Enemy, Force and Conduct, he ordinarily
depended upon, and succeeded by the former; which cannot be said of Caesar; for
as much as he took as much care of his Men, as a Father of his Family, nor ever
went upon any Enterprise without great Stores of Provisions and all
Necessaries; if he had not Corn enough he made it up with Flesh, and having an
advantage over his Enemy, chose rather to defeat him by Policy than the Sword:
and in all occasions endeavored to add Industry to his Force. This is but one
part of the Comparison of these two Great Men, and since our Boobies will be
thought to have made a wise Choice of their King, as they call him, and he must
be a great Champion, let him be dressed up with all the Imperfections of
Alexander, with whom they are pleased so often to compare him; for I am sure
nothing really honorable and commendable in that Great Man can ever suit their
puny Hector: and then for a Conclusion, let them but be so just withal, as to
apply the Character of Caesar to his Adversary, and judge what they may expect
for the future from either.

Another famous Instance of his Military Policy is the tender Care he takes in
making Provision for, and paying his Soldiers by Sea and Land. It Is not unknown
to us all what numbers of Seamen died of strange and unaccountable Diseases the
first Summer after this Revolution, through his notable Frugality in furnishing
the Navy for the most part with old and decayed Stores, and that abominable Lie
that was spread abroad in excuse of it, that their Meat and Salt were poisoned
with Nutgalls; whereas all Physicians will grant, if a quantity of them was
really mixed with them they could not produce such Effects, but would rather
have proved an excellent Medicine to have prevented, or cured the Bloody or any
other Fluxes; which were very frequent among them, being a great Astringent.
But not to insist upon this senseless Story, these old Stores however decayed
were thought a good expedient to save Money to hire Foreigners and many other
necessary uses. What Care did he take to send over Provisions for the Army in
Ireland, whereof at least ten Thousand perished through want of all manner of
Necessaries, and were ready to leap at what our very Dogs would refuse, while
the Dutch and other Foreigners, wanted nothing, but were fat, and well liking?
And because this Prince must be called and owned as Generalissimo of the
Confederate Forces in Flanders, and all Advantages against the Enemy there
ascribed to his Conduct, so it is not unreasonable to lay all the Miscarriages
there to his Charge, as Evidences of his sinister Conduct. Whence proceeded
that great scarcity nay absolute want of all sorts of Provisions, even of Tents
and Straw, in the beginning of the Campaign, which occasioned a great deal of
Sickness, and the Death of many Men and Horses, but from his Negligence, or
want of Money to provide them, which is as inexcusable as the other; since that
General who will go upon any Enterprise without all things necessary, has been
ever condemned as rash, and void of all Military Prudence? What a Reflection is
it upon the Politics of this Mighty Warrior to be unprovided in the beginning
of that Annus Mirabilis, which raised the expectations of all Christendom, and
was to decide the Fate of all Europe, when he had engaged himself to be early
in the Field, and seemed resolute to oppose the French in all they could
pretend to; and yet tamely to stand staring at the Head of 100000 Men, without
making the least Attempt to raise the Seige of Namur, the most important Town
in all Flanders, or to give the least Diversion; and to serve only for an
Evidence of one of the bravest Actions that ever was performed by any Prince,
and that indelible Dishonor and Loss to him and his Allies, which they in all
likelihood can never retrieve. Now, I say, the P. of O. committing so great an
Oversight in not making timely and competent Provisions for his Army in such a
difficult time of the Year, his Army must be more than ordinarily fatigued,
dispirited, and unfit for Action, and never ready on the sudden to act
offensively or defensively; and one thing which argues this was not a single
Error, but a perpetual Miscarriage on the Confederates side all this War, is,
That whereas the Foreign Prints have constantly given us an Account of the
early and indefatigable Preparations of the French all this War, they seldom
afford us the like Instances in the Confederates: let the true Reason lie where
it will, its an Argument of a double Weakness, and that their Success, whenever
they have any, is an effect of Chance, and not of their Politics and
Diligence. For want of timely and suitable Preparations for an Enterprise, its
odds but it must miscarry, especially when it cannot be relieved by Prudence or
Stratagem; and how sagacious he is at a dead Lift let the World bear him
witness, unless it be in throwing his Miscarriages upon others, without any
regard to Truth and Honor. We have not found yet that he has been early enough
out either by Sea or Land, but only by a mere Accident at Sea this last Year,
the crossness of the Winds favoring, which is an Advantage he cannot always
promise himself; and had it not been for that, in all Humane Probability, he
would have for ever lost all opportunity of playing the Fool again.

But this is not the only Defect remarkable in the P. of O. as to Military
Prudence, (or Providence,) but his Pay has been all along bad. Money is called
the Nerves, and the Belly of War; the Nerves because it gives Motion to, and
maintains Armies in their Motion; (hence Thucidides observes, that few of the
Grecians in respect of the extent of their Territories went to the Wars against
Troy, and could never keep themselves long together, through want of Money; and
that the People of the Morea made short Campaigns upon that account. It Is
generally for Money and Subsistence that Men list themselves into the Wars, and
when once that fails, they sensibly grow weary and dead hearted;) and it is
properly called the Belly of War, because like as the Belly distributes
Nourishment to all parts of the Animal, so does Money to an Army. How far this
P. has discharged himself in this Point, no Body is ignorant from the highest
to the lowest amongst us. The present Arrears to the Army in Ireland is an
Instance of Injustice without Parallel. Men that had ventured their Lives, and
endured all the Hardships possible for Humane Nature to sustain, in hopes at
least of good Pay, if not sharing the Country for their Service, having never
received any other than a little Subsistence Money, and forced thereby to
commit all the Villainies in the World, by Plundering and Murdering, to the
Destruction of near a third part of the People, and three parts in four of the
natural Riches and Product of the Country; and at last told by their Officers
they must never expect their Arrears, but exact Pay for the time to come, and
then immediately to be transported to Flanders to be made Forlorns, is such a
Monument of Inhumanity as we can scarce find in History, though at the same
time a just Reward from God for their Rebellion against their Lawful King, who
ever tendered them as his Children, there being not one part of four alive of
all those Villains who had so basely deserted him, and betrayed him. This
Matter of Fact about the Arrears, if occasion should require, will be readily
acknowledged by some hundreds of Officers, particularly by Colonel Bierly,
whose Case being singular, I shall beg leave to insert it, which in short is
this; The Colonel was a Gentleman of a plentiful Fortune, and formerly very
zealous for the P. of O's Interest, and Colonel of a Regiment of Horse from
first to last, and has expended between 5 and 6000 l. of his Estate in his
Service, and there being an Arrear of above 4000 l. due to him; for several
Months he solicited diligently for it, but without Success: in conclusion, he
told the Lords of the Treasury that his private Affairs obliged him to go into
the Country to settle them, having been so long absent, therefore desired that
he might know whether he might expect an Order for his Arrears or not, and he
would stay a Week longer to adjust that Business. The Lords Commissioners told
him that he might go into the Country when he pleased, for he was to expect
nothing from them, for they had no Orders to pay any Arrears: So he is gone into
the Country, where he spares no occasions to set forth the Injustice and
Ingratitude of him, who was never guilty of doing a just or honorable Action
in his whole Life. What a Scandal and burning Shame is it, that the poor Seamen
(whereof a great many have two or three Years Arrears due to them, and all the
rest proportionably, having been exposed to all Dangers, kept out at Sea, and
on Shipboard, longer than ever was known, and been instrumental of that Grand
Deliverance he had only to brag of in his Speech) should be defrauded of their
Pay; nay, not having so much as Subsistence Money; and yet tied up to the
Service by severe and repeated Proclamations, without and against all former
Precedents, obliged to be at Sea most part of this Winter, and utterly
forbidden their ancient Privilege of making a short Voyage or two to get Bread
for their poor Wives and Families, who having Bankrupt their former Credit with
Shopkeepers, Bakers, etc. are forced to beg and starve! This is such a Hardship
as they and their Forefathers never knew before, and such a Yoke as none but a
Dutch Bore could ever have fixed upon English Necks. The Cowardly, and justly
to be abominated Dutch by all of our Nation, after the Defeat at Sea two Years
ago, were taken into our Hospitals before any of our Countrymen were put in,
tenderly provided for, and had a Gratuity given by the Princess of Orange for
their Encouragement, were entertained, and got Money from all sorts of People;
and besides all this, This Gracious Governess promised to refit all their
disabled Ships at the public Charge, to have Pensions for the Widows of the
Men that were lost in the Fight, etc. as may be seen in the London Gazette of
July 21. 90, in the Article from the Hague, July 25. On the 22d Mr. Harbord
arrived here from England, and the same Evening had Audience of the States
General, -- to whom he represented, that he was commanded by the Queen to let
them know how much her Majesty was concerned at the Misfortune that had
befallen their Squadron, in the late Engagement, and that their not being
seconded as they ought to have been, which Matter her Majesty had directed to
be examined into, in order to recompense those that had done their Duty, and to
punish such as should be found to have deserved it. That her Majesty had given
Orders for the refitting the Dutch Ships that were disabled, at her own Charge,
and had commanded that all possible care should be taken of the sick and
wounded Seamen, and that Rewards should be given to the Widows of those that
were killed, behaving themselves bravely in the Fight, to encourage those that
do well for the future. Here is a strange Partiality and Tenderness for the
Dutch, Rewards for their Widows, Encouragement promised to those of them that
shall do well for the future, besides particular Care of their sick and wounded
in our Hospitals; while our own Men were permitted to perish for want of
necessary looking after, and under the unskilful Hands of Country Chyrurgions
little better than the Country Farriers. What Instances of such Grace and
Compassion to the poor Widows and Orphans of the English, which are numberless
in Wapping, Chatham, and many other of our Ports, who never as yet could get
the just Arrears due to their Deceased Husbands; and yet which is most
barbarous and unjust, the Dutch must have Rewards and Encouragements out of our
Pay, whilst the English are neglected and permitted to starve. This is a
Specimen of the Affection our New Governors have for the English Nation, and a
clear Forerunner of our Slavery, if God Almighty does not timely prevent it,
which none but a degenerous and infatuated People to their own Destruction
would ever suffer themselves to groan under? But this is not all, the ancient
Encouragement of Smart-Money to the wounded is most fraudulently detained, the
maimed exposed to mere Beggary, for want of their usual Pensions paid to them
by the respective Counties they belong to, and are become a public Nuisance in
our Cities and great Towns. What is become of the wounded and maimed in Ireland
and Flanders, who, no doubt, were very numerous? God only knows; the most
reasonable Conjecture is, they are either suffered to perish abroad, by being
refused Passage Home, or knocked on the Head to save their Pay, and that they
might not come Home and tell Tales of their hard Usage, to the discouraging
their Fellow Slaves from entering upon the Service. The Story of 50 wounded
English being burnt in a Barn by the Dutch, at the Command of the P. of O. in
Ireland, upon the absolute refusal of an English Officer, who had some remains
of Compassion and natural Affection for his own Country men, is real matter of
Fact, and ought not to be forgotten; which was done, as is said, merely to
avoid the Trouble and Charge of curing them. These are some of the Hardships
the Soldiery groan under, and a Specimen of the Brutish Temper as well as
Vnpolitickness of our Usurper; and sooner or later he must expect to reap the
just Fruits of his Cruelty and Folly both. What Glorious Achievements can he
ever pretend to do with Soldiers, who must in due time (if there be so much
Mercy reserved in Heaven, have their Eyes opened, see their Error) and resent
such ill Usage and Partiality? However our dull and unthinking Bigots may
flatter themselves with great expectations of what he has most sillily given
out in his Speech to both Houses, of his Resolution to make a Descent, and do
Miracles in France; the Soldiery are of the contrary Opinion, and through mere
Despair of ever getting their Pay, or effecting any thing upon their Enemy,
have deserted considerably, and really entertain low and mean Thoughts of his
Conduct, see through the Cheat; and are only hindered by the strictness of his
Discipline from running unanimously to their Old and Best Master. They own, as
many as get over, that they are hated in Flanders, abused at all rates by the
Dutch, exposed upon all accounts as Forlorns: They can tell you how diverse of
their Officers were cashiered, and Soldiers hanged immediately after the Battle
at Steinkirk, for avoiding being knocked on the Head by the French, when a
numerous Army stood looking on, and not one single Troop or Company permitted
(though some of the English desired it, and were ready to hazard their Lives to
rescue their poor Contrymen) to go in to their assistance. By several
Letters from Officers in Flanders in the English Army, we have been informed,
how the poor wounded Men, through the intolerable Pains they endured, cursed and
damned to the Pit of Hell, with their last Breaths, him who brought them to
that horrid Butchery. They can tell you likewise what great Numbers deserted
his Service immediately after the Fight, choosing rather to run the hazard of
being hanged, and loosing all their Pay and Arrears than to continue in his
Service. They can tell you how the English are universally hated by the
Country People there, that they I scarce let them have Necessaries for their
Money, and that the Flanderkins have more respect for the Enemy than for their
pretended Friends the Allies, and much better usage for them. They can tell you
that their Wounded and Prisoners, that fell into the Hands of the French, were
more kindly treated by them than among their Friends; and how far such Usage
may work upon the Minds of a People naturally Generous, though at present
bereaved of their Senses, Time may demonstrate. They can tell you how the P. of
O. is undervalued and nosed by the Confederates in general, distrusted by the
Dutch, despised by the Inhabitants in all the Cities and Towns in Flanders, and
hated by all, and for want of those Qualifications we are made to admire, and
so foolishly and superabundantly have hitherto magnified in him. What wonder
then is it that our English Seamen and Soldiers mutiny, run away, etc. they can
neither get their Pay, nor good Words but at a dead lift; if they modestly
demand their own, though incited to it by the keenest Necessity, they are
immediately hanged or shot to Death without the least Remorse or Pity! Had we
ever such unjust Acts of Parliament made in any Kings Reigns, for enslaving and
punishing of Seamen or Landmen, as since this Revolution; so many brave Men
hanged or shot to Death for Trisles; such Kidnapping our Landmen, under
pretense for Sea Service, and sent the Lord knows whither? Nay, I am credibly
informed, it has been no unusual thing to press Landmen, and sell them for 3 l.
a Head to the Dutch, or into other Foreign Service. What Apology can be made
for the wicked abuses of the Mariners, a parcel of brave young Fellows, who
were kept on Board till they were almost all dead of the Smallpox and other
Distempers, the remainder cheated of and denied their Pay, and then forced in a
sickly and most pitious Condition to beg from door to door, as London and other
Places can sufficiently testify? To recount all the Miseries of our distressed
Countrymen, who are actually engaged under this Government, would be an
endless Task; all I shall add under this Head, is, that this ill Usage looks
more like the effect of Malice, and a perfect Hatred, and Distrust, than of any
necessity upon our Governous; but if it be, our Condition is deplorable and
remediless, by all the Supplies we are able to give, though never so willingly,
and without our most just and present Resentments, a certain Forerunner of
inevitable Ruin; but if we have but one grain of Sense, or Reflection left,
and be not benumbed all over, an infallible Indication of the Stupidity of the
Generalissimo of the besotted and dull Confederates; and what the effects of
such Politics may be, with relation to himself, I leave to the Judgments of
all ingenuous Men to conjecture.

Thus we find his Politics are by no means adequate to his Designs, or
proportionable to those great Undertakings, his Reputation, and the necessity
of his Affairs, as well as of these three Kingdoms unhappily under his
Management, do absolutely require: and in reference to this last particular, I
shall now enquire, whether an indefatigable and sincere studiousness to promote
the public Good of these Nations, ought to be admitted as a just Ingredient of
his Character or Reputation: I need not much enlarge upon this Point, the
direct contrary being easily deducible from what has been said all along, only
for the assistance of our Memories shall recapitulate. Our Constitution both of
Church and State are renvers'd, and quite disjointed; our Liberties and
Properties most unjustly invaded, and more Instances of Arbitrary Power daily
committed than in several of the former Reigns. Trade in general decreasing,
basely and designedly betrayed, and rendered almost impracticable. A great part
of our current Coin either transported in Specie, or melted into Ingots, and
recoined into Dutch Scellings in Holland, and irrecoverably lost, to our vast
impoverishment, and the enriching our sworn Enemies. A Million at least per
Annum, by the confession of Favorites of the Government, lost ever since this
War in Shipping and Merchandise, besides the Produce of it in Trade at Home, to
the undoing of Multitudes of Families in a short time; and this loss like to
continue as long as we have any thing to lose, or the War lasts. Ireland a
third part depopulated, and more than half of the intrinsic Riches, or Product
of that Kingdom, embezzel'd and wasted; and a third part of our Seamen dead or
deserted. The Flower of our fighting English destroyed to no purpose. What
excuse can be made for the detaining our Turkey Fleet above twelve Months, nay
after our never to be forgotten Victory at Sea, when we could have well spared
half our Fleet for Convoys? the remainder with the Dutch being more than
sufficient Guards to the Descent (a Design so senselessly managed, and
shamefully mentioned at this time of day, as the only thing to buoy us up to
sponge 5 or 6 Millions more out of our Purses) and yet by their idleing in our
Ports and Harbors, and doing nothing but lousing themselves, have suffered
more Ships to be lost since than in any one Year since the War. I desy all
Mankind to satisfy us in this Affair of so near consequence to the very Being
almost of the English Nation: And if the Descent be urged as a proper excuse,
What has been the occasion of its miscarriage, to the astonishment of all
Europe? It must either be occasioned through its Impracticableness, or for Want
of Necessaries to such an Expedition; but neither of these can apologize for
such an unpardonable Frustration, being a certain sign of the Incapacity of the
Authors and Contrivers of it, neither foreseeing the Difficulties nor Charges
necessarily attending such an Enterprise; and thence we may conclude the great
Infelicity, and Disadvantages these miserable Nations lie under, to be engaged
in a War that our Governors have no skill to manage: and then what can we
expect but to be perpetually worsted, and to come off with infinite Loss and
Disreputation, and in the end be forced to submit. So that unless our
Parliament, by their Omnipotence, can supply them with more Brains and better
Conduct, and instill into their Sculls more Wit to improve a Victory, when they
can get it, it will be equal to us whether we beat or be beaten, and then how
deplorable will our Condition be?

The last Blessing of this Revolution that I shall mention these unfortunate
Nations enjoy under the P. of O. (which is a plain Inference from what has been
hitherto insisted on) is this, That they shall not, or cannot enjoy their
Idolany longer than the Confederacy holds tight with us, or we with them; this
is so necessary a deduction that it cannot be evaded, because he is their
Creature, set up merely for their common Interest, and his downfall may become
an Advantage to them in time, as well as his Prosperity and Grandeur, (as has
been said.) Whatever Figure of Generalissimo we may fancy he makes among the
Confederates in Flanders, it is certain he has not the command of any Forces (if
really of those) but what he carries over from hence. How often has he been
overruled in Councils of War by the Spanish Governor Castinaga, and Bavaria
since, Prince Waldeck, etc. is to notorious to be recounted here. So that his
Business is rather to be their Providitore-General than any thing else, to
furnish them with Men, Money and Stores, to build them Forts, and repay their
Losses, (as in that Instance lately produced of the Dutch Squadron:) Nay, so
unwilling are they so much as to find his Soldiers Quarters, that he is forced
to transport part of his Quota back again, and to be at the expense of
fortifying two Towns, Dixmuyde and Furnes, to lodge part of the Remainder, send
over Provisions, and even Coals for their Subsistence; Ghent, Bruges, and some
other places refusing positively to entertain the rest, if not prevailed upon
by the Duke of Bavaria. All the Reward he has for the vast Sums he annually
pilfers for them out of our almost exhausted Coffers, is to King it here, and
all he desires; and upon that account it is his Personal Interest to keep the
War on Foot whatsoever it costs us. From whence it is proper enough to infer,
that if we be able or willing to furnish as many Millions yearly as the Support
of the Confederacy will require, we may yet keep the Dutch Stadtholder for our
King, and if not, we must part with him, and there is an end of the Raree Show.

As a Corollary to this last Advantage, we ought not to forget another as
remarkable, (for we do every thing aukwardly, and pray and hope, as they say,
backwards, and in opposition to all the rest of Mankind that are not infatuated
or grown mad,) and that is the Blessing of never enjoying Peace so long as the
P. of O. Lords it here. I confess in his Speech the last Sessions of
Parliament, and in his Discourse to the States before, or after that, he
promised he would do his utmost to humble France, and procure an Honorable
Peace to all Europe; but in this as well as in all other Promises he has
deceived all our Hopes, and none but half-witted People would ever be so
deluded. It Is Demonstration he can never do the one or the other now; France
was never so powerful as at present, nay, is grown excessively Powerful, as he
tells the Parliament in this last Speech; and I may add, the Confederacy
exceedingly weak, and England, that must give Life and Vigor unto all, not
excessively rich, nor I hope for ever abandoned to the highest degree of
Sottishness and Insensibility. And as for a Peace, himself is the only Obstacle
of it, and will first or last be cursed by all Europe on that account. The
Confederacy must of necessity have dropped long e're this, if we, through our
Zeal and Malice against our Lawful King, whatever we roar against Louis le
Grand, had not been so prodigal of our Wealth, and Blood, to maintain the
abominable Usurpation of a Foreigner, and through all the Course of his
Management a sworn Enemy and Hater of the English Nation. And now forsooth, in
this last Speech (after all his ill laid Projects and Designs baffled, and
frustrated at Sea and Land, and that he had at the long run discovered, that
the Power of France was excessive, i. e. in plain English insuperable, by all
the Force and childish Politics of himself and the Confederates,) he very
humbly craves the Advice of the Parliament at a dead Lift, when all lies at
stake, which he never thought worthy of advising with before, and modestly asks
at least an equal Force to that of the last Year; as if a Force that was able
to do nothing the last Year, either by Sea or Land (but by a mere Accident)
would be able to do Wonders the next, against the augmented Forces of his Enemy
by both. What pitiful Cant is all this? Is it not plain by his Speech that he
dares not so much as flatter us with the hopes of any Success against France
the next Campaign, since he is fearful even of asking such a Supply as all
intelligent Men foresee will be absolutely necessary to oppose the prodigious
Preparations of the Enemy? And can we hope with the same Assistance we gave him
the last Year, which we experimentally found was insufficient even for the
Defensive part, by Land especially, will be superior to him the next? We are
certainly informed of the great Preparations of all sorts of Ammunitions the
French are making in all their Frontier Garrisons upon the Sambre, the Maes, the
Moselle, and the Rhine, the vast Magazines of Hay, Straw, Oats, and other Grain
and Provisions they are erecting in those parts; their Forces so disposed of in
Posts upon the Sambre and the Maes, that 30000 can be got together at any time
upon any Enterprise at a short warning; and upon the Moselle 20000 on any
occasion, and all without doubt to execute some great Designs very early before
the Confederates can be in a condition to oppose them. And will it be
sufficient for the Confederates to stand upon the Defensive, which they never
could do to any effect? And is this the way to humble France, to reduce her to
her ancient Limits, and to restore Peace and Liberty to Europe? And then as for
Savoy, what Measures are concerted to preserve his Territories from the French
Reprizals, or even to hinder them from being swallowed up? It Is true indeed
there are several of the Emperor's Troops quartered in Italy, besides those of
some of the German Princes; but then if we do but remind our selves of the
Winter Campaign, which the French King has already begun in Flanders, and on
the Rhine; his Resolution (as we are informed by all the Foreign Gazetts and
Courants) to act in concert with the Turk, and to push on the War with all
imaginable Vigor during this Season, while the other does the same in Hungary,
(where as we are told the Ottoman Forces increase daily; and by their Motions
and Preparations it is generally conjectured they have present and great Designs
in Hand, having lately assembled in great Bodies between Belgrade and
Semandria, as (it is thought) to fall into Sclavonia, or attack Peterwaraden;)
in such a Case as this, it is but reasonable to suppose that both the Emperor
and the foresaid Princes, will be necessitated to recall the greatest part of
their Forces; and then let the World judge whether 50, 60, or as some accounts
say 70000 French will not probably prove too great a Match for that Prince to
encounter, and especially in the Winter time; for these Prints do positively
tell us, that all the Troops in Dauphine and thereabouts, with all the
Magazines that have been erecting for several Months since, are actually
removed toward the Frontiers of Piedmont, and that the French design in the
Month of February, if the Season favor them, to besiege Coni, or Turin it
self. The German and Spanish Troops, notwithstanding the most pressing
Instances of the D. of Savoy to detain them, are marched into their Quarters;
Bavaria had recalled two of his Regiments, if he had not been prevailed upon by
the P. of O. to let them stay, upon his promise to maintain them this Winter at
his own Charge, which by the way is a certain sign of the French Forces
increasing on that Side; and therefore could not be conveniently spared: So
that the only present Security he has is the Winter Season, and the deep Snows;
and as soon as the Weather breaks, a Force by much superior, and in all Points
better provided for, will fall into his Country, and in all probability put a
speedy period to the War on that Side, either by an entire Conquest, or by
forcing him into a sudden Compliance. We hear of no Preparations answerable to
those of France on the Confederates Side, all being at a stand, waiting for the
lucky News of more Money from the Parliament in England; and e're that be done,
and Preparations made, the Enemy will have done his Business, and have little
to do but to dodge with them, and play with their Noses the whole Summer, and
show the World what Fools they are. Again, what a piece of kindness is it to
our Parliament, and an honor too to tell them, the Inconveniency of sending
out of the Kingdom great Sums of Money for the payment of the Troops abroad,
(he dares not say the English or Scotch,) is very considerable, and so much
wishes it could be remedied, that if they can suggest to him any methods for
the support of them, which might lesson that Inconvenience, he should be ready
to receive them with all his Heart. Why truly the Case is plainly this, he
finds it is no concealing any longer the Transportation of all our Money for the
support of Foreigners, and is afraid this Trade will not hold long, either that
England can pay the Confederates unreasonable Pensions, or that the
Confederates can be held together, notwithstanding the exactest payment of what
he is engaged to them; therefore he is willing to go on with them, or knock off
as the Parliament will advise him, (provided he mentions these Things bona
fide, and does not impose upon the rest, and the whole Kingdom besides, by an
assurance of a Majority that will carry all right or wrong for his Interest,)
any thing so he may continue King, or have the satisfaction at least of ruining
the Nation with himself when he must fall. This is downright, (if he be in good
earnest) and the Nation has a fit opportunity to look to her self. No means can
be found out to avoid this Inconvenience, and to maintain an Army abroad at the
same time: The only way is to take him at his Word, recall our Forces, break
off the Confederacy, and to stand upon our own Legs, maintain a good Army here
at Home, pay them well, and augment our Navy. But yet this Method has its
Difficulties too; so hard a thing it is to ensure any the least degree of
Mundane Felicity: For should we leave the Confederacy in the Lurch, (which his
present Circumstances seem to incline, or necessitate him to consent to, if the
Parliament think fit,) then the vast Arrears owing to the Allies which they
could never expect to get from him, would oblige them to unite with France,
declare the P. of O the common Enemy, and England the Seat of War. (That he is
indebted to the Confederates seems highly probable to me, by the Elector of
Brandenburg's pressing the States and the King of Spain so hard for the
Subsidies, or Pensions, due to him the last Spring, representing to them that
without them he should not be in a condition to maintain the Forces he had on
foot, which the Elector of Saxony did likewise the same time; and it is not
unlikely, that was one pricipal reason of Hanouer's slow Proceedings the last
Campaign: And if I be not much mistaken in my Conjecture, the P. of O. must
come in for a Snack in that Affair, as well as the States and Spain, especially
if he be the Primum Mobile of the Confederacy, as the Monthly Account and one
of the late Slips term him.) But to return, the latter would be insignificant,
for Reasons formerly mentioned; so that our Case looks desperate. But if we
should break up the Confederacy by consent, these Arrears must be paid, which
no doubt will arise to a large Sum, which would be hard for us to part with in
these Circumstances, and to support the Charge of a War besides.

But, Oh the Descent! This must be carried on yet. None can desire more than I
that a Descent should be made into France, and therefore notwithstanding the
Disappointment of that Design the last Summer, I intend to attempt it the next
Year with a much more considerable Force, etc. What a parcel of Stuff and
Contradiction huddled together, as if the Noise of the Cannon from Mons and
Namur was not out of his Head yet! To talk of a Descent so publicly, so long
beforehand, enough to frustrate the best laid Project in the World. If it were
impracticable the last Year, much more the next. There are the same
Difficulties at least this Year, if not ten times greater; but nothing will
serve our Turns, or be worth our Noble Attempts, but Impossibilities. By the
next Year there will be a potent Fleet to obstruct us, if not powerful enough
to defeat and ruin us; more powerful Diversion by Land; early notice of this
Design; all possible means found out to prevent us by Sea and Land; and it may
be a Descent to anticipate ours, and what then? Ay, but I intend to attempt it
-- with a more considerable Force. Is not this a palpable Contradiction to his
modest Request he had made before, of a Force at least as great by Sea and Land
as we had the last Year? i. e. If we may be permitted to understand him, he
desires, if it cannot be otherwise, but the same assistance of Men and Money he
had the last Year, and he will attempt it; and if they enable him with a much
more considerable Force he will attempt it; if, notwithstanding all the
forementioned greater opposition he is like to meet with the next Year than the
last, he intends yet to attempt it, though with equal Forces to those he had
before; Why was it not attempted then when there were far less? Will he engage
to be wiser next Year than the last, or that the French shall be more Fools, or
that they shall be less able to oppose him with a more powerful Navy, and a
greater number of Land Forces the next than they had the last Campaign, and he
be stronger and abler to attack them with the same Forces he had before? And
suppose he be enabled with a more considerable Force, can he assure us that
their Diligence in repairing their Losses at Sea, and the considerable
Augmentation of their Land Forces will not exceed his more numerous Forces, and
render his good Intention as impracticable as ever? This is just such a
passionate desire as he had to fight LVXEMBVRGH Hand over Head, without the
least shadow of Hope to get any Advantage, but merely to keep up the Opinion
amongst Fools of his being a Fighting Spark, and scorning to pass a whole
Campaign with doing nothing; so he is resolved to attempt something by Sea,
though he is sure to get nothing but hard Blows, and expose some thousands of
his English to be knocked on the Head, or to die like Fools to their immortal
Honor: And this is all he seems to promise in his Speech, to attempt a landing
in France, which was ever laughed at by sensible Men before, and ought to be
hissed at now.

Well! but here are grand Motives to stir us up to support him with all the
speed imaginable: We are exposed to the Attempts of France while the French
King is in a condition to make them, and therefore the great Advantage we have
at this very nick of Time of being joined with the most of the Princes and
States of Europe, against so dangerous an Enemy, ought not to be slipped,
especially our Country and Religion lying at stake, etc. and we have the same
Religion to defend etc. What Advantage have we now that we had not before? Are
we but just now entered into the Confederacy, or have we or they been asleep or
drunk all this while? Why an Advantage now? Are they stronger now, or more
politic, or resolute than before? Or if we have had little or no Advantage in
being joined with them all this while, what assurance have we of any from
henceforward? I am sure some wise Statesmen, who have transmitted to us the
Experience of former Ages, do assure us if a Confederacy does not make some
notable Impression upon the common Enemy the first or second Campaign, they are
never like to do it afterward, but grow weaker and weaker till they sink into
nothing; and as to these Confederates, notwithstanding they have served almost
an Apprenticeship under one of the wisest Masters of his Craft in the whole
World, have added so little to their Skill, and approved themselves such
notorious Dunces, that we have no hopes of ever seeing a Masterpiece from them,
to their grand Disparagement, and our infinite Loss. And after all this Pother,
are we exposed to the Attempts of France, and is France a dangerons Enemy, and
the Power of France excessive? Who may we thank for all this? Was it not the P.
of O's being joined with most of the Princes and States of Europe, that brought
us into these Snares upon a parcel of sham Pretenses, and Bugbear Stories, with
his Bearskins and Laplanders, and the Devil knows what? And has not their
senseless management of their Affairs against their Common Enemy, as they call
him, made him so strong and dangerous as he is? And is there any prospect they
will be ever more politic and powerful for the future, and have better Success
in all their Enterprises? Can all the Speed they make in getting Money,
providing Necessaries for the War be answerable to his Preparations, which are
at this time so forward, as to wait only a proper Season to employ them? And if
from the nature of things they must be later, since all the World is convinced
of the Agility and Diligence of the French, and that they are never guilty of
losing. Opportunities; do we imagine that all the Confederates can do will
signify any thing? Then to what purpose is it to throw away our Money, and to
impoverish and weaken our Selves? All the good that our Money is like to do
the Confederates, is only to discharge part of the Contributions they are
obliged to pay the French to save their Towns and Villages from being laid in
Ashes; such Brave Fellows they are in defending their own Liberties and
Properties, that continually sponge the Money out of our Pockets under the Sham
of being our Saviors and Deliverers: And so far from humbling their Enemy, and
carrying the War into his own Bowels, that what he does not think worth the
taking from them, they are forced to redeem from being destroyed at any rate,
and we like F -- deposite the Money. Again, how strangely are all our Measures,
and those of our Allies, broke in pieces in a trice? Our Doughty P. of O.
demads but modestly at least as great Force at Land and Sea as the last Year,
consequently at least as much Money, etc. and no doubt the Allies do what they
can on their parts at the same time. Now if we consider the vast Expenses and
Losses the Common Enemy is like to put them to by this Devilish Winter
Campaign, (being destitute of Magazines, of Provisions for Horse and Man,
Ammunition, Carriages, and all Necessaries, as we are well assured by the late
Instance of Charleroy being bombarded almost to Ashes before they could get up
to its Relief, the carrying Furnes and Dixmuyde, and sixteen or seventeen days
playing upon Rhinfelden and the Kat, before they were in any condition to
attempt the Relief of them,) by false Alarms, taking their Towns, and the bare
attacking others to give them Diversion, while they are in good earnest in
other places, and (which at the same time shows they have not Men enough to
secure themselves on all Sides, though the French have to beard them, and keep
them in play, while they assault them in their tenderest and weakest part) we
shall find in the upshot that these at least as great Sums of Money will go
near to be half expended before the Summer Campaign begins, (their Designs
reaching no farther;) and consequently all their Hopes, if they have any, and
Projects of effecting any thing upon France crushed, in the very Shell. I know
the saving of Rhinfeld is looked upon as a very great Deliverance, and that Te
Deum has been sung in Germany on that occasion, which is an Argument of its
great Importance; but yet at the same time we are not ignorant that it was
owing to the badness of the Weather, more than to any thing else; and for all I
can see to the contrary, the Confederates have no reason to think themselves
secure, even as to that point; the Town and Castle, and the Kat are miserably
ruined, and before they can put them into any defensible condition again, an
indifferent good Season may give the French an opportunity, if they have no
better Fish to fry, to attack it the second time, as undoubtedly they will, and
with a stronger Force; and then it must go. How the Germans will be able to
supply their late Losses in those Parts, the whole Country round having been
most miserably plundered and harrassed during the Siege, and forced to pay
swinging Contributions; the vast Expenses in supplying that place with
Ammunition and Provisions, to repair the Breaches, add new Works, provide for
the Subsistence of their Forces, and those many ruined Families in the Towns
burnt by the French in their Retreat, I cannot divine: But if we reflect upon
the Moneys and Moneys worth raised by the French, in the several Excursions
made during that Siege into diverse parts, forcing the Country to supply them
with whatever they had for their convenience all the time, and what they have
extorted from them since; I am morally assured the Germans have paid the whole
Charge of the others Expedition. But to all this let us add, that since the
taking of that place would have been of vast consequence to the facilitating of
the Designs of France upon the Empire, (as generally was acknowledged and
dreaded,) and the early taking of it yet would be so still upon the former
supposition, (especially if the Turk, taking the Advantage from the Emperor's
weakness and unpreparedness, make some early and vigorous Attempt in Hungary or
Sclavonia;) the effect will be this, the French will be able to penetrate so
far into the Empire, as to put all Germany into a Convulsion, force that Prince
to draw all his Forces out of Italy, (by which the Duke of Savoy must fall off,
and consequently the War draw on to a period;) and though he should, by the
adding those Forces to the Army in Hungary or the Rhine, make some tolerable
defense, yet being unable to do the same on the other Side, he would be
compelled to accept of any Terms from the Turk and French King; and then
farewell England and Holland too; the one must be glad to submit to her old
Master, and the other to such Conditions as she can get. This is the Game we
are likely to see in a short time, the effect of our Weakness as well as
Wickedness, notwithstanding our profuseness and readiness to support so
wretched a Cause to the ruin of these Nations, if God be not the more
merciful: Of our Weakness, I say, abstracting all other Considerations, because
we will not learn Wisdom and Forecast from our Enemy, in making Provisions
against the Winter, when he is always most active; and we may take it for a
certain Maxim, grounded upon our Experience all this War, that if we cannot
prevent the French from doing their Business in the Winter time, or very early
in the Spring, all our Summer's Expedition ends in nothing but marching and
countermarching, running away or getting a kick on the A --, and so Home again,
and tell our Loving Subjects some dreadful Story of the great or excessive
Power of France, and desire more Money.

Thus we are fooled and cajoled from Year to Year with the perpetual Outcries
of the growing Power, and excessive Power of France, their augmenting their
Forces by Sea and Land; put in mind of our being exposed to their Attempts, the
danger of our Country, Liberties and Properties; and to animate us to open our
Purses the wider, and bleed the more freely, he assures us in the Word of a
True Protestant Dutchman, he has the same Religion to defend. What pitiful
Nonsense is all this? It has been pretended all along this War, that the French
King in his Negotiations with the Pope and the Italian Princes and States, to
incline them to use their Interest to procure a Peace among the Catholic
Princes, or to take part with him, has made it his Business to persuade them,
that the War carried on against him so far as the Protestant Princes or States
were concerned, was on the score of Religion, which has been denied by the said
Protestant Princes, and most of their Writers on this occasion, and
particularly by the Author of the General History of Europe, published by the
Authority of the States General, in the P. of O's Declaration published by
Schomberg in Dauphine; and in the Articles of Limerick we find the P. of O. to
the regret of many of our Protestant Rebels, has granted greater Liberty and
Privileges to the Roman Catholics in Ireland, than ever they enjoyed in the
Reigns of any of our Protestant Kings. But to come nearer, he uses ambiguous
terms, which look very suspitiously, We have the same Religion to defend. What
same Religion? The new Latitudinarian Religion, Presbyterian, or the Oliverian
Independent, or what? Even what you please. We are Presbyterians in Scotland,
Episcoparians in England, Calvinists in Holland, and (if some intelligent
Persons are not mistaken) Roman Catholics in Flanders, and after all every
where Atheists. There are those in the World who fear not to assert, that it
was publicly enough reported at Rome by diverse of the Cardinals, and
particularly the Auditor of the Rota, some time before the Revolution, that he
was reconciled to the Chapter of Rome; and some stick not to assert, that he made
his Protest in the Royal Chapel at Brussels before the High Altar, at his
Admission into the Confederacy, that he would inviolably perform the Articles
of it, whereof one is this, if we may credit a Copy printed here in England, of
the Resolution of the Princes, Allies, and Confederates, which has been taken
in the Assembly at the Hague, etc. Art. 1. Having resolved to make a Descent
into France, etc. We will make no Peace with Lewis XIV. till he has made
reparation to the Holy See for whatsoever he has acted against it, and till he
has annulled and made void all those infamous Proceedings against the Holy
Father Innocent XI. If this be really one Article of the Confederacy, as there
is a grand Suspicion, if we consider the Lukewarmness of that Pope toward King
James, as was frequently buz'd amongst us formerly, what Figure he made in the
Confederacy, and his Inveterateness against the French King, the Bigotry of the
Emperor, and the inflexible Temper of the Spaniard as to matters of Religion,
it is not to be conceived how they should enter into a Negotiation of this
nature with the P. of O. without an assurance of his coming over to their
Persuasion, and Resolution of promoting the Romans Catholic Interest in these
Kingdoms. Neither is it reasonable to suppose they would contribute their
Assistance to remove a Prince of their own Principles, though with a grand
Prospect of advancing their civil Interests, to the hazard of impairing their
Religion to make way for an heretical Prince. Besides, how can we imagine they
would ever communicate such a secret to him, if they were not first sure of
him, or could be sure of him without such an Engagement? The sole Refusal or
Discovery of it would have infallibly prevented all their Designs, brought an
indelible Dishonor and Scandal upon their Religion, as well as their Persons,
and provoked K. James and the French King to take the utmost Vengeance upon
them, and made them justly odious to all the rest of the Christian World, of
whatever Persuasion: What a Blemish would it have fixed upon the Emperor,
commonly characterized as a Prince of a most devout Temper, and actually
engaged against the Common Enemy of Christianity, to be found in a Design to
depose a Catholic Prince, and at the same time to cut off all the Hopes of
ever propagating the Catholic Religion in three Kingdoms? Neither is his usual
Partiality toward Popish Bishops, Priests, and the Roman Catholics in
general, one of the slightest Arguments for his Suspicion, though it is usually
objected, that by his Alliances he was obliged to show some favor to them. Why
was it not as well cautioned he should not set the Mob upon their Houses and
Chapels? and why did not those Princes by their Interest with him prevent the
issue of so much Blood, and put a timely stop to those horrid Barbarities, and
irreparable ruin of vast Numbers of their own Persuasion then, as to show such
favor and marks of distinction since? No, some Severity was absolutely
necessary in the beginning to get the Affections of the People, and to his
surer establishment in the Throne; but since he has gained his Point, and dipped
all Degrees and Orders of Men so deep in Guilt against their Lawful Sovereign,
that they fancy themselves beyond all hopes of Pardon, he rides them at his
pleasure, makes them believe what he lists, and readily stops their Mouths, and
entirely satisfies them with this Excuse. There might be some other very
considerable Arguments offered on this Head if necessary or prudent; all that I
shall add is this, That for my own part I shall ever believe him to be a
Papist, as much as any others fancy him either a Presbyterian, or of the
Communion of the present pretended Church of England, till he satisfies the
World to the contrary, by taking some severe Test, and most solemn Oath; and if
this should prove true, (as it may notwithstanding his communicating publicly
according to the Form of the Church of England, as many have done formerly to
our knowledge before the Test was advised to make the distinction;) How finely
are we trumpt upon? However, let him urge this Motive as far as he pleases,
it is little to the present purpose; as the Business of Religion has been
managed since his Usurpation, it is no great matter what Religion he or we
profess; we have as good as renounced our Christianity already, to make and
receive him as King; and I am sure nothing can be more contrary to it, or
affrontive of the Great God of Heaven and Earth, than our very Prayers and
Devotions, wherein we beseech him to support and prosper one of the grandest
pieces of Villainy that ever was acted upon the Face of the Earth, to confound
all Justice and Probity; which is as great an Indignity to an Holy and Just
God, as Idolatry in the highest degree of it. Nay, more than that, all our
Preaching and Prayers tend directly to nothing but the hardening and
encouraging Men to persevere in the horrid Sins of Rebellion and Schism, with
their Concomitants, and by consequence in the Eye of Reason give an inlet to
all other Vices, it being as justifiable for a Man to plead a necessity for
Whoring, Theft, Murder, etc, as to incur the guilt of Perjury and Rebellion for
the preservation of Religion; and the consequence is so visible and
intelligible by all the Debauchees and Atheists of the Age, that we to our
great Sorrow perceive the visible growth of both daily; and one John Tillotson
has contributed more to the spreading and rooting of Atheism, than 50
Spinosa's, Hobbs's or Vaninus's: So that let him insist as long as he pleases
upon that old stale Cant of Religion to cover all the rest of his profligate
Designs, we are certain he has the least reason to name it of any Person in the
whole World; one may as soon with his Arch-Heretick, and Schismatic, Don John,
find out a place for the Damned in the Mansions of Eternal Bliss, after a
certain period of suffering Hell Torments, or that the Devils and the Damned
sing Hallelujahs in Hell, or that they shall at length merit a Release from
those dreadful Torments, by their supposed Blasphemies against, or Execrations
of God Almighty, as the least spark of Religion in him, if we reflect upon his
Practices, (which are ever the Fruits of good or bad Principles;) or as soon
demonstrate that the Emperor, the King of Spain, Dukes of Bavarin and Savoy
entered into the Consederacy with him and the rest of the Protestant Princes,
out of no other Design but to preserve the Church of England against the
Attempts of King James and the French King, as prove it ever was the least part
of his Intentions. For it is visible to any one that knows the difference
between Schism and the Unity of the Church, that he has persecuted ever since
he came hither the Members of the True established Church of England; and the
first effort that he made was to let loose all manner of Schisms and Heresies
upon her to worry her to Death, if possibly, the preservation of which he most
impudently makes one of the plausible Pretexts of his Invasion; and if the
Latitudinarian Gentlemen had not out of a great Zeal to preserve their
Preferments more than their Religion, swallowed the Oaths against their known
Duty and Allegiante, had put the Presbyterians and Independents into the actual
Possession of all the Churches in the Kingdom, as is constantly urged by them
in private as the only Reason of their compliance, and so turned R --, as they
say, to keep Rogues out. And here I must not forget to give them their Due,
they proved apt Scholars and outwitted him: Nay more than that, by compelling
them to Complyances against all that they formerly taught and professed to
believe to be their indispensible Duty, he has been the occasion of such new
Lights and Discoveries to them in matters of the nearest Concernment to them,
that in effect he has given the sham to the so Glorious Deliverance it self,
and rendered himself for the future altogether useless. How natural is it now
for them to urge, and indeed in some of their Writings they have already, that
though there might be some pretense in the late dark Age of their Immaturity
and Childhood for his Heroic and Generous Undertaking, there can be none now
for his Continuance, which by his Unsuccessfulness, and the vast Expenses he
puts the Nation to, without any color of hope to accomplish the remainder of
his Designs, has already dimn'd the Luster of his first Enterprise, and sunk it
almost into Oblivion. It Is not Change in Religion, let it be what it will, can
affect them now; they have got a Clue that will readily extricate them out of all
such Labyrinths, with the new Arts of higher and lower Sense, the Distinction
between Submission and Allegiance, as Circumstances shall determine it: No
Oaths can now enslave them and tie them up, and no pretense of Religion impose
upon them. Christianity is not the same thing now that she was in her Swaddling
Clothes, one thing is to be done in propagating the Faith, another when she has
taken firm rooting. The Self-denial and Passivity of the first Ages was really
necessary for the propagation of the Faith; but now it is settled it is become an
useless Topic, especially since the State has added her Sanction, and stamped
it into Civil Property; and Christianity as to the Agenda requires little more
then what the pure sight of Nature cleared up from Passion and Prejudice
suggests of her self: Self-Preservation is her prime Law and Dictate, and all
the Religion in the World cannot null it without committing the greatest
violence upon Humanity it self. Besides, since Salvation is not confined to any
Party or Sect of Christians, but allowances must be made for Humane Frailty, it
must be diametrically opposite to the Great Law of Charity it self to be
strait-lac'd in a point of such deep importance. Therefore let the P. of O.
talk what he will as to Religion, Ours is as Comprehensive as his, let it be
what it will; we want only the much desired Opportunity to reap the Blessings
of our happy Change, which if it cannot be obtained under him, we are ready for
the next propitious Providence; and let it come from whence it will, modo hic
sit been, if we may but continue Vicars of Bray still, we'll call it and
celebrate it as the Greatest Deliverance we ever had yet.

These short Reflections upon some Passages of his Speech, I thought fit to
subjoin to my Considerations on the last mentioned Disadvantage these Nations
have by this Great Revolution, viz. the unlikelyhood of ever enjoying Peace
under the present Government. I might, if it were not to avoid being over
tedious, enlarge my self upon a Subject of satal Importance to these Islands,
the Daily Decay of Trade; all that I shall say in reference unto it is only
this, that it is impossible for us to retrieve it so long as the P. of O.
continues here; because we can never hope to be at Peace, or Masters of the
Seas so as to secure it; and we must allow a Million and a half at least to be
yearly lost during this War, in Shipping and Goods, and all the possible
Product or Increase of it in the way of Commerce, near a third part to be
deducted out of the Trade in general, occasioned by excessive Taxes, and
scarcity of Money; a considerable part whereof is near lost already for want of
Seamen, Convoys, and Ships themselves, by such vast numbers being taken for
Transportation, the frequent Embargoes, and unhappy detaining of our Fleets, to
the loss of their Markets, wasting their Provisions, and raising Commodities to
such high Rates, that we had as good be without them; particularly the
Newfoundland and Bank Fishery suspended, if not lost, to the impoverishing of
diverse of our Port Towns, by reducing numerous Families to downright Beggary,
to the excessive Charge of the respective Parishes they belong to. Then again,
for our Comfort, let us but consider the Increase of the French Shipping, by
their perpetually snapping ours and the Dutch, the Increase of their Seamen by
the vast Encouragement of the Privateers, the addition that will be made by the
next Summer to their Navy, and we shall find Trading by Sea will in a little
time be rendered almost impracticable. Add to this the P. of O's certain Design
to betray our Trade to the Dutch, for it is impossible to avoid such a
Reflection, since no other Reason can be given for the detaining our Turkey
Fleet above twelve months for want of Convoys, after they were ordered to be in
a readiness. What other account can be given of the Ineffectualness of the
Petition made by diverse Merchants and Ensurers to the House of Commons now
sitting, wherein they set forth their Losses of 190 Vessels taken by the French
since the last Fight, (and I suppose they mentioned only such as belonged to
the Port of London,) they were only slighted by the Committee, telling them
opprobriously, they were not the chief Merchants of London, and demanded
whether they would swear on their own Knowledge to the number of the Ships, and
the particular Time and Place of their Taking, etc. whether they had applied
themselves to the Lords of the Admiralty for Convoys, and when they answered
that they had, they referred them to the Council Board, and the Council told
them they could spare them none; the Committee quelled the business, saying,
the Council must have some Reasons why they could not grant them any. Does not
all this appear to be a real Design to ruin our Commerce, and to gratify the
Dutch? And are not we forced by this means to trade with them for ready Cash or
Bullion, for those Commodities which we use to fetch in our own Bottoms from
abroad? And if we do but reflect what a prodigious Sum of Money the Spices we
annually take off from the Dutch, which we were wont to barter for with our
Tobaccoes, Sugars, etc. from the West Indies; and the Losses we have sustained
during this War in our Jamaica, Virginia, and Barbados Fleets, by which means
we are necessitated to part with our Coin in specie; the Interruption in our
East India, Streights, and Levant Trade, being hereby obliged to take those
sorts of Goods at the second hand from them; the Decay in our Traffic, and the
great hazard of utterly losing it, it will appear, to the eternal Reproach of
our Mock-Deliver, the manifest Treachery of the Conservators of our Liberties
and Properties, and the Terror and (I hope in God) the just Regret of all those
who are not yet willing to have their Noses and Ears cut off by the cursed and
never to be forgiven Dutch. This is not all, let us reflect upon his endeavors
the last Session of Parliament to dissolve the East India Company, which part
of our Trade has been ever envied by those greedy Mammonists, and for many
Years has been attempted to be engrost by them; and you will easily foresee to
what a weak condition the Trade of the Nation will be reduced, if not speedily
prevented, which must require many Years to recover her pristine Wealth and
Glory. In one Word, All that is valuable to us runs to wreck, Our Religion
dwindling sensibly into downright Atheism and Profaneness, Our Liberties into
Slavery, Our Property into Beggary, the Honor and Reputation of the English
Nation into the utmost Contempt; the Constitution of our Government broken, and
the People running more and more into Factions, the greatest part of them
however disagreeing among themselves, dissatisfied with the present Government.
Add to these Considerations the certain Prognostics of a decaying State; the
lost Reputation of him who sits at the Helm; the growing Lukewarmness and
Despondency of the People in general, occasioned by immoderate Taxes, want of
Trade, the barbarous usage of our Soldiers by Land and Sea, unsuccessfulness in
all the late noisy Projects, and the Known Strength and Policy of the Enemy.
Then consider and weigh seriously the looseness of the present Clergy both in
Principle and Practice; as to the former Atheists more than Christians,
asserting, in effect, that real and acknowledged Evil may be done to good Ends,
preaching up and practicing Rebellion, reviling in their Sermons and
blaspheming the Lord's Anointed, applauding the Wickedness of the Usurper, and
blasphemously equallizing him to our Blessed Savior, as some of them have most
impudently done; and by justifying all his most flagitions Proceedings make
themselves accessory and Parties to all he does, imbruing by that means their
Hands in all that Innocent Blood of their Fellow Subjects that has heen spilt
by that Detestible Murderer, to the subversion of the Monarchy, and all the
Calamities that have ensued upon it, let them be of what quality soever, (since
if they had done their Duties, all these Miseries had, morally speaking, been
infallibly prevented, to the grand Honor of themselves and their Religion;)
and so render themselves unfit to approach the Holy Altar of God, and to
intercede for a Blessing upon his People: Thus by their means the Gates of
Heaven are barred against us, and instead of Blessings we have Plagues and
Judgments. The Degeneracy of the Priests has been ever looked upon as a direful
Forerunner of ensuing Destruction; and I am sure it must look very horridly,
when the Priests shall pray and praise God for nothing but what is the effect of
his Indignation, caused by the Sins of themselves, and the People misled by
their wicked Examples, when they shall endeavor to harden and confirm them in
the Sins they have drawn them into, and as much as ever they can prevent their
Repentance; when they shall exhort them to take part with Disobedient and
Rebellious Children against their Parents, to violate their Allegiance, expose
their Bodies and Souls in a most Unnatural Rebellion, and pray to Heaven to
prosper them in the very height, etc. of Impiety; What a Dishonor is this to
God and Religion! What a Curse to the World! What an Injury to Men's Souls! And
what can it portend but Vengeance, and (without a timely and extraordinary
Repentance) inevitable Ruin? Neither can I omit putting my Fellow Subjects in
mind of that raging Pestilence in the East Indies, which has swept away
Multitudes of our People; the never to be forgotten Earthquake in Jamaica, and
those late Monitory Shakings which ran through all this Island, as well as a
great part of the Territories of our Wicked Confederates: I shall not pretend
to divine what may be the Consequence of them; but we never heard of an
Earthquake in this Island but did certainly forerun some very remarkable
Calamity. All I shall farther add is this, The only Refuge this Government has
(for I find they don't think it safe to stand upon their own Legs,) is to keep
up the Confederacy; This is reality will prove a rotten Reed, we may lean upon
it, but it will run into our Hands and wound us, but never support us; it is
grown already feeble and contemptible, and being originally founded in Villainy
there is little likelihood it will prosper. By the Experience of former Ages,
Confederacies seldom or never performed great Atchiements. Their Religions,
Manners, Interests, being for the most part different and contrary, their
Consultations for that very Reason seldom prove effectual: And Monluc tells us,
that two Princes designing to overcome a third never agree long; and gives you
his own Experience, and that of preceding Times for it. And the most acute and
judicious Guicciardine tells us, That Confederacies can never be so knitted and
united, but that some or other of them will grow remiss, or go off from the
rest; and then all is spoiled. And Comines adds, That if there be not One to
overruled and govern all the rest of the Confederacy, their Designs will be
frustrated, and end in nothing but their own Shame and Weakness, and the Glory
and Advantage of the Common Enemy. I might, if I dare take that Liberty, have
produced a multitude of Examples of this Nature, but I hope any One's
Reflection upon the Instances of this Age will save me that Trouble; and
therefore will address my self to those of my Countrymen who have had the
misfortune to be misled, that since they have found all their Expectations
deceived, themselves gulled out of all those real Blessings of Government they
formerly enjoyed, Peace, Plenty, Liberty and Property, and all that could
render a People happy, by One whom a Man would be tempted to think could never
have been procreated of Humane Race, void of all sense of Religion, Justice,
Honor, and every Qualification that is apt to conciliate Love or Veneration
from Mankind; who has really forfeited the Crown by his own Act, having
violated the very Instrument of Government he subscribed: One that has been the
occasion of shedding more Christian Blood, on both Sides, than was spilt in the
ten Persecutions, and merely upon a Sham Pretense of Religion to us; that it is
their Interest and indispensible Duty, if they have any sense of Goodness
remaining, any fear of God before their Eyes, any respect for Religion, or love
for their Souls, any remorse for the Evil they have done, any Bowels for their
own Country, any Charity for the rest of the World, to free these Nations of
such a Plague and Curse, and if possibly, to redeem all those Blessings which
have been so long withheld from us by his Means, by atoning God Almighty, by
doing Justice to their highly injured King and Queen, to themselves, and to all
Europe, and averting those dismal Plagues which otherwise e're long will fall
upon their Heads: Otherwise let them do what they can, be as obstinate,
malicious and revengeful as they please, if they be resolved yet to act
wickedly they shall be consumed, both they and their King.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6. Lin. 5. make a Comma after that. P. 10. l. 2. for have r. having. Page
15. l. 28. r. the Confederacy. P. 16. l. 4. for miserable r. inevitable. P. 17.
l. 25. r. peradventure will be. P. 18. l. 6. after Succession add to the
Parliament. P. 19. l. 3. r. selected. P. 22. l. 18. r. encamped. P. 29. l. ult.
for for r. from.


