THE Ancient Testimony OF THE Primitive Christians, AND MARTYRS of JESUS
CHRIST, Revived, against TITHES. Or, A RELATION of the Sufferings of WILLIAM
DOBSON, of Slade-end, in the Parish of BRIGHTWELL in BARKSHIRE, because for
Conscience Sake he could not pay Tithes unto RALPH WHISTLER, Tyth-monger of the
same Parish; And for Thirteen Years was much Exercised by Imprisonment, and
loss of Goods: And the last Day of the 3 d. Month called May 1677. Dyed a
Prisoner for the same. To which is anexed, A short Account of the Sufferings of
Michael Reynolds of FARRINGDON in the same County, because he could not for
Conscience Sake, pay TITHES to ROBERT PIE.

Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for Us in the Flesh, Arm your selves
likewise wit^ the same mind; For he that has suffered in the Flesh, ceased
from Sin: For the time pa^ of our Life may suffice us to have wrought the will
of the Gentiles, when we walked in wantonness, Lusts, Drunkenness, and
abominable Idolatries, wherein they think it strange tha^ you run not with them
to the same Excess of Riot, speaking evil of You, who shall give account to him
that is ready to Judge the Quick and the Dead.

1. Pet. 4.1,2,3,4,5. Having a good Conscience, that whereas they speak evil of
You, as of Evil Doers, the^ may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
Conversation in Christ.

1 Pet. 3.16. He that oppresses the Poor to increase his Riches, shall surely
come to want.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXX.

To the Moderate READER.
FRIEND,
HOw great have been the Sufferings that many honest men, (yea, such as truly
feared the Lord, and hated Covetousness,) have sustained and undergone; and
what spoil and havoc have been made upon many peoples Goods, within this 25
years, and some have died in nasty Goals and Prisons, whereby their Wives have
been made Widows, and their Children left Fatherless; Because they could not
for Conscience Sake pay Tithes to Parish Ministers and Impropriators, which is
all one in the ground, as has been plainly manifested by many Testimonies,
that have been published, which are extant in Print; tha^ Tithes as they are
now forced and paid, are Antichristian; though there wa^ a time under the Law,
in which the Levitical Priesthood had a command t^ receive Tithes of their
brethren: But after Christ Jesus came in the Flesh, a^ was offered up, which
fulfilled the Law, and first Covenant, and put a^ end to that Priesthood, We
find no President in the Holy-Scriptures of t^ New Testament for the payment of
Tithes, but the contrary, as may be s^ Heb. 7th. chap. and so forward; where
the Apostle speaks much concerni^ the first Covenant, Priesthood, and Offerings
appertaining thereunto: a^ (says he.) The Priesthood being changed, there is
made of necessity ^ change of the Law; and so goes on speaking of Christ Jesus
the one off^ring, and everlasting High Priest to them that believe; as is
largly trea^ed on there, which the Reader may do well to peruse, who desires
satisfaction therein.

And although the Children of Levi, which received the office of that
Pries^hood, had a command to take (according to the Law) Tithes of their
Br^thren, yet we do not find they sued men at Law, and took three times the
valu^ or ten times the value of such as refused to pay, as some do now adays,
w^ can have no reasonable pretense to be of the Tribe of Levi, but rather of
the whom the Lord sent his Prophets to cry against, who preached for hire, a^
sought for their gain from their Quarter, and cried Peace, Peace, to such (...)
put into their mouths, and them that put not into their mouths, they prepar^
War against, as it is at this day.

And Christ Jesus when he sent forth his Ministers to preach the Gospel of the
Kingdom, to heal the Sick, cleanse the Leapers, etc. He bid them provide
neither Gold, nor Silver, nor Brass in their Purses: But freely ye have
received, freely give. To preach freely the Gospel to all Nations; and he that
sent them out, provided for them, so that they wanted nothing: And the great
care of the true Ministers of Christ was, that they might not make the Gospel
chargable, but rather wrought with their hands. They did not settle themselves
in large Benifices, and make a bargain with the People for so much a year to be
their Minister, or Sue People for Maintenance; but witnessed against such an
hireling Ministry, and their forced Maintenance also, whose Testimony the Lord
has again revived.

The Martyrs likewise, many of them did bear Testimony against Tithes, and it
was an Article amongst others, for which some suffered in the burning Flames,
by the merciless Papists in Queen Mary's days, worthy of the remembrance of all
true Christian Protestants.

So it is no new thing that the People of the Lord (called Quakers) have
suffered so deeply for, but the ancient Testimony to the Coming, Death, and
Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; which they that plead for
Tithes in this Gospel-day, do in effect deny.

And as for our Friend William Dobson, deceased, we have this to say; That his
Neighbors and Countrymen, (yea his very Enemies) can tell, he was an honest
man, a peacable quiet man: And many who for many years were fellow Prisoners
with him in Redding Goal, can testify (from a certain knowledge, if need were)
much concerning his Integrity to the Lord, and his blessed Truth, for he loved
the Prosperity thereof, and was a zealous Contender for the same; a very plain
man, and of a quiet frame of Spirit, very cheerful and loving, and not given to
change; and in all his Exercises and Sufferings, we never heard him in the
least to murmur or complain, but always freely given up in his Testimony, for
the unchangable truth, wherein he was concerned, being very well satisfied
therein. This in short is written, not desiring to multiply Expressions in
praise of our Friend, but proceed to give an account of his Sufferings for the
Truth sake, and leave it upon Record to Posterity. Published by some of the
People called Quakers, in Redding, who were his Fellow Prisoners for many years.

THE Ancient TESTIMONY OF THE Primitive CHRISTIANS And Martyrs of JESUS CHRIST,
Revived against Tyths, etc.
IN the year 1664, which was not long after it pleased the Lord to reveal his
truth and way everlasting, unto William Dobson, he was arrested (because he
conscientiously refused to pay Tithes) at the Suit of R. Whistler, and in the
month called October, was had to Redding Goal, and kept 15 weeks, and then some
related to him, (without his knowledge,) paid R. W. his Demands, and so was
released for that time.

But the next year he was arrested again at R. W's Suit for Tithes, and had to
Redding Goal in the 11 month 1665, and kept there near 15 week^, and then was
removed to Westminster, London, and made a Prisoner at the Fleet, and in a
short time after brought before the Court in Westminster; where he was falsely
accused with a Debt of 35 l. 11 s. at the Suit of Ralph Whistler. The Judges
asked William who was his Attorney? He told them, he had no Attorney, but was
there in person to answer what they had to charge him with: and and whereas he
was charged with a Debt of 35 l. 11 s. at the Suit of R. Whistler, he then
declared that he owed him nothing: then they said, Here is a Declaration
against you, and you must return an answer to it; and William took the
Declaration, and told the Court he would return an Answer to it, and so he was
had back again to the Fleet. And the Declaration being in Latin, and
Court-hand, he could not read it, so as to understand it but saw his Name was
not in it, so he sent it to a Lawyer, who drew up a Plea to this effect: That
it could not be understood that he was the person intended in the Declaration,
because (...) from his Nativity been known by the name of Dobson, and by no
other name; as likewise his Ancestors before him. So his Answer was delivered
into the Court by a Sergeant: and some that understood the Law, told William he
would be Nonsuited the next Term, it being not effectual in Law, for a man to
be arrested by one name, and prosecuted by another. But instead thereof, the
next Term Ralph Whistler's Attorney brought William a peremptory Rule from the
Court, that unless he did rejoyn by Saturday next, Judgment should be entered
against him; telling some that were Prisoners in the Fleet the same time with
William, that he could whisper in the Judges ear, [mark] and tell him what he
was, and so carry on his design against him; whereby he was constrained to put
himself upon Trial by the Country: and obtained leave of the Clark of the Fleet
to be at the Assizes which was held at Abingdon for the County of Bucks, in the
5 th. month, called July, 1666, where Judge Twisden sat Judge; and the first
Trial that was called was it, where William was called again by a wrong name,
and he told the Jury, that was not his name; also one that stood by told the
Judge, that William Dobson had pleaded Misnomer; but the Judge regarded it not,
but fell into a passion, and threatened William because of his Hat, often
calling him Sirrah, and false Knave; to which William replied, that He was a
true man, and denied falsehood and deceit. The Judge (instead of hearing his
lawful defense) caused the Sheriffs men to hale him out of the Court, and his
Adversaries Witness was sworn, and then William was brought again into the
Court, and R. VVhistlers Councellor ( Tertullus like) began vehemently to
accuse William, for carrying away several Acres of Wheat, Barley, Beans, and
Dills, no less than 13 Acres and a half more than he had, and the most part of
such Grain whereof he had none growing (namely Beans) their false Witness (to
wit John Smyth of Satwel) not only confirming what had been said by the
Councellor, but likewise overvaluing it; said that Every Acre of wheat was
worth 4l. and the Tithes 8s. and that every Acre of Barley was worth 2l. and the
Tithes 4s. etc. By which means the single value amounted to almost 8 l. which
at the dearest Rate, when Wheat was at 10 s. the Bushel, was valued at but 4 l.
10 s. the Tithe of VVilliam's Farm by the year. The Judge caused the Clark to
cast it up, according as the Witness had falsely sworn, and the treble Damage
amounted to 23 l. and odd Money, and then called to the Jury to give in their
Verdict, Who they found for, the Plaintiff, or the Defendant? whereupon,
William desired that the Jury might go together and consider of the matter,
giving them to understand that his Adversaries Witness had sworn very falsely,
both as to the number of Acres, and also as to the value of the Corn, and of
such Grain of which it was well known to the Neighbors (...) had none growing.
Nevertheless, the Judge (being in a Passion) would not (...) from the Bar but
must give in their Verdict, and threa^ed the Defendant to lay him by the heels,
telling him he disturbed the Court, for thus Speaking in his own just defense,
denying their Lies and false Accusations. And the Judge being thus set against
the Defendant, the Jury brought in for the Plaintiff, and the next Term they
brought forth an Execution against him, by a wrong name likewise. And the 17
th. day of the 9 th. month 1666. Richard White, an Alehouse keeper in
Wallingford: with two lewd Fellows more of the baser sort, Ralph VVhistler
with his Servants assisting them with his Horse, and drew away VVilliam's Cart,
and Wheels, and Cart-rope to his own House; they likewise led and drove away
all the Cattle William had, and some Horses and Cows that were none of his
(being on his ground) although he told them they were none of his: The goods
they took away were valued at 40 l. whereupon William gave the Undersheriff
an account of the value of Goods which they had took from him, and that some of
the Goods were not his: the Undersheriff promised to rectify the business,
but was not as good as his Word. And although Ralph Whistler had taken nine
times the value of the Tithe demanded; yet he wished he had had so much more;
and that William had nothing left him, and that it should not be long before he
would have him in Prison again; and also in a Neighbors House laid violent
Hands on William, and wrapped one of his Fists in the Hair of his Head, and
Struck him on the Head and Face, etc. Insomuch that the Constable could hardly
get him off from abusing him: which manifested great envy as well as
unreasonablness. That nothing but the Ruin of this poor Man could be expected;
had not the Lords power upheld him. But R. W: Was as good as his word in what
he before threatened, viz. that it should not be long before he would have him
in Prison again, for having taken away his Goods as beforementioned, he soon
caused his Body to be taken up again, thereby endeavoring what in them lay (as
appears by their actions) to hinder him in his^ Employment in manuring his Land
for another Crop, toward the maintinance of his Family. About the middle of
the 9 th. Month 1667. William Dobson was Arrested again for Tithes at Ralph
Whistlers Suit, to which he gave an Appearance, and thereby had liberty to
follow his Employment till the Assizes, which was about the middle of the 12
th. Month following, holden at Reding, where it came to be Tried, and (the
same) Judge Twisdon sat Judge; who spying William in the Court with his Hat
on, gave him such another Salutation as he did before, at the Assizes at
Abington the last year, viz. Come Sirrah, will you not put off your Hat yet?
threatening to lay him by th'Heels, before William had spoken any thing whereby
to make him so Angry. R. W s. Councellor began to Plead against William after
their usual manner, for Carrying away his Hay and Corn without paying Tithe;
which they valued (as they said) at 12 l. and odd Money, which with treble
Damages amounted to 36 l. and odd Money: and for proof thereof R. VV. brought
his former False Witness John Smith of Satwel; against whose Evidence William
made exception, signifying to the Judge, that that was the Man who at the
Assizes held at Abingdon the year before had Sworn falsely against him, and
therefore his Evidence ought not to be received. The Judge asked whether he had
Indicted him for Perjury? William said no; but I can prove it against him;
then the Judge said he must receive his Evidence, until he be Indicted; so
Smith was Sworn, who took Oath that every Acre of Wheat was worth 50 s. Which
was very false, for Wheat was then at a very ^ow rate; and the Judge also said
he could not see how it could be so much worth: however the Clark cast it up
according to what Smith had Sworn, and the single value (they said) did amount
to 12 l. (with treble Damges to 36 l.) But the Judge was so moderate that he
left it to the Jury, and bid them to withdraw; and so they did; and abated one
third part of that which the Witness had Sworn it was worth, (which ^gnifieth
they gave not much Credit to his Evidence.) The Jury brought in the single
value at 8 l. With treble Damages at 24 l. and thereupon Ralph Whistler brought
an Execution: and the 20 th. day of the 3 Month 1668. Moses Slade then
Under-Sherriff, and Thomas Skeats of Redding, Bailiff, Seized on, and took away
from William Dobson a Gelding, and (...) Cows, (all he had) and drove them to
Wallingford, and Sold them (...) 14 l. and which were well worth 17 l. And when
they had taken away the Goods without Doors, R. VV. not being satisfied
therewith, ^irred up the Under-Sherriff to go again to take away more Goods;
who ^t two very bad Fellows (as by their actions appeared,) namely, William
^ild, and Henry Weston, Bailiffs; who went into William Dobson's House the 29
th. day of the same month, and took away all the Pewter and Brass they could
find, as Kettle, Skillet, Platters, and Skimmer. One Bed and Bolster, one pair
of Blankets, two pair of Sheets, four Sacks and a Winnowing-sheet: also of
wearing-cloths, a Doublet, two pair of Breeches, and a great Coat of William's,
and two Wastcoats, four Petticoats, and a Searge Hood of his Wives. And when
they had loaded upon the Horse what they had got within doors, they went about
to drive away the Hoggs that were left; but the Swine ran away, and would not
be drove by them; and so they had not the Hoggs that time. But the other Goods
they carried to the George Inn in Wallingford, which Goods and Clothes were
worth about 11 l. but what they sold it for we have not heard. Yet,
notwithstanding, Ralph Whistler was not satisfied, as if indeed he were
re^olved to ruin, or at least to weary out this poor man. Having heard that ^e
had bought some more Cows to yield some Milk for his Children, sent Child the
Bailiff again, and his Brother, in the 11 th. month, 1668, to William's House,
and then they took away three Cows, which was all he had, and were worth 10 l.
So that the Goods taken away on this Execution as before is mentioned, for 8 l.
the single value demanded: in Cattle and Houshold-goods, and wearing-cloths,
was valued to be worth thirty eight Pounds.

Yet the next Year Ralph Whistler caused William to be Arrested again, and in
the 8 Month 1669. Or in a short time after was sent to Reading Goal, from his
poor Wife and Children; and the latter end of the 9 th: Month following, he was
removed by Habias Corpus to Westminster; and returned over in Court, and at the
rising of the Court was called to the Bar, and Charged and asked who was his
Attorney, whereupon he nominated William Church Clark of the Fleet, and gave
him his Fee, and appointed him to put in a Plea of Nell debet parpatriam to the
Declaration, which he promised to do, and William expected a Trial at the next
Assizes holden at Reding in the first Month 1670. Bu^ so it was, that he had no
Trial, nevertheless upon the 16 th. day of the same Month William Child the
Bayliffe, and Robert Hopkings took away all the Cattle that William had, viz.
Horses, Cows, and Hoges, and drove them all to an Inn in Wallingford, and Sold
them the next Market day for 19 l. But the Goods were valved to be well worth
80 l. they using to Sell large Penniworths of his Goods, or else they might
have wanted Chapmen to take it off their hands. Indeed it is to be admired, how
great the Lords Love and Mercy was to this William Dobson, by which he was
preserved in patience to undergo so great exercises, and to look with an
outward eye, it might seem strange how the man could subsist, and carry on his
business to maintain such a Family, when no sooner he can make shift to buy a
few Cattle, but on a sudden they are had away by Droves, and that at such times
in which it is most to his disadvantage, and to more than the yearly value of
what the Farm was worth by the year, besides the loss of time by Imprisonment,
and tossings of his Body from place to place into Confinements. But, to return
again to the matter, this is not all, neither would all this before-related
satisfy William's unwearied Adversaries. But after Ralph VVhistler had thus
cruelly dealt with him, the Priest of the Parish will needs have one fling at
him; (and we say it is well if he did not encourage R. VV. in his eager
prosecution, and unreasonable proceedings) and now VVilliam's Goods are gone,
his Body must to Prison again upon Excommunication, and the 29 th. day of the
first month before mentioned, in which R. VV. had caused all his Cattle to be
fetch away, William was to visit his Friends (who at that time were many)
close Prisoners, upon a conscientious account, in Reding Goal, the Jailer
seeing him there, told him, if he had not come he must have fetched him, and
pulled out a Warrant and showed it to him, which came from the Sheriff, for the
apprehending William Dobson, by virtue of a Writ of Excomunicat' capiendo: for
not going to their Worships, and not receiving the Sacrament (as they called)
when as he was so little out of Prison, and so tumbled and tossed up and down,
that he was hardly in a capacity to go if he had been minded. But he did not
only bear Testimony against the maintenance ( viz. Tyths) but that Ministry
which Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money, and that Worship which is in the
World out of the Leadings of God's holy and blessed Spirit. So John Thorp the
Jailer stopped him, and kept him a Prisoner with the rest of his Friends, whom
he came in kindness to visit, and continued a Prisoner two years and a half,
and then it pleased the Lord so to order it, contrary to expectation, that
William was released with the rest of his Friends, from their long
Imprisonments, by the King's Letters Patents in the 8 th. monh called October,
1672.

And in the time of his Imprisonment on Excomunicat' capiendo, Ralph VVhistler
and his Servants, in the Harvest time took away VVilliam's Corn in the Field,
what they pleased, sometimes a whole Land of Corn together, after it was cut
down, upon the account of Tyths, and at several times after a scambling manner,
so that the value thereof, which in that two years and a halfs time was taken
away in Corn, could not easily be computed.

But William being again out of Prison, and through the blessing of Almighty
God had a little increased his Stock, Ralph VVhistler pretending that the
former Execution was not yet Levied; upon the 24 th. day of the 1 st. month,
1673/4 he sent John Button a Bailiff, and William Robins Assistant of
Wallingford, who seized on and drove away 4 Cows, and 3 Horses, which were
valued to be worth 27 l.

And the 28 ^ day of the same month, William having borrowed a Horse (for he
could not keep any of his own) his Man was drawing a Cart and Wheels with the
Horse, in Wallingford street, where Moses Slade the under Sheriff, laid
violent hands on the man, and took the Cart and Wheels away from him, which
were judged to be worth four Pound.

Again, William having bought some more Horses to Plow withal, it being about
or in the Seed-time, could not well be without, supposing by that time surely
Ralph VVhistler was satisfied; but the 13 th. day of the 3 d. month, 1674, John
Button the Bailiff took away from VVilliam's Servant, out of his Team, two
Colts with their Harness on, which were judged to be worth 9 l. upon the former
Execution, as they pretended.

So that for two years Tyth demanded, at 4 l. 10 s. a year, which came to 9 l.
these cruel and unreasonable men (for so they have made their actions to render
them to all that shall take a view thereof) took away and sold as much Cattle,
(viz.) Cows, Horses, Hoggs, and other good and wearing-cloaths from William
Dobson, as was worth 78 l. which was about eight times the single value that
Ralph VVhistler demanded, which is very unreasonable, and will surely be a
blot, and bring a line of reflection (and that justly too) upon him and his
Posterity, though thereby he might think to increase his Riches, it is well if
it prove not as a Canker in his Estate (as to some others such gain has proved)
which by Oppression is heaped together. And the memory of such unneighbourly
proceedings will remain upon Record, when Ralph VVhistler is gone to his Grave:
and the Lord, if it be his Will forgive him, and lay not this to his charge, in
that day when God shall open the Book of every man's Conscience, and give
righteous Judgment to every man according to their Deeds done in these Bodies,
whether they are Good or Evil.

But to return again to the matter that is yet behind. In the beginning of the 3
d. month, 1675, William being then at Liberty, was served with a Subpoena to
appear before the Barons of the Exchecquer, at the Suit of Ralph VVhistler; and
about the middle of the month following, he was arrested by William Child
Bailiff, with the Sheriff's Warrant but through the Sheriff's means was not
sent to Goal until the beginning of the 7 th. month, called September; at which
time the Jailer sent for him to Prison; and after a little time William, with
20 more of his Friends that were then Prisoners, were by the Jailer (Joh^
Tharp) shut up in two very close Wards over the Dungeon, where the Felons lay
sick of the Smallpox; and one of them dying in the Dungeo^ with that
Distemper, John Thorp caused the Muckle and nausty Straw whereon the Felon dyed
(which was in a very sad and loathsome condition to look upon) to be burnt there
in the Dungeon, underneath those Rooms where William and his Friends were shut
up; and the Smoke and infectious Dain thereof was so offensive, as is hard to
expres^ the same; which seized on several besides William, and the same day he
and several of the others grew ill and had the Distemper, and some^ died in a
short time after; and William was so nigh death, that few tha^ saw him could
think him a man likely to continue, and was given up by those that were about
him as a dying man. And at that season the living Power of God, as a spring of
Love and Life, filled his heart, and burst ou^ as a Stream, in uttering forth
many heavenly Expressions, and wholso^ Exhortations to his Friends and
Brethren; to prize the Love of God, an^ to be faithful unto him; signifying how
good the Lord had been unto him* And much more to the same effect he spoke,
with fervent zeal and clearness, as if he had been in perfect strength, to the
comforting his Fellow prisoners. And speaking so loud, some of the Goaler's
Family ( viz. Walter Cowdry and the Maidservant) came up into the Wards, to
hear and see what was the matter, and when he had fixed his eyes on them, he
spoke very sensibly to them, and also concerning John Thorp and Walter Cowdry
(the then Turn-key) their cruelty toward him and his Friends, and with great
zeal he thundered out God's dreadful Judgments, that (he said) would suddenly
be poured out, against the Jailer and his Confederates, in that barbarous
proceeding against the Innocent, in such Wickedness and Cruelty: Also
signifying that the day of their visitation was near at an end. And much more
he spoke to that effect, to the admiration of all that were present. And the
Jailer and his Wife are since both dead --

But it pleased Almighty God, with whom all things are possible, that after a
long time of weakness, William Dobson recovered a little strength of body, and
had a little Liberty to take the Air, and sometimes to go to see his Family, and
be there to look a little over his outward concerns, but remained weakly in
Body, and never recovered his former strength from that time. And,
notwithstanding the Priest of the Parish, of whom Ralph Whistler rented the
Tyth, was dead, and Whistler off from the Bargain of renting it, and had
counted with the Priest before he dyed, and abated to the Priest what he valued
the Tyth of William's Farm to be worth: Yet Ralph Whistler kept him a Prisoner
for non-payment thereof to ^is dying day; though he owed him nothing; which
(said William in his ^ife-time) is a further manifestation of Ralph Whistler's
cruelty and un^easonableness in his actinggs toward him for the space of
thirteen years, because for the space of thirteen years he could not for
Conscience Sake pay Tyths. And the Lord in these troubles which he permitted
him to be exercised withal, did wonderfully uphold and preserve him, and
blessed his endeavors; that notwithstanding all the endeavors of his
Adversaries, which might tend to his ruin, yet he thrived in his outward
Estate, which has been taken notice of by many; and that the eminent hand of
the Almighty God was manifested greatly for his good every way, which is matter
of encouragement unto all that are or hereafter may be called by the Lord ^o
suffer for the same Testimony. Now, William Dobson, having thus by the
as^istance of the Lord's Power fought the good Fight of Faith, and kept the
Word of his Patience, laid down his head in Peace, and finished his course, and
upon the last day of the 3 d. month, called May, 1677. he died a Prisoner for
the Truth, and his name is recorded in the Book of Life amongst ^e faithful
Sufferers and Martyrs, for the ancient Testimony of Jesus christ, against that
great Oppression of Tyths.

Here follows A Brief RELATION Of the late Sufferings of Michael Reynolds Of
Farringdon, in the same County; because he could not for Conscience Sake, pay
Tyths, to ROBERT PIE, Impropriator.
IN the 7 th. month, 1678. Michael Reynolds was Arrested for Tyths at the Suit
of Robert Pie; and kept by the Bailiffs, Prisoner at an Inn one day; and one
(unknown to Michael) who pretended himself an Attorney, promising to appear for
him, he was le^ go: And Robert Pie prosecuted his Suit, (having no Defense man
at all against him) and procured an Execution for sixty Pound.

And on the 19 th. day of the 6 th. month, 1679. there came Joh^ Pullen and
James Clark of Abingdon, and William Tombs of Farringdon, (Bailiffs) with the
said Execution, and seized on, and Drov^ away nine of Michael Reynolds's Cows,
and a Colt of two years old* and likewise seized on a Barn full of Corn; and
the same day al^ they arrested Michael Reynolds in the Suit of Robert Pie; and
kept hi^ Prisoner at an Inn most part of a day, and when they saw he could
(...) ^ploy an Attorney (but was given up to endure Imprisonment) they let ^m
go.

And the 22 d. day of the same month, two of the forementioned ^ayliffs (viz.)
James Clarke and William Tombs, took away a Mare ^m Michael upon the same
Execution; and in a little time after, the ^e Bailiffs sent two men to thrash
out Michael's Corn in the Barn which they seized on before) whose Names were
William Farmer and ^arles Bray of Farringdon, and they thrasht and winnowed all
the Corn ^at Barn, which was carried away and sold.

Again, the 10 th. day of the 8 th. month following, the said Bailiffs ^me
again to Michael Reynold's House, and said they had not yet ^ken enough; and
then they seized on the other Barn full of Corn, (...) the two Thrashers again
to Work, and they thrasht out the Corn in that ^rn also.

And the 25 th. day of the 9 th. month following, the two Thrashers ^y the
appointmnnt of John Pulline) took Witness, and delivered (...) the Key and Lock
of Michael Reynolds's Barn to him, and gave an ^count under their hands, that
the Corn thrasht by them, and winnowed, which was carried away and sold, to
answer the Execution before-men^oned. was in all, of Barley 56 Quarters and a
half, and was by them ^ged worth, at the times when it was carried 17 s. a
Quarter one with (...) other, which came to 49 l. 8 s. 9 d ^so of Beans and
Pease 9 Quarter, at 8 l. 8 s. 0 d ^d the Cattle taken away, as before
mentioned, were worth 40 l. 0 s. 0 d Which amount to in all 97 l. 16 s. 9 d.

All this was taken away for one years Tyth from Michael Reynolds, and the
whole Rent of the Land he holds is, but 55 l. a year, and of ^at there is in
Meadow, where they took the Tyth by Force, and in pasture, ^here Robert Pie
claims none to the value of 20 l. a year; So that the ^hole Rent of that Land
which he had any Color of Law to sue for, ^ll not amount to 40 l. a year: And
it may be supposed that the Tyth cannot in all likelihood exceed a 4 th. part
of the Rent, which at utmost cannot be above 10 l a year.

And therefore it is evidently manifest, how cruelly and unjustly Robert ^ye
has dealt in this Case with his Neighbor Michael Reynolds (although (...)
other Cases we have not had much Cause to find Fault with him) who (...) the
denial of scarce 10 l. demanded, has caused to be taken away (...) Cattle and
Corn, the value of 97 l. 16 s. 9 d. which is near ten times (...) much more. Oh
horrible Injustice, that ever such Actions should be found amongst such as
profess Christianity, is great pity, and is a sha^ to the professors thereof.

And besides all this, the Servants of R. P. in the Harvest-time, 16^ did take
away from Michael Reynolds, both of Hay and Corn what t^ pleased, upon the
account of Tyths.

The Truth hereof has been so public^ known in and about the Town (...)
Farringdon, that it needs no furt^ Prooff: But is subscribed to by a S^^ferer
for the Truth, against Oppr^^sion.

MICHAEL REYNOLDS.

THE END.

