AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Great Victory, Obtained at Sea, against the FRENCH:

By their Majesty's Fleet, Commanded in Chief by Admiral Russell; and the Dutch
Commanded by Admiral Allemond, near the Cape of Barfleur in May 1692.

LONDON, Printed for John Rawlins at the Anchor in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1692.

THE PREFACE.
BY the ensuing relation, it will appear that France which was not until of
late, accounted amongst the Nations, that were considerable for their Maritime
strength, was at last become not less formidable at Sea than Land; and how
great it has been on the Continent is too well known by the Mighty acquisitions
that Crown has made in one Age, that France it self is almost lost in the midst
of that vast Empire which it is now become, by most unjustly wresting from all
the Neighboring Princes; But the full Force was never known until these last
three Years, in which it has made head against almost all the Christian World,
and for the most part, rather gained than lost of those Princes, and States in
War with her: From whence it is Obvious in what condition the rest of Europe
had been in, but for the powerful opposition England has made, being
influenced by their Heroic King, which sufficiently shows the Necessity there
was for the late Revolution. For from that time may Lewis the Fourteenth date
the destruction of his Project, and the rest of Europe their Enlargement from
the Slavery he designed, and prepared for them, for whatever turns like Fortune
he may have, they will rather seem, than really be the effects of Strength, for
nothing is plainer than that France has been at the Zenith of its Greatness,
and now in the Declension may strugle sometimes, and do some mischief, but
never recover power enough to repair the Structure he was forming. The Victory
their Majesty's Fleet has obtained, having so shook that Monarchy, that not
their Alps, nor Barrier in Flanders can secure France from being pierced to
the Heart. Another way being now opend which a few months will plainly
demonstrate, and which performance I shall rather choose to write after, than
the Predictions now. I shall therefore proceed to relate some particulars of
this great Conquest, which is like yet to be much greater in the Consequence.

AN ACCOUNT Of the LATE ENGAGEMENT, etc.
THE Power of France was so much increased in Shipping under the Reign of their
Present King, that it has not been an Imaginary hopes which the French, and
their Friends in England Conceived, that they might make themselves Masters at
Sea, especially after they had in the Year Ninety, made some Experiment of
their Strength, which, if they had been able to Effect this Present Year, they
had provided themselves of Forces, Artillery, and Ammunition, upon the Coasts
of Normandy, to have Embarkt on Transport Ships for that Purpose, to have made
a descent on England, under pretense of restoring the Late King James. The
French promised themselves such assured Success in this Design, that they acted
with an unusual Freedom, openly declaring their Intentions, (it being well
known, that whatever advantages they have obtained for the time past;
Treachery, or Secrecy, at least were the means whereby they Compassed them) and
that their Actions might accompany their great Words, with indefatigable
Industry they worked on their Fleet at Breast, and on the 12th. of May (their
Style) the Count de Tourville set Sail out of the Road of Bertaume, for the
Coasts of England. The French Endeavors were not Confined only to their Port
of Breast; but at Thoulon also they had equipt 16 large Ships to bring round out
of the Mediterranean to join the rest, but the difficulties they met with had
prevented their haste, and they had not Patience to expect their Coming, but
put to Sea with what Strength they had, their Party in England having given
them repeated Assurances, that the English Preparations were very backward,
having as yet but few Ships at Sea, and those small, and weakly Manned, that
the Capital Men of War would not get out until the end of May at the soonest,
the Dutch Squadron were not yet joined, nor ready, and that it was possible to
get between what were already out, and the other, and prevent their ever coming
together, and by these means destroy both.

But as an Earnest of their other Successes, they had News that the Count d'
Estree with the Thoulon Squadron, which at first consisted of 16 great Men of
War, 6 Fireships, and 3 Galliots, had on the 18th. of April, as he was about to
pass the Streights, fallen into a Storm wherein 2 of his Ships, one of 64, the
other of 70 Guns, run ashore on the Coast of Barbary near Ceuta, where 250 Men
were drowned, and about 500 more made Prisoners by the Spaniards, besides these
lost, several others were separated.

Notwithstanding this ill Accident to the French, Monsieur Tourville on the 10
of May appeared near Dartmouth, with about 100 Sail of all Sorts, but the Wind
being Easterly in the Evening, he stood off toward their own Coasts; the
English Fleet which was then out, under the Command of Sir Ralph Delaval, and
Rear-Admiral Carter, was about St. Hellen's; on the 12th* Vice Admiral
Callenburge, and Rear Admiral Evertzen, with 9 or 10 great Dutch Ships passed
by Deal, and sailed Westward, and on the 13th. the Wind still Favoring,
another Dutch Man of War sailed after them, and on Thursday, the 12th. in the
Afternoon, Admiral Russel weighed out of Rye-Bay, and about 11 a Clock on
Friday Morning joined the English and Dutch, at which time the whole Fleet
consisted of about 90 Sail for the Line of Battle; on the same Day Admiral
Russel acquainted the Officers that he had received a Letter from the Earl of
Nottingham by Her Majesty's Command, wherein he signified that Her Majesty had
been informed, that a Scandalous Report had been spread abroad, as if some of
the Officers of the Fleet were disaffected to their Majesty's Service, and that
her Majesty had ordered the Discharge of several of them, but that Her Majesty
was assured this Discourse was raised Maliciously by the Enemies of the
Government, and that Her Majesty was so well pleased, and satisfied with their
Zeal and Service to their Majesty's, and the Defense of their Country, that she
had resolved not to displace any one of them. As soon as this was made known to
them by the Admiral, they made and sent up an Address, which was the next Day
presented to the Queen by the Lord's Commissioners of the Admiralty. And was in
these following Words.

The Address.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, and Servants, Flagg Officers, and
Captains in your Majesty's Fleet, out of the deep and grateful sense we have of
your Majesty's good, and just opinion of our Loyalty, and Fidelity, imparted to
us by the Right Honorable Admiral Russel, in a Letter to him from my Lord
Nottingham, do in behalf of our selves, and all the other Officers and Seamen,
humbly presume to Address our selves to your Majesty at this Juncture, to
undeceive the World in those false and malicious reports, that have been lately
spread in prejudice of your Majesty's Service, by People of unreasonable
disaffection to your Majesty's Government; and an obstinate Aversion to the
quiet, and good of our Country: That there are some amongst us that are not
truly Zealous, for, and entirely devoted to your Majesty's Service. We do
therefore most humbly beg your Majesty's leave to add to our repeated Oaths,
this Assurance of our Fidelity. That we will with all imaginable Alacrity, and
Resolution, venture our Lives in the Defense of your Majesty's undoubted
Rights, and the Liberty, and Religion of our Country; against all Foreign, and
Popish Invaders whatsoever. And that God Almighty may preserve your Majesty's
most sacred Person, direct your Councels, and prosper your Arms by Sea and Land
against your Majesty's Enemies, let all the People say Amen, with your
Majesty's most Dutiful, and Loyal Subjects.

Dated on board the Brittannia, this 15 th. Day of May, 1692.

This Address was Signed by Sir John Ashby, Admiral of the Blew, Sir Ralph
Delaval, Vice Admiral of the Red, Mr. Rooke, Vice Admiral of the Blew, Sir
Clousley Shovel Rear-Admiral of the Red, Mr. Carter Rear Admiral of the Blue,
and the other Commanders of Their Majesty's Fleet, and Her Majesty received it
very Graciously, being pleased to say,

That She always had this Opinion of the Commanders; but was very glad this was
come to satisfy others.

The day before this Address was formed, the French Fleet was seen off of the
Start point near Dartmouth, and her Majesty was assured that the Rochfort
Squadron under the Command of the Sieur De Vilette, had joined. the Count de
Tourville; but that the Thoulon Squadron was not as yet arrived at Breast. And
Admiral Russel on the 17th. Sailed with the whole Fleet English, and Dutch to
the Westward, having a fair Wind; and here it may be observed, that from the
time the French put to Sea until this time, the Wind proved Easterly, or to the
North; and that there had not been six hours of Southerly, or Westerly Winds
which are so frequent, more especially at this time of the Year: Or else in all
probability that part of the Fleet which was first at Sea, was in danger to
have fallen under the power of the French.

The French King had most certainly given positive Orders to his Admiral to
attack the English, and Dutch Fleet, when, and where ever he met them; his
Reasons for so peremptory a Command, considering how carefully France has
managed it self during the whole War, both at Sea and Land, has occasioned the
most curious observers to enquire very carefully into the Cause, and has
produced very different Opinions concerning the same; with some of which I
shall acquaint you ( viz.) That the War bore so very hard upon him that he lay
under a necessity to make use of his utmost Efforts to end it; which a great
Victory at Sea would have Contributed much to, and that if he was defeated the
loss could be scarce heavier to him, than the vast Charge of maintaining such a
Fleet at that extreme Ebb the War has reduced him to: But this being a Notion
taken up by Men of too fine Speculation, I shall wave repeating any more of it;
but proceed to some other more believed, and more probable Reasons; which are,
that Monsieur Pontchartain, his intendant General for Maritime Affairs, or his
Agents, had recourse to the old French method of Bribery. And had made such
offers of Money to some that had Command in the English Fleet, that they making
it known had leave to accept the Money, and were only exhorted to perform their
duty to Their Majesty's, and their Country, or whether the Jacobite party in
England, after having told so many lies of their own strength, and the general
Inclination of the People to return to their former Slavery, had also brought
themselves to believe; that the Officers of the Fleet would revolt, and had
imposed the same upon the French King for Truth, or whether they had assured
him their weakness, or Cowardice was such, that they were easily overcome; one
of these it is generally believed hastened the French to Sea, and upon the
English Coast, and whichsoever it was, though no thanks are due to such as would
betray their Country, yet more advantages have happened by this Advice and
Intelligence, to this Nation than ever so inconsiderable a party for Sense,
Fortunes, or Courage, could have contributed with all their best Intentions,
and Services, which makes it evident that there is nothing so bad, that at
sometimes is not good for something.

For now on the 19th. Their Majesty's Fleet about six Leagues from Cape
Barfleur, got sight of the French, who came down with Wind at S. W. upon the
English; the first News of the Engagement, came from Admiral Russel's own Hand
to my Lord Nottingham; which I shall recite Verbatim, being as brief, as it is
an exact account of the first days Action.

A Copy of Admiral Russel's Letter.
YEsterday about Three in the Morning, Cape Barfleur bearing S. W. and by S.
distance Seven Leagues, my Scouts made the Signal for seeing the Enemy, the
Wind Westerly; The French bore down to me, and at Eleven Engaged me, but at
some distance; we continued Fighting till half an hour past Five in the
Evening, at which time the Enemy Towed away with all their Boats, and we after
them. It was calm all day; about six, there was a fresh Engagement to the
Westward of me, which I supposed to be the Blue. It continued Calm all Night. I
can give no particular account of things, but that the French were beaten: And
I am now Steering away for Conquet Road, having a fresh gale Easterly; but
extreme Foggy: I suppose that is the place they design for; if it please God to
send us a little clear weather, I doubt not but we shall destroy their whole
Fleet. I saw in the Night three or four Ships on Fire, but I know not what they
are, so soon as I can give you a more particular relation, I shall not be
wanting.

May the 20th. 1692. Cape Barfl^ur, S. W.
distance 7 Leagues.

This Letter was sent from the Admiral by the Commander of the Mary Galley to
Portsmouth; who brought a further account ( viz.) That at Eight a Clock on
Friday Morning, being the 20th. of May; he left the Fleet at S. and by W. about
Fifteen Leagues distance off of the Isle of Wight, that he saw the Seconds of
two of the French Admirals sink, and many Ships on Fire; that the Sea was full
of Wrecks of Ships for two Leagues together; but that he knew not, that any of
Their Majesty's Ships were lost: That the French run, and ours pursued them;
and on the one twentieth we heard from Portsmouth, that Their Majesty's Ship
the Montague came in disabled, and Captain Foulk the Commander confirmed the
News of the French being beaten; that the English were in pursuit of them at
Nine in the Morning the day before; which was the time he left the Fleet: and
further said that Admiral Carter was Killed, who was Rear Admiral of the Blue,
his Death was the only allay to all this good News, being generally lamented
both at Sea and Land; he was a very brave Officer, and Faithful to Their
Majesty's Service; and his Memory will Live and serve for an Example to
Encourage others, for the Honor he had obtained was for his Gallantry, having
risen from a much lower Capacity.

Captain Killingworth Commander of the the Fox Fireship, came also to
Portsmouth in his Boat, and Confirmed the foregoing Account, and further added,
that he had burnt his Fireship on Board a French Rear-Admiral, but was put off
with great Difficulty, that he saw a French Man of War of about 70 Guns blow
up, and another 3 Decked Ship on Fire.

Thus every day produced several fresh Advices of the happy success of their
Majesty's Arms, and more were expected, for Victory was not doubted from such a
Fleet, so Commanded; for Admiral Russel before the Engagement, went on Board
all the Men of War, to animate both Officers and Seamen, assuring them he had
no distrust that they wanted Courage or Loyalty, and for his own Part, if he
failed in his Duty, he desired that they would not spare to throw him
Overboard, and as he proposed himself the Pattern they should follow, so if
any such were found that neglected to imitate him, they should be made severe
Examples. Although this might be of excellent use, yet all the Commanders left
us without Knowledge, whether it would have been wanting, every one striving to
excel.

On Saturday the 21st. of May, the Queen received by Express, that by the
former days Action the French Fleet was so diminished, that their Number was
reduced to Thirty Six, which were seen to the Leeward of us, at about two
Leagues Distance, the Wind at E. N. E. the English Fleet endeavoring to get up
with them, and they retiring, and on Saturday the 21. the Wind serving
indifferently both for Eastward and Westward, the Enemy divided: about 9 that
Morning, Admiral Russel took his Course toward Barfleur, having got sight of
several French Ships under the Shore, and Admiral Allemonde with the Admiral of
the Blue, sailed to the Westward. The Dutch Admiral Discovered Sixteen French
Ships, which he supposed were coming from France to join their Fleet, and
endeavored to get up with them; in the mean time Sir John Ashby pursued the
rest of their Fleet, who strove in great Confusion to get into the Race of
Orney. Admiral Allemonde lost Sight of them he pursued in the Night, and
believing they had got in amongst the Rocks thought it not advisable to follow
them, and so sailed Eastward again to join Admiral Russel.

On the 22d. in the Forenoon, Sir Ralph Delaval Burnt under Cape de Wyke near
the Shore, the Royal Sun, being the Ship of the Count de Tourville Admiral of
the French Fleet, she carried 104 Guns; the Admirable commanded by Monsieur
Beaujeau his Second, that carried 102 Guns, and the Conquerant of Eighty Guns,
with two Friggats, and three Vessels of lesser Rank; at this time also Admiral
Russel was in close pursuit of another part of them. The Prisoners of the Ships
that Sir Ralph Delaval Burnt, Declared, that during the Engagement 4 or 5 of
their biggest Ships were destroyed.

Colonel Anthony Hastings who Commanded the Sandwich was killed in the Fight,
and his Ship disabled, which was afterward brought into Portsmouth to refit:
Captain Grayden that Commanded the Hampton Court was Wounded, and his Ship,
with the Seven Provinces, one of the Dutch Squadron, and one or two more being
disabled were brought into Portsmouth, but not one Ship English nor Dutch was
missing. Her Majesty commanded that Care should be taken that able Surgeons
should be sent down to look after the Sick and Wound^d Seamen* that were
brought into Portsmouth, belonging to the said Ships, or any other, and that
the Hospitals in Southwark and Smithfield might be fitted up to receive them.

Four French Ships of Three Decks lay on the back of the Isle of Weight very
much disabled, and two English Men of War that were refitted, with two Dutch
Friggats and a Fire-ship, were ordered to go out, and take or destroy them.

This Extraordinary Victory which cost so little on our side, and so much
exceeded the expectation of all People, was received by Her Majesty with a
great deal of Moderation, plainly showing that She had no other Joy in it than
the safety of Her People, and the Interest the rest of Christendom had in their
Majesty's Successes. But the People so universally discovered their Pleasure in
having beaten the French, who had so shamefully scandalized the English Nation
two Years before, that they knew not sufficiently how to express themselves; no
other Business was much talked off, but Praises and Encomiums on the Conduct and
Courage of the Admiral, and other Commanders, and for several Days and Nights,
Ringing of Bells and Bonefires, yet such was the Care of the Government, that
not a Person nor a House was Damnified by the common People of those who were
known to wish well to the Enemies of this Kingdom, and were reasonably
suspected to have gone further than Wishes, to Contribute toward enslaving us,
and all posterity to the French.

On Wednesday the 25th. in the Evening came Captain Mees, Commander of the
Ruby, a Fourth Rate, with Letters from Sir Ralph Delaval to my Lord Nottingham,
bearing Date the 22d. giving a particular Account of his Burning the Three
Ships before mentioned ( viz. the Royal Sun, and his two Seconds, the
Conquerant and the Admirable. The most material Passages were, that after
Admiral Russel had given the Signal for the Ships to cut their Cables, Sir
Ralph Delaval found that the French had quitted the Race of Orney, and that
some of them stood for the Bay of Cherbourg; he followed them, and saw three 3
decked Ships, but so close to the Shore, that it was unsafe to follow them
further, until he had informed himself of the Road, they being within shoal
Water, and sounding within Gunshot, they strove to hinder it by continual
Firings; so to prevent loss of time, Sir Ralph Delaval went on Board the St.
Albans, and hoisted his Flag, ordering the Ruby and two Fireships to attend
him, with which he stood in, leaving the great Ships without, but coming near,
the French gauled him so extremely, and finding the Fireships could not get
in, he retreated out of shot, and Anchored, and called a Council of War, where
it was resolved to attempt them in the Morningwith all the Third and Fourth
Rates, and Fireships, but finding that would not do the Business, the Water
being shoal, Sir Ralph Delaval ordered Three Fireships to attempt the burning
of them, going himself with Barges, and Tenders to take them up, if the Enemies
shot hindered the Design. The Service was sharp, the Enemy firing both from
their Ships and Fort, yet the Bravery of the Officers and Men, overcame the
difficulty, so that two of the Fireships did Execution, burning two of them,
the other Fire-ship by a Random shot was set on Fire, being ready to Board the
Enemy. The Action was brave beyond Expression, and was earnestly recommended to
Her Majesty by Admiral Delaval, who observing the People go out of the
remaining French Ship by Boatfulls, he commanded the St. Albans and the
Reserve, with others to fire at her, believing it would make them quit her, and
after some time finding no resistance, took all the Boats armed, and went on
Board where were a great Number of Men, but no Officers, he took them all out
maimed and whole, and set her on Fire. Sir Ralph Delaval had set all the French
on shore, but that he was told thirty sail of Ships were standing with him,
which afterward proved to be Sir John Ashby and the Dutch coming from the
Westward, by which means all the Prisoners remained on Board, and were very
uneasy to him; from hence they sailed Eastwards toward the Bay of la Hogue,
where it was expected to find 3 or 4 more French Ships.

This Action was of very great Consequence, and as great danger but the
Admiral, Sir Ralph Delaval, well knew the bravery, and Loyalty of them he
Commanded, would surmount all difficulties: The Captains of the Fireships Names
were, Captain Heath, who burnt the Royal Sun, which was the greatest Action of
all: For that Ship, being the Admiral, made a stout Resistance. Captain
Greenway, burnt the Conquerant, which was also a brave Enterprise: The
Admirable, was burnt by the Boats, after Captain Fowlis his Fireship was
destroyed by the Enemies Shot; which if he had escaped there was no fear of his
performing his Orders.

A Captain of a French Fireship being taken declared, that during the first
Engagement on the Nineteenth day, Monsieur Gabaret Admiral of their Blue, lost
his Ship which carried Ninety Guns, and that four others were burnt, or sunk at
the same time, and at the time when the three before mentioned Ships were burnt,
in the Bay of Cherbourg, four smaller were destroyed, and about three hundred
of their Men perished; what the English could save were made Prisoners, and
some others were not hindered going on Shore.

Whilst this Gallant Action was Effecting, Admiral Russel lay with the
remainder of the Fleet before La Hogue, having closely shut up all that were
left of the French biggest Ships; there being Ten three Decks each, besides
others. But about Twenty of their smaller Vessels got away through the Race of
Orney, and made toward their own Harbors: It was impossible for the rest to
escape the Vigilance of the English Admiral; who had now almost finished his
Proposals, in the Letter he sent to My Lord Nottingham, in which he says that
if it pleased God to spare him a little clear weather, he doubted not to
destroy their whole Fleet. And that such weather he had appears by the success;
and through the whole time it is very Remarkable, that an especial Providence
attended their Majesty's just undertaking; for from the day the French Fleet
put first to Sea, the Wind was for the most part full against them, or so
contrary, that they could never get up to Admiral Delaval, and Carter, when
they had the only time to perform any thing, and as soon as Admiral* Russel*
and the Dutch were joined, a Wind served fair which brought them to their
destruction, and hindered their Return.

Thursday the 26th* came an Account by Letter from Admiral Russel, bearing Date
the 24th of the last and greatest Destruction of the French Fleet, which I
mentioned lay in the Bay La Hogue: That on the day before he sent Admiral
Rooke, with a Squadron of Ships, and Fireships, and all the Boats in the Fleet,
to burn Thirteen Ships that lay there: And notwithstanding the continual Firing
the French made from their Ships, and Platforms (it being at their own Shore)
it succeeded so that six three Deck Ships were burnt that Night, but then it
becoming dark, and thick weather, the remainder were let alone until the next
Morning, at which time the enterprise was renewed; the Enemy were beaten from
several of their own Ships, and the English Seamen took possession of them, and
turned their own Guns upon them, with which they beat them from their
Platforms. This Action caused a great slaughter of the French, for one Ship of
Fifty six Guns was overset and utterly lost* the rest were all burnt: and now
there was not known to be one more of that Fleet at Sea, from which the French
King and his favorers in England derived such hopes, and had cost him so much
labor and Treasure to get together. That that which had been the Work of an
Age to Complete with all the Assistance England had in some foregoing Reigns
been able to afford him, was in less than one Weeks time so Shattered, that
it is now impossible France should ever make any Considerable Figure on that
Element, either in War, or Trade, so that the Hands that raised them, have
pulled them down. And their own Dear Friends the Jacobites, who have so
magnified the strength of that now Vincible Monarch, and so Contemned that of
their Native Country, from which they have* under the Government of Princes (to
whom they would render themselves Obnoxious) received greater Benefits and
Advantages than the French King's Favorites in France. These also have
Contributed their shares by deceiving themselves first, and next their Master,
for whom they gathered Intelligence; by which means the French Fleet was
Trusted at Sea, and have given an opportunity to that Admiral and other
Commanders (which can never be sufficiently commended) to obtain a Victory, the
greatest that ever was upon the Ocean, and as great in its Consequences. For at
the lowest Computation, there have been burnt, and sunk no less than Twenty
Eight, or Thirty (the greatest part being) of the biggest Ships not only that
the French had, but that were in the World, and more than seven Years Peace,
and all the Hands, and Treasure he can employ can build over again, and set
forth: But of that he will find his account short, being not in view of a
prospect of Peace, nor may it be expected that England will fall into such
another Lethargy, as to suffer themselves to be Rivalled in a Fleet, that had
nothing that rendered them inferior to us, but the Courage of our Officers, and
Seamen.

To the End it may be known what strength the French Fleet was composed of
(without the Thoulon Squadron) I shall insert the most exact Account that could
be obtained thereof ( viz.)

Eighteen Ships, from upward of Eighty Guns to One hundred and six, and Thirty
six from upwards of Sixty Guns to Eighty, Twelve Ships from Fifty Guns to
Sixty, and Seven from thirty to Forty six, besides Twenty four Fireships,
Twenty six Frigates, Twenty six Pinks, Fourteen Long-boats: The whole of the Men
of War being designed to be Seventy three, which were to have on board Forty
thousand, Two hundred, Ninety nine Men, and Five thousand and Nineteen Guns:
Besides these, Officers and Volunteers. And in the Fireships, One hundred,
Sixty Guns, and Two hundred and Forty in the Long-boats.

By the foregoing relation it will be found, that whatever part of this Fleet
was out; yet the great Ships are very near every one destroyed, and the smaller
so disabled, that some will never be repaired; and such that can, will be a
work of Time, and when that is done will be very inconsiderable; for it is easy
to determine the strength of such a Fleet, whenas they had that vast Addition,
and were not able to dispute with the Force and Bravery of the English and
Dutch. Besides, all the loss of the Seamen is irreparable, the huge number of
them that have been cut off by the several ways of burning, drowning and
killing in the time of the Battle, may reasonably be supposed to be more in
number than remains in Service in the Trade of France; and though those may be
possibly spared for their King's Service (for I question not but their Trade is
near at an end, their victorious Neighbors will carefully attend the Increase
of more Seamen by that means) it is plain that the Power of France is in its
declension at Sea, which is the place England had most reason to fear it; and
as it is not probable they can ever recover their strength; so it is possible and
that by a reasonable Conjecture, that in a few Months to come, the French King
will be Master of as few Ships as he found at his coming to the Crown.

For since the coming away of the News of this last destruction of their Men of
War, we have received advice of burning more than twenty of their
Transport-Ships, which lay in the Bay of La Hogue, and which the Prisoners
declare were designed for embarking of Men for the intended Invasion of
England, the Admiral found some Obstruction in the Execution of this Design,
from two small forts that were on the Shore, and their small Shot, which the
French and Irish being drawn down from their Camp, made upon our Seamen. But
the former Successes, and the Cheerfulness they undertook this Enterprise with,
made all resistance ineffectual, so that the Admiral's Commands were as
punctually performed, as they were readily obeyed; for not one Ship that lay in
all that Bay escaped. The Admiral after this, commanded the Admiral of the Blue
Squadron to sail toward Havre de Grace (and if it was practicable) to serve
the rest of the Transport-Ships that were in that Harbor in the same manner,
whilst himself, with the rest of the Fleet, sailed toward the Coast of
England; and where on the 26th. he arrived at Spithead, and commanded that the
27th. should be observed with Public Prayers and Thanksgivings throughout the
Fleet, for the Victory obtained over Their Majesty's Enemies.

On the 30th. of May it was credibly reported, that a Person of great Quality
received a Letter from Plymouth, or some place near adjoining, that of the four
great French Ships, formerly mentioned to be disabled, and seen off the Isle of
Wight, three were taken by those refitted at Portsmouth, and one sunk. Thus
nothing but further Additions to the Victory come from all Parts, and the
Reports of the French Prisoners confirm their loss greater than we knew, and
some material Passages, which we had no other way to be informed of, but from
themselves; one of which I shall in this place recite, which is, that the
French Admiral of the Blue Squadron, which was set on Fire the first night of
the Engagement, had Mr. Fitz James on board, that is Brother to the Duke of
Berwick; but whether he perished in the Flames, or saved himself by changing
his Ship, is not yet certainly known.

The Dutch, both Officers and Seamen, showed great forwardness as often as it
was their Turn to have the Enemy to engage: But they who had so melancholy a
share two years before when they were overpowered by the Enemies superior
Force, were now made amends by the English, who happened to have the greatest
part of this Action upon their own hands, and so gallantly behaved themselves,
that they never gave an Opportunity to them to signalize themselves when they
had the French first to engage (as it appears for the most part the English had
the Chance of that.) The first Five hours on the 19th. day, the French are
owned by all that have hitherto given any Account of the Fight, to have pursued
the Attack they so briskly begun, with more Resolution and Bravery than ever
that Nation were known to fight at Sea before; and had they had any other than
such Enemies to deal with, might with great Reason have expected the Advantage.
But the two extreme parts of the English Fleet, that composed the Line of
Battle, not being able to come up with the French to assist those of their own
part, yet knew how to make the best Improvement of the Time, which they did;
for whilst Admiral Russel engaged the French Admiral and another or two, singly
by himself, part of the Blue Squadron got the Weather-gage, which the French
had before from the beginning of the Fight. And as this very much animated the
English and Dutch, so it dispirited the Enemy; they soon after towing off
Westward. And thus happily concluding what may materially be expected at Sea
both for this Year, and others to come, I will entertain you with a Copy of a
Letter from an Officer in the Fleet to his Friend in London; which is in these
Words.

UPON the opening of the Day in the Nineteenth in the Morning, we were Alarmed
by our Scouts from the Windward of the approach of the French Fleet, which
occasioned us both to draw into a Line of Battle, with the Starboard Tacks on
board, the Dutch leading the Van. The White Squadron of the French commanded by
Tourville, bore down with all imaginable Gallantry on Mr. Russel our Admiral,
and the Red; the White and Blue, commanded by Amfrevile on the Dutch, though at
so great distance there was little done on either side; and Gabaret with the
French Blue Squadron kept so far Ahead, that the last Twenty Ships of ours
a-Stern, had hardly any Body to Fire at, but what was at a great distance; the
Rear-Admiral of the Blue, who was next the Red, had something to do, but not
much; and the Vice Admiral of the Enemies Blue, who ought to have engaged the
same Division on our side, took Heart-a-grace, and with his whole Division run
quite away from the Fleet, without Firing a Gun the whole Day; so that the
whole Battle fell on the Red on our side, attacked by the French White, and
assisted by the Rear-Admiral of their Blue: For some time of the Day Sir
Cloudsley Shovel engaged them of the Blue: It was very hotly disputed doubtless
on both sides, being within Musket Shot, pelting such vast Quantities of great
Shot; but the advantage in less than two Hours appeared on our side, by the
Britannia's so handling the Royal Sun, that she lay by an Hour without hardly
Firing a Shot. The whole Day there was but a little Gale of Wind, and hindered
our Blew Squadron from getting in nearer to Windward of the Enemy; and to add
to this Misfortune the whole Day was attended with such a Fog, that after the
first two Hours of the Fight, one could scarce see the next Ship's Head. Just
in the close of the Evening the French White, taking the occasion of the Fogg,
and the Flood Tide, and a little Wind, let go their Anchors to facilitate their
retreat, and our Blue in the thick Fogg drove through them, which caused hot
Firing on both sides, which was at Night stopped by the Fogg, the Darkness being
such that we could not see a Ship's length Ahead; and so ended this Day with
all Honor to the Red, who were engaged very hard, and bravely beat all their
Opposers; and Admiral Russel has all Honor imaginable due to him, First, in
commanding in Chief on so Happy a Day; next having almost the whole Battle with
his Squadron; but in my Opinion chiefly having Hand to Hand silenced the best
Ship of the Enemies in less than two Hours time, so as to be Fired at without
making a Shot. This Gentleman, Monsieur Tourville, was handled just as he did
two years ago the Crippled Dutch. And thus you may see what influence
inequality of Number has on the best of Men; for Monsieur Tourville, (brave
Enemy) could not move Amfreville in the Van hardly to come within a long random
Shot, nor Vice Admiral Panetir in the Blue to strike a stroke; and indeed
Admiral Gabaret so far kept his distance that little could be done by him; yet
these three Men have particular Characters in France for Fighting Men, the two
latter, being Soldiers of Fortune, raised (...) their Merit. The French will
plead doubtless that we o(...)umbred them much; it is true, but by what I saw,
and am ^^^tainly told, they were beaten by equal Number, or less; f(...) though
I have said they were few in Number, and hardly half fought yet our Red
Squadron was not more; and I do not find our Great Number stood us in any other
stead than to frighten their Fighting Ships, which gave us a Victory with
saving of much Blood, and with destruction of their Ships, which has since
happened.

And so, Sir, I have given you the Proceedings of a Happy Day to our Country;
but unhappy to my self, who had no share in this Honor, my Post being the very
last of the Fleet, on that Tack of the last Twenty Ships of ours, with which
the Vice Admiral of the French Blue run away, and the rest wearily kept the
Wind, so that we had not one Ship to Fire at. The little Wind and very Foggy
Weather hindered us from getting up to our Friends.

Next to our Admiral, Sir Ralph Delaval, Sir Cloudsley Shovel, the London, St.
Andrew, Sandwich, and Royal Katharine, have suffered much with loss of Men.

As I said the whole Fleets coninued driving all Night in a Fogg, without
seeing one another: The Morning following the Wind came about to the East, when
we all met, both English and Dutch, and pursued the Enemy to the Westward;
about ten a Clock it cleared up, and we saw above Thirty Sail bearing down, who
about Noon came to an Anchor with the strong Flood Tide near Cherbourge; when
the Wind came West, at the Night Flood the French got loose; and plied, and in
the Morning were at an Anchor near to Alderney; and we without having better
ground and less Tide, by Eight a Clock happily found about Twenty Sail of their
best Ships to drive to the Eastward along their own Coasts; and when it was
fit, our Admiral made the Sign to cut our Cables and follow them, which we did,
and Monsieur Tourville's, and Two other Three-Deck'd Ships, and Two Frigates run
ashore at Cherbourge, and were since burnt by Sir Ralph Delaval: Thirteen more
of their Ships, of which Eight were Three-Deck'd, run into La Hogue, near Cape
Barfleur, and these thirteen are since burnt by Vice Admiral Rook, as Admiral
Russel commanded, with all their Boats, and some Transport Ships; five other
got away in the Night; Two of Sixty Guns sunk in the Fight, and one
Three-Deck'd Ship burnt by Accident.

May 28* 1692 I am, Sir, etc.

This Account agreeing with our former Advices, and being something more at
large, I thought I would not be amiss to insert in this place; and shall next
proceed to mention the Names and Strength of such of the French Fleet that have
been destroyed since the beginning of this Great Action, which though they are
not all, yet so many as are here being true, perhaps it may be some
satisfaction to those that are rejoiced at this Prosperity of their Majesty's
undertaking.

A True List of some of the Ships, and their Names who Commanded them, together
with the number of Men, and Guns they carried, that were destroyed by their
Majesty's Fleet in the Battle, and pursuit, viz.
Guns. Men. Commanded by THe Royal Sun of 104 900 Admiral Tourville The
Admirable of 102 650 by Mons. Beaujeau The Conqueror of 82 552 Monsieur Du
Maignon

These were burnt at Cape de Wycke near Cherborrge, by Sir Ralph Delavale.

Guns. Men. Commanded by The Ambitious of 96 550 Vice Admiral Vilette. The
Thunderer of 84 600 Count De Relingue. The Magnificent of 76 550 Mons. de
Coerlogon The Triumphant of 76 490 M. Manch. d'Ablemont The St. Philip of 84
550 Chevelier D'Amfreville The Feirce of 76 490 Monsieur De Alteloire The
Amiable of 68 420 Monsieur de Reales The Arrogant of 60 350 Monsieur de la
Vigiere

These Eight with four more whose Names, etc. are wanting, were Burnt, and one
Overset in the Bay la Hogue, by Vice Admiral Rooke.

Admiral Russel, who had the high Trust and Command of the English Fleet, under
their Majesty's, upon which depended the fate of all Europe; and of which he
has so worthily acquitted himself, and with such inexpressable advantage to the
English Nation in particular, having gained this Glorious Success, without the
loss of one of their Majesty's Men of War, or of their A(...)s the Dutch. I
shall therefore give you a brief account of their Number, Rates, Men and Guns,
both English and Dutch, (viz. of the English) Six ^i^st Rates, which carry 4615
men 796 Guns. Ten Second Rates, which carry 6420 men 900 Guns. Thirty five 3d.
Rates which carry 14650 men 2333 Guns. Thirteen Fourth rates which carry 14650
men 550 Guns. Besides these there were Twenty three Fireships.

The Number of the Men of War were Sixty three, which carried on Board 28570
men and 4489 Guns.

The Dutch Squadron consisted also of Nine First Rates, carrying 4015 men 769
Guns. Ten Second Rates, carrying 3765 men 718 Guns. Nine Third Rates, carrying
2835 men 570 Guns. Eight Fourth Rates, carrying 1735 men 410 Guns.

Besides these there were to this Squadron fourteen Frigates and Fireships: This
Squadron was composed of thirty six Men of War, which carried on Board 12350
men and 2494 Guns.

The total of both the English Fleet, and Dutch Squadron being Ninty nine Men
of War, 40920 Seamen, and 6983 Guns, Friggats and Fireships Thirty seven,
besides Tenders, Scouts, Spies and other Boats.

But of these some of the English were either not ready, or not all the Dutch
Joined, or were otherwise disposed of, for in the Engagement there was not
quite Ninty Sale, however so many as there were, are still remaining through
the mercy of God, and the singular Care and Conduct of the Admiral, who being
safely arrived at Spithead, Her Majesty ordered some of the principal Nobility
down to Compliment him upon his prosperous Success; and Her Majesty has made
provision to give testimonies of Her Approbation to all the rest of the
Officers of their Fidelity, and Gallantry: And commanded a great sum of Money
to be distributed amongst the Seamen, who behaved themselves to Admiration. And
thus ends the total Defeat of the French Fleet, and the most considerable
Action that ever was done on these Seas; and earlier in the year then two great
Fleets ever fought in the memory of Man. Her Majesty dispatched away Expresses
thereof to the King at his Camp in Flanders, who has since acquainted his
Allies with it, by whom it was recieved with all the Demonstrations of Joy, and
it is hoped this is an earnest of further Successes to their Majesty's Arms.

FINIS.

