True Copy of the PAPER delivered to the SHERIFFS of London and Middlesex, by
Mr. William Anderton, at the Place of Execution, which he designed there to
have spoken, but being frequently interrupted by the Ordinary, Mr. Samuel
Smith, desired the said Sheriffs to publish or dispose of it as they should
think fit, seeing a dying Man was not suffered to speak.
To my Contrymen.
LIberty and Property has for some Years made an hideous Cry in these
Kingdoms, and nothing more than the Rights and Privileges of the Subject is
the Pretense of our present Deliverers; and doubtless it was for the sake of
these that so many of my infatuated and blind Contrymen rebelled against
their Lawful and Injured Monarch, whilst Religion (Rebellions Umbrage) was made
the Covert of the hidden Designs of those who have now demonstratively shown,
that they sought nothing less than our Ruin: And that these were only
Pretenses to gain their Ends, the very Blind, although they cannot see, yet
most certainly feel it. Under the like Pretenses do our Deliverers still
continue to deliver us even from what they please, that they think will but in
the least help to effect what they came for: Under the Notion of the Necessity
of a War they deliver us from our Money, and from our Traffic and Commerce, by
which so great a part of the Kingdom is sustained: Under the Notion of carrying
it on, they kidnap our young Men, the Flower of our Kingdom, and directly
contrary to Law transport them; and to save their own Foreigners, put them in
the first Onsets of their Battles, as the Heathens did the Christians of Old,
that their Enemies Swords might be blunted with killing them, before they came
to encounter them: They exhaust all our Stores both for Sea and Land, and carry
away all our Artillery; and if any Man seem but to disapprove of these their
Proceedings, under the Notion of Law they murder him: Nay, if they do but so
much as suppose him not to be on their Side, he must be a Traitor, and no
matter what the Law says, they say he shall die.

Can any thing be more plain to demonstrate this than my present Case? My
supposed Crime was Printing, and all that the Witnesses could personally say
against me, was, That I was a Man against the Government, and had called the
Prince of Orange Hook-nose, though I protest I never did; not one of them could
say, nor did they offer to say, that I ever printed the Books of which they
accuse me, or procured them to be printed, or published any of them, or that
the Materials were mine, or that I hired the Room where they were found; but I
was an ill Man, and that was sufficient: By which it is plain, that they were
resolved right or wrong to have my Life.

That they designed not to Try but to Convict me is as plain; for they refused
positively to allow me Counsel to such Matters of Law, as was never refused to
any before; and though I caused several Statutes to be read, some to prove that
there must be two Witnesses at least to the Fact, others, that though there had
been two, as there was not one, yet positively declared that it was not
Treason: Nay, the very last Session of Parliament was it enacted, That the
Printer of Seditious and Treasonable Books should for the first Offense be
punished no otherwise than not to follow his Trade for three Years, and for the
second Offense never to follow it more, and such farther Punishment as seemed
fit to the Court, not extending to Life or Limb. Now though mine (had it been
proved) had but been the first, yet you see contrary and in direct opposition
to the Law, they make it High Treason: And when the Jury could not agree to
find me Guilty, and came down to ask the Court whether the finding these Things
there, and supposing them to be mine, since it could not be proved that I
printed these Books, or had made any use of them, could affect my Life? I say,
when the Jury asked this Question, and the Lord Chief Justice Treby told them
positively, No, it did not; yet withal he told them, That that was not their
Business, their Business was to find me Guilty of Printing: And while they
stayed, the Court frowned upon them to that degree, that the Foreman told them,
he was not to be frighted; upon which they publicly reviled them, calling
them, ill Men, ill Subjects, and a Pack of Knaves; and so terrified them into a
Compliance. That this is true, those who were near know too well, although the
partial Writer of the Trials has most perfidiously published not only an
unfair, imperfect, and lame Account, but has also stuffed it with downright
Untruths and Falsehoods, and left out whatsoever made for me; not so much as
mentioning the Contradictions of the Witnesses in what they did swear, their
swearing to some things that made for me, and when I took hold of them they
denied them, nor has he in the least told the World of the Judges Overruling
whatsoever I offered, without giving any other Answer than that it should be so
because they would have it so; with many other such Things, which the
conscientious Auditors can testify.

And now I pray consider where is this Liberty and Property? Where the Rights
and Privileges of the Subject? Nay, where the very Laws themselves? And
consequently where is the Security of any Man? Why, even in the Deliverers
Pockets, where your Money is, and where also without all doubt, if you look not
well to your Selves, your Estates ere long will be there likewise. What are
these Proceedings but Arbitrary in a Superlative manner, and such as no Reign
ever produced before? These were they you were heretofore only afraid of, being
jealous without just Cause; but now you see them actually come upon you. I hope
you your selves will put a stop to them, by laying these Proceedings before the
Parliament, for had it been sitting at this present these Proceedings durst not
have been practiced; and I pray God to put so speedy an end to them, that as I
am the first, so I may be the last that may suffer by them.

I have hitherto lived a Member of the Orthodox Church of England as by Law
Established, and I declare I now die in the Unity of the same: Therefore,
according to its Discipline, I hold my self obliged to ask Pardon of the whole
World, of every particular Person whom I have any ways offended; and I do
freely and sincerely forgive every one that has offended me, particularly my
most false and perjured Witnesses, and among them more particularly Robin
Stephens, my most unjust and unrighteous Judges, and my repenting Jury; and I
pray God may not lay this their Sin of wilful Murder to their Charge at the
General Bar, where they shall appear as Criminals, and not Judges.

MAY the Almighty bless, preserve, prosper, and restore our Sovereign Lord King
JAMES, to the just Possesision of his indubitable lawful Crowns, strengthen him
that he may vanquish and overcome all his Enemies here on Earth, and crown him
with eternal Glory hereafter: And that he may never want Heirs to inberit his
Crown, bless I beseech thee, O God, His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and
give him such a Numerable Issue, that there may never want one of his Loins to
sway the Scepters of these Kingdoms so long as Sun or Moon endure* Amen. Amen.

June 15. 1693. William Anderton.


