The Anatomy of an Arbitrary PRINCE; OR, King James the II.
Set forth in his Proper Colors, and what England may expect from such a one.
Written for the Information and Satisfaction of all the Grumbletonians in their
Majesty's Dominions.
By a Son of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.
I Shall first relate his Actions in England, Scotland and Ireland, when King
thereof, and afterward his present Actions in Ireland, which may serve as
parallels to his former Actions.

To begin, He that designs to be a Papist and a Slave, and that all his
Posterity should be Papists and Slaves after him, may be supposed to fight for
the Restoration of King James the Second, and no others: For he has broken his
Oath before God and Man, and the Laws of the Land, and his repeated Promises of
keeping them inviolable, by building of Popish Churches and Chapels, erecting
of Monasteries, setting up Colleges for Jesuits, for corrupting of Youth, and
making one of that Order a Privy Councellor and Minister of State; by making of
Popish Judges and Ecclesiastical Commissioners, one whereof declared himself a
Papist, which is against the express Laws, for any Papists to be in any place
or places of Trust; by raising Persons to Ecclesiastical Dignities who have no
zeal for the Protestant Religion: Suspending the Bishop of London, turning out
the President and Fellows of Magdalen College from their Freeholds, and
putting Papists in their Room, by commanding the Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, (which was contrary to Law) to be read in Churches, and citing all
the Chancellours and Archdeacons of England, requiring them to certify the
names of all Clergymen, who did or did not read the Declaration, though they
were not enjoined by their Bishops who were their Ordinaries, by subjecting the
Honors and Estates of the Subjects and the Established Religion to a Despotick
and Arbitrary Government; seizing of the Charters of Towns, and putting in
Popish Magistrates in many of them, by causing a great deal of Blood to be shed
in diverse places of the Kingdom against all the rules and forms of Law, not
suffering the Persons accused to plead in their own defense: By putting the
Administration of Justice in Papists hands, arming the Papists, and putting
them in the greatest places of Trust both by Sea and Land, as well Strangers
and Irish, as English: By imprisoning of the Bishops for their humble and
lawful Petition, and afterward trying of them: By treating of a Peer as
Criminal, for speaking the Truth, in saying that the Subjects were not bound to
obey the Orders of a Popish Justice of the Peace, and requiring all persons
that were in any Employment or Esteem, to declare that they would concur in the
Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and give their Vote for such Parliament Men
who would be for repealing of them, and turning out all persons in places of
Trust, who would not concur in it, and putting those in their places who
promised to comply, and many of them professed Papists: By sending an
Ambassador to Rome, and receiving one from thence, and admitting of vast
numbers of Popish Priests and Jesuits, Dominicans and Friars, into England: By
making of Popish Counselors, Popish Lieutenants of the Counties, High
Sheriffs, and under Sheriffs, and Popish Justices of the Peace: By keeping up a
standing Army, with Popish Officers: By Invading the Fundamental Constitution
of Scotland, and altering it from a legal limited Monarchy, to an Arbitrary
Despotick Power, and has exercised the same, to the subversion of the
Protestant Religion, and the violation of the Laws and Liberties of that
Nation, and perverting all the ends and designs of Government, and declaring of
an absolute power there, and that all the Subjects were bound to obey him
without reserve, and by disbanding the Protestant Officers and Soldiers in
Ireland, and putting in Papists in all places of Trust, and turning out
Protestants, and taking away Protestants Estates, because they had them
contrary to Justice or Reason, only because the good Catholics cut a little
parcel of about one hundred and fifty thousand Heretics Throats, and made
Candles of their Grease: I had almost forgot one thing not worth speaking of,
the Dispencing with the Laws of the Land. These instances may suffice, to show
his desire, (to use his own words) to use no other than Lenity and Mercy, and
are very proper to be compared with the following Speech which he made to the
Council, upon his coming to the Crown, February the 6th 1684, with his after
assurances.

JAMES R.
MY Lords,
Before I enter upon any other business, I think fit to say something to you,
since it has pleased Almighty God to place me in this Station, and I am now to
succeed so good and gracious a King as well as so very kind a Brother, I think
it fit to declare unto you, that I will endeavor to follow his Example, and
most especially in that of his great Clemency and Tenderness to his People: I
have been reported to be a man for Arbitrary Power, but that is not the only
story has been made of me, and I shall make it my endeavors to preserve this
Government both in Church and State, as it is now by Law Established: I know
the Principles of the Church of England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it
have showed themselves good and Loyal Subjects, therefore I shall always take
care to defend and support it. I know too, that the Laws of England are
sufficient to make the King as great a Monarch as I can wish. And as I shall
never depart from the just Rights and Prerogatives of the Crown, so I shall
never invade any man's Property. I have often heretofore ventured my life in
Defense of this Nation, and shall still go as far as any man in preserving its
just Rights and Liberties.

In his Speech to the Parliament, May the 30th 1685. he says that he has an
English Heart, (if he had said and a Popish Conscience) as much as any Man, and
will go as far when there is occasion in defense and support thereof (we should
have known what to trust to.) In his Speech to the Parliament after the defeat
of Monmouth, November the 9th 1685. speaking of the Popish Officers that were
in the Army, (I will neither expose them to disgrace nor my self to the want of
them) knowing that without such he could never bring about his Designs,
concluding with these words, I will ever make you all returns of Kindness and
Protection, with Resolution to venture my own Life in the defense of the true
Interest of this Kingdom. And though the Parliament Addressed him the 17th
following, desiring him to lay aside those Popish Officers, as being contrary
to Law, yet he would by no means hearken to it, but was very angry with them,
in his Speech in answer to their Address, concluding with these words; I will
be steady in all the Promises I have made you, and be very just to my word in
every one of my Speeches.

But in his Speech to Father Clare he said, he would either Convert England, or
dye a Martyr; and that he had rather dye to morrow, that Conversion being
wrought, than Reign fifty years without that, in Happiness and Prosperity.

To begin with his present Actions in Ireland, upon his arrival at Dublin, the
few Protestants that remained in Employs were turned out, not a Protestant was
allowed to sit in Council, or bear Arms, the Lord Granard, Lord Chief Justice
Keating, Sir John Davis, Sir Tho. Newcomen, Colonel Russel, etc. were all
turned out, and none permitted to hold any Place but Papists, though these
Gentlemen were so true to the King, and went so far to serve him, as made them
suspected to be of his Religion. See his gratitude to the Bishop of Chester,
who coming with him from France, died a Protestant at Dublin, and was so
miserably poor as to want common necessaries; and being dead, was buried at the
charge of a Charitable Prelate there: but to proceed, the Lord Viscount
Mazerine has been plundered in Plate, Money, Household Goods, etc. to the
value of near twenty thousand pounds, and others proportionable,
notwithstanding several Declarations from Tyrconnel and King James to the
Contrary; and upon a modest computation they have plundered already in Money,
Plate, Household-Goods, Horses, Corn and Hay, etc. to the value of two hundred
thousand pounds. One Mr. Robert Boroughs an Attorney, and Rich, had all his
substance taken from him, and turned out of doors, who died for hunger and
cold, and they have killed many persons in cold blood without any provocation
given; for example, the Lord Galmoy took one Dean Dixies Son, and another young
Gentleman, tho not in Arms, and hanged them upon a Sign-post. Upon King James's
arrival in Ireland the Protestants thought they should have had some redress
for the Robbing and Pillaging of their Cattle and moveable goods, and other
inhumanities which the Irish Soldiers daily committed on them, as likewise for
the future; but behold the lenity and mercy of this King, who upon several
complaints made to him, would answer, that he would do for them what he could,
but they never received any further satisfaction or Justice; particularly the
Lord Galmoy cut off a Gentleman's head in the North, and made his own Son carry
it on a Pike in triumph before his Regiment. Upon Complaint of this to the
King, he seemed mightily displeased, yet the Lord Galmoy carried the Sword
before him the very next day. If we did relate all the dismal relations we have
from thence it would make a Volume. These are mercies fit to be acted by none
but Papists, and Popish Kings. An Irish Lord who came with King James from
France, speaking to a Clergyman of Dublin, said, That King James can never
expect possession of his Kingdoms by the Protestants means, unless tied and
settered with Conditions which he cannot, nor shall not observe to them: it is
by the force of Arms of his good Catholics, and by assistance of France that
he designs to regain his Dominions, and then he comes in free and boundless,
like an absolute Conqueror, and shall afterward do what he pleases; we have
had one taste of the sincerity of his Intentions, as well before, as when King;
and he that desires another, in God's name let him go to him or to the French
King, it is much as one: but suppose he is sincere now, and that he repents of
all his former illegalities and miscarriages, and resolves for the future never
to commit the like, what security can he give us that he will always continue so,
to govern us according to the Rights, Privileges, and Laws of the Land?
Certainly he can give us none besides his Oath or Promise, which signifies
nothing, for it is impossible for him to keep them without damning his own Soul;
and can any man believe he will damn his Soul to keep his Oath or Promise, when
he shall go to Heaven for breaking of them (according to the Doctrine of their
Church?) but what signifies it to break two or three Promises when every body
breaks them, or an Oath or so, it is in fashion now? as for the French King, he
has kept his Oaths and Promises in such an extraordinary manner, that all the
Histories now extant cannot come near to a Parallel, and our King James has
only been there to learn a few of his Morals, and is coming to teach 'em with
French and Irish Dragoons, intermixed with a little Liberty, such as we nor our
Fathers were able to bear. And now good Folks prepare your selves for this
happiness, for he is coming with open arms and stretched out hands to make ye
happy (that is Papists) whether ye will or no, and I doubt not but that you will
see your own happiness which is coming upon you like a Torrent, and prepare for
it accordingly.

I hope all the People in England will make a just judgment of what has been
said and consider what they may expect from such a King who is so much Jesuited.

All the World cannot but acknowledge that this great Revolution has been by
the miraculous Providence of Almighty God, and we ought (as St. Paul did) to
bless God that we are once delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and should
we not affront that Providence if we should let him into our Bosoms again?
would it not be just with God to let him destroy us? but can we be guilty of
such a notorious folly or madness, as to maintain the Ambition of the late King
James, to the ruin and destruction of our selves, which can be nothing else if
we contribute to restore him to the Crown; on the contrary, if we design to be
happy, and that our Posterity should be happy after us, in enjoying the Gospel
in its purity and its true Religion, and what the Laws of Nature and our
Country have conferred on us, we ought to oppose the late King James as the
common Enemy of our Religion and Liberty, for this is the time to Entail
happiness on our selves and our Posterity: Now, and Ever, Now, or Never.

ADVERTISEMENT.
AN Answer having been sent to the Sheet of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience
and Jure Divino disproved, and Obedience to the present Government proved from
Scripture, Law and Reason; the Author does promise to perform his Challenge,
and Print it (very shortly) with a Reply annexed to it, wherein shall be
explained those places of Scripture which relate to Government, or Monarchy.

Licensed

June 24. 1689.
Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey. 1689.


