THE AMORS OF Messalina Late Queen of ALBION. IN WHICH. Are Briefly Couched,
Secrets of the IMPOSTURE OF THE CAMBRION Prince, THE Gothic League, And other
COURT INTRIGUES of the Four last Years Reign, not yet made PUBLIC

By a Woman of Quality, a late Confident of Q. MESSALINA.

LONDON, Printed for John Lyford, 1689.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
HAving Correspondance with a Gentleman, Resident in Cologne, the Repositorum
of all the Oppressed Subjects of Gothland, where they first unload their
Grievances and thence disperse them all over Europe.

Among other pieces of Curiosity received from the said Gentleman, were these
few Sheets, presented to him by the Man who prints them, and from whom he has a
promise of the Second Part (that was just putting to the Press) and as soon as
printed off, I may expect them by the first Post; they bear the Title of Les
Amors de MESSELINA DERNIERE REINE d'ALBION, and penned, as the Printer informs
my Friend, by a Woman of Quality sometimes a Confident of Messalina late Queen
of Albion, and one that has been very familiar with her in the most secret
Intrigues; but upon some disgust received since their Retirement to the Gothish
Court (proceeding, as is supposed, from the Haughty and Intolerable Humor of
the Queen) has thereupon left the Court, and being very much out of Favor, is
retired unto the Electorate of Cologne, it seems to carry the appearance of an
Historical Novel, and contains most of the Cabinet Contrivances of the Court of
Albion for these last four Years, it lays open the Villainous Contrivances of
the Pagan Priests, especially Father Pedro's, against the Peace and Welfare of
the Christian Religion in that Kingdom; it discovers the Life of the late
Queen, with her Project to intail POPERY and SLAVERY on the Nation: It
discovers the Mufties or High Priest, together with the Antichristian-King of
Gothland^s Intrigues, at least to Imbroil if not totally to Subvert the Power
and Interest of all the Christian Princes in Europe: It gives an Acoount of the
Weakness and Oversight of the late King Lycognes, in suffering himself first to
be led by the Nose by Polydorus King of the Gauls, afterward to become his
Pentioner, and to have as it were his whole dependence upon him: As lastly his
Ungenerous and Cruel LEAGUE with the said King, not only to destroy or ruin all
his own Christian Subjects but even to Exterpate what they are pleased to call
the Nothern Herisie from the Face of the Earth.

It further shows the wicked and unparalled Design of the late Queen
Messalina, to impose upon and wrong the King her Husbands Children, two lovely
Princess, of their Just and Lawful Pretensions to the Crown of Albion.

P. S. While I was Correcting this Preface for the Printer, in order to its
Immediate publication, the Dutch Post-man brings my Foreign Letters, one of
which is from my Cologne Friend, in which is Enclosed the printed Sheets of the
Second Part, where (on a Cursolary view of them) I find the Intrigues of his
British Highness laid open, showing (after the failure of Count Davila and
Father Pedro) the Secret Intrigues of the WARMING-PAN; in which is briefly
Couched the whole management of that Imposture. With a New Amor that has
lately happen^d since the Courts retirement into Gothland, between King
Polydorus and Queen Messalina: Wherein are several Secrets of the Pagan League
not yet exposed: But such is the over eagerness of the Bookseller, that I
cannot persuade him to stop the publication of this, but I am over persuaded to
publish them in two Parts, as they are in the Original.

FAir Albion had for many years enjoyed all the pleasures that Peace and Plenty
could afford, and by a long discontinuance from War, seemed to have degenerated
from those inclinations to Glory which have been accounted natural to the
People of that Famous Island; the last time they carried out their Victorious
Arms, was against their Neighbors on the Belgic Coasts, where after many
signal proofs of Courage and Ability on both sides, the Quarrel proceeding
chiefly from Emulation of each others Power and Trade, a firm and lasting Peace
was concluded between them: And now Britomardes the Second of that Name, King
of Albion, having against his natural disposition been obliged to spend the
first and better part of his Youth in all those hazards and difficulties which
a Civil War within the Bowels of his own Country, and a twelve Years Exile
abroad laid him open to, he at last, to his wonderful satisfaction, finds
himself at liberty to follow the current of his own Humor, and resolves to
Sacrifice the remaining part of his Life to the soft temptations of Love and
Pleasure: But see the fallibility of Humane Resolutions, and how easily
Providence can disappoint our firmest Expectations, for though Britomardes knew
how to improve his Minutes of Love and Delight to as great advantage as any
Prince in the World, yet he could very rarely find himself disengaged from
those weighty Cares that necessarily attend the Thrones of Great Princes, or
from the apprehensions of some impending Dangers which the many discoveries of
Plots and Conspiracies against his Life, imprinted in him: He at last dying,
without lawful Issue, Lycogenes the Second, his only Brother, succeeded, a
Prince who in his Youth and Adversity gave so signal proofs of his Virtue and
Gallantry, that he rendered himself the Admiration of Foreign Countries, and
the Delight and Love of his own, but (I know not by what unhappy Councels
thereunto incited) after his coming to the Crown of Albion, he committed so
many Irregularities against even the Peace and Safety of his own People, that
they were obliged to call in Anaximander, Prince of the Low Lands, to their
Assistance to defend their Lives, which they affirmed Lycogenes had exposed and
sold to Polydorus King of the Gauls, and to recover their Rights and Liberties
which, say, they their King had encroach'd upon and taken from them: Lycogenes
had by his first Wife (who was Daughter to a Noble Peer of Albion) two Lovely
Princesses to his Daughters, the Eldest called Artemisia, Married to
Anaximander, the other Philadelphia, Married to Polycrates the Northern Prince.
His second Wife was Messalina, Daughter of a Huge Prince in Italy, and nearly
Related to Boanerges the High Priest, a Lady sent by Heaven to determine the
Fate of Poor Lycogenes, and to ruin the growing greatness of the Pagan
Interest in the Kingdom of Albion: She was, as to her Person, all that could be
wished in a great Woman, she had a Majestic, Lofty Carriage, black Hair,
delicate sparkling Eyes of the same Color, a handsome Nose, her Mouth
extremely pretty when she smiled, her Face Oval, her Look demure and sullen,
except when she was in Company with her Favorites; she was tall and well
shaped, and to those who only looked on her, she made lovely Figure; she took,
according to the mode of her Country, a great delight in Music and Amor;
Before her arrival at Albion, she had spent part of her time in the Court of
Gothland, where she behaved her self with that Gallantry, and so far insinuated
into the favor of that Court, that it is believed Lycogenes received his first
recommendation of her from the King of the Gauls; she looked upon the Nobility
of Albion either too just to their King, or too unworthy of her Favors, to
entrust them with any part of her Intrigues, and therefore she chose to be
beholding to the High Priest and to Polydorus, for Persons that might at once
serve both her Love and Ambition; and though Lycogenes did all to oblige her,
that a fond overweening Love could prompt a Man to, yet he found it more than
a difficulty many times to prevail with her to keep within such rules as were
most agreeable to his Honor, and requisite for the Peace and Security of his
Kingdom; Messalina after Lycogenes Accession to the Crown, upon the Height and
Eminence of her new Station, seemed to have received a new Air and Temper too;
for during the Reign of Britomardes (her Lycogenes then but a Subject) she bore
her Grandeur with that universal Complaisance and Condescension, that possibly
the Renown of her Prideless Mien and Deportment, out-ran the very Fame of her
Beauty, and the same Poetic Raptures that daily Deified the one, built Altars
too to the other. All Tongues were full of her Praises, and there wanted not
her Applause even in all Corners of the World. But as if Fortune had tried to
match her own Mutability in that Change which the Advance to a Crown soon
wrought through her whole Temper and Carriage; the Anointing Drops seemed to
have infused so strange a Spirit of Ambition and Haughtiness, that her former
Dearest Darlings and Favorites were then thought scarce worthy the Honor of
being her Vassals, insomuch that that Universal Quire that before had so
chanted her Praises, were all of a sudden struck dumb; whilst the Exaltation of
her Pride, with that of her Glory, had infinitely rebated the edge of the late
popular Veneration. But as disgusted as so haughty a Behavior soon made her,
not only by the People, but the very Courtiers of Albion; We are to consider
'twas in the Days of her more humble State, and gentler Charms, that she gained
the Heart of her Lycogenes. It Is true, as her Pride became a Fault, however it
brought one Virtue with it, in giving a Check to her former Inclination to
Intrigue; her sometimes Favorites (upon her Ascent to a Throne) being now a
little removed to a Distance unworthy of Graces so sublime. The long expected
and long sighed for Day of her Imperial Dignity being come, she could not
without abundance of Regret behold those Wrinkles Age had already made in the
Face of her Lycogenes, she would often ruminate on the Sensible Decay Time and
continual Cares had wrought in the Strength and Vigor of the King her Husband,
she could not consider his weak and seldom Caresses any otherwise than as
Memento Mori to her own Glory and Ambition; she saw many whom the unkindness,
shall I say Injustice of Lycogenes had rendered cold and disaffected to his
Interest, gaping with expectation of a speedy Change; she was not insensible
that the moment of his Death would probably be the Eternity of her Ruin, and
that at least her Honor, if not her Life, would be endangr'd; these
Considerations would often perplex the Mind of poor Messalina, and would often
check lhe current of her Joy even in the height of all her Glory. 'What? would
she cry, 'must this be the weak Foundation whereon all my future Hopes must
rest? Must all my Glorious Projects lean on the uncertain Security of a Feeble
Husband's Life? Shall the present possession of a Crown seem so to transport my
Thoughts, as to leave me careless of all future Contingencies, or shall I think
the high Station of a Queen of Albion so far above my Personal Merit, that like
a cheating Gamester, I can be willing to refund, or lay down my Royalty? No,
no, Messalina, think of the Grandeur of thy Mighty House, think of thy yet but
Blooming Youth and Beauty; but above all, think of thy boundless lofty Soul,
which will sooner break than bend to the least derogation of thy Honor:
Remember Boanerges, thy holy Patron and Kinsman, and the Mighty Polydorus, do
something worthy their great Alliance and Friendship: Remember the Eyes of all
thy Sect expect thy wonderful Operations; and since the necessity of Time
requires thy speedy Resolutions, remove boldly whatever dare obstruct thy Will,
and let thy Orders have a speedy execution.' Such were the extravagant Thoughts
of Unhappy Messalina, which were yet heightened afterward by the pernicious
Counsels of Count Davila, and Father Pedro, her two chief Assistants in all her
Consultations, and sent on purpose to work on the restless Humor of this
Queen, by Boanerges the High Priest, to promote the Interest of the Pagan
Faction in the Kingdom of Albion. These two, according to their Instructions,
draw first a Scheme of what they had to do, and then like crafty Workmen,
proceed to the Manner, Time, and Place for the execution of their Projects;
they soon come to a determination of the manner of their proceedings, for being
sensible of the main points whereon all the Queens Satisfaction seemed to
depend; to wit, Amor and Religion, (two things so relative and reciprocal to
each other all over Italy and great part of Gaul, that you shall seldom see a
Devotee without the attendance of her Enamouratto, or a Man at his Prayers
without mingling some pithy Ejaculations to the Saint that kneels by him) that
they seemed to have little else to do than to make seasonable applications to
the Queens humor, as time and opportunity should give leave. The Count was a
tall slender Man, well shaped, black Eyed, and quick, a large Nose, but thin
Faced, facetious in his Discourse, and after the Italian way Musical; he had
been well acquainted with Messalina in Italy, and had without any signal reason
to despair, made several addresses of Love to her; He was designed and sent by
the High Priest Boanerges, to make what efforts he could on the well known
Inclinations of Messalina, though he came not so well provided but that it was
generally thought the Queen defrayed even the expense of his Courtship: Father
Pedro was to ply the other weak side of Messalina, and by his Insinuations of
an implicit faith to be given to every thing, he should assert she was to use
her utmost power and influence with Lycogenes, to promote and put in execution
without reserve, whatsoever should be proposed as advantageous to the Pagan
Interest: This was the purport of their Commissions, which they were to manage
with all the Discretion, Secrecy, and Expedition imaginable.

The Queen happening to be indisposed a while after the Counts arrival at
Court, he was necessitated to defer the payment of his private devoirs for four
or five days, though the satisfaction her Majesty was pleased to express for
his arrival, was thought to add much to her recovery; She let him know about a
Week after his coming, she was willing to receive his Visit that day after
Dinner, and to avoid all inconveniency that might arise from the multiplicity
of Attendance at the Palace Royal, she takes her Chair privately, and crosses
over to St. Jaques, a small half Mile from Alba Regalis, and retiring into her
Closet, she with impatience waited the coming of the Count, having before given
Orders to admit him without Ceremony; the Count by what mischance detained is
uncertain, came not till two hours after the time appointed, and being
conducted by Aspasia, one of the Queens Women to the Closet door, went in, and
found Messalina thrown upon a Couch fast asleep, whereupon he stopped, and being
about to withdraw, the Queen awoke, and perceiving the Count, she started up in
some seeming disorder: The Count fearing she was displeased to have been seen
in that posture, was in great confusion whether to stay or go, till the Queen
making up to him, said, 'My Lord, this is a piece of Gallantry in you
extraordinary, to make a Lady wait thus long for your attendance; I know not
how you will be able to acquit your self from the justice of my resentment, of
which heretofore you have expressed great apprehensions:' The Count was so
abashed at this short but severe reprimand, that for a great while he could not
make any reply; but at last coming to himself he fell on his Knees and humbly
implored her Majesty's Pardon, telling her he hoped Her Majesty was not now to
be convinced of his readiness to serve her with the utmost faculty of his Soul;
that she could not be insensible that the first time he had had the honor to
see her in her own Country, he had made so entire a resignation of himself and
his interest to her will and pleasure, that it was not now in his power to
design any thing repugnant to her satisfaction, that he was too sensible of her
Justice, to believe that one unfortunate error was able to blot out the
remembrance of a thousand demonstrations past of the profound respect he always
thought due to her; that he hoped his hearty repentance for this, would induce
her not only to confirm his Pardon for the present, but to give him assurance
of her good will for the future: The Queen who all this while with the greatest
satisfaction imaginable, had heard the Count thus zealous in his Apology for an
error, she had resolved with a great deal less difficulty to have pardoned,
stretching out her hand to the Count, told him roundly that she was
sufficiently satisfied of his good inclinations toward her, that besides the
recommendation of her Kinsman the High Priest, his own personal merit had so
wrought on her opinion, as to make her resolve to commit a Secret of the
greatest importance to her Interest, that could be, to his management and
discretion, that as she did already believe the sincerity of his Protestations,
so she doubted the necessity of her Affairs, would in a little time cause her
to exact his performance: The Count was about to reply, when Madam Marchioness
de Tomazo, the Queens chief Confident, and Father Pedro, were come into the
withdrawing Room, and advancing up to the Closet, the Queen bid them enter,
where after the usual Ceremony they fall into a deep Consultation, the matter
before them, was the means of advancing the Pagan Interest throughout Albion,
and next the satisfaction of Messalina's Ambition, as to her continuance in the
Regency in case Lycogenes (which was very much feared) should in a short time
fail; they were each preparing to deliver their Opinion in this weighty Affair,
when news was brought that the King waited for Messalina's Company, to make a
visit to the Queen Dowager; Messalina before she departed, gave them in Charge
to deliver in Writing to her self, within three days, their Opinions severally,
and told them that within three days more she would have another Consult,
wherein she hoped they would come to a final Resolution: The Queen being gone,
these three fell to deliberation on the points already proposed; after a great
many Arguments they conclude, that nothing but the Queens having a Son, could
in any humane probability secure both the Queens Power, and the Grandeur of
their Diana and her Temples in Albion after the death of L^cogenes; for
supposing, said they, (which is very much doubted) that Lycogenes live to bring
in either by Fraud or Arbitrary Power, the Pagans Religion in his own time, yet
the root it will take will be so slender and shallow, that one breath of the
next Successor (being a Christian) will be able to blast it, and in the mean
time there will be no provision made for the Queens satisfaction; and alas!
cries the Marchioness, the Queen can no more hope for a young Son from
Lycogenes now, than I can for a young Set of Teeth at threescore; the Count
smiled to himself at the quaintness of the Expression, and as he guessed at
what her discourse did tend to, so he could not but be glad that she had first
broke the Ice: I presume, said Father Pedro, (addressing himself to the Lady)
her Majesty upon a due Consideration of the Premises will not be offended at
what shall be proposed by her Friends in order to her future as well as present
satisfaction, and because things of this nature may better be imparted to the
Queen, by your Ladyship than by us, we shall refer our thoughts of this point
to your Ladyships management: Upon this they parted, and the Count repairing to
his Lodging, fell a ruminating on that days Transactions, he began to think his
Master the High-Priest's business would come on very favorably; nor did he see
any great reason to despair of some success in his own Amor, he considered how
obligingly Messalina had entertained him in the Closet, and began to make some
random Conjectures of what she said she had to deliver to him, he remembered
the reports that had been given about Town concerning himself, and how that the
Queen had been pleased to say once, she believed Count Davila to be as capable
of winning a Ladies Favors as any man in Europe; he called to mind the
Character M^ssalina went under in Italy, upon the account of the young Baron of
Sanctifore, a Gentleman that was generally thought to have made Effectual Love
to her; he could easily guess what entertainment she had with the King her
Husband, who beside a failing contracted in his youth, had the heavy burden of
age and cares lying on him; he knew the Queen young and vigorous, and that the
mistrust she had of the Nobility of Albion in all probability, did restrain her
from making any advances of Intrigue or Amor with any of them; these and the
like considerations made him resolve to sound Messalina's inclinations with the
first opportunity, and in the mean time to press her to come to a resolution
concerning his Master. The next Night Father Pedro meets Messalina retiring
into her Bedchamber after Play, and the Queen stopping, asked what they had
done in her business? Pedro told her he thought the Marchioness had ere this
imparted their Opinions to her Majesty, and implored her Majesty not to be
offended with the freedom of their thoughts, since the present State of Affairs
could not possibly admit of any milder Resolutions, he laid before her the
instability of her Fortune, the danger of her Person, the Age of Lycogenes, his
Weakness, and Imperfection; he pressed her to consider the merit of the thing,
and how it would for ever advance the Interest of their Temples in Albion, and
when she objected her Honor and Credit, he told her, her Station was above
even Suspicion, for who durst peep into the Cabinets of Princes? He told her he
could propose methods as secret as pleasant, and begged her not to defer a
matter of such consequence, and which he feared every day might determine and
make void: Messalina, whose natural temper had bean long checked by the stiff
rules of Majesty and Greatness, began now to soften and melt at the pathetick
Arguments of Father Pedro, and eagerly grasping him by the hand, told him, That
if ever she could condescend to any part of his discourse, it must be upon
considerations more weighty than any of pleasure; That she wished she could
live to see her Religion Re-established, and a Son of her own placed in the
Throne of Albion; That she could not indeed without a great deal of trouble
consider the faint Caresses and weak Efforts of the King her Husband; and
confessed, that though Glory and Greatness had gained the ascendent of her
heart, yet she could not without a great deal of regret, resolve to bid
d^fiance to all the other satisfactions of l^fe; That though the high Quality
of Lycogenes had raised her heart above the common Rank, yet she could not
perceive but she was still subject to the common Failings of Flesh and Blood:
The lascivious Priest, who all this while was tickling himself with the coming
Temper of Messalina, supposing he had now raised her fancy, to the very
Critical point indeed was resolved to press the Discourse home; but some of the
Ladies of the Bedchamber coming up, the Queen without any more words, walked
forward into her Bedchamber; Father Pedro at the same time retiring something
dissatisfied with his supposed disappointment, was making what way he could to
his Lodgings, but judging it not very late by the Company he saw yet stirring
in the Court, he resolved to take a turn or two in the Galleries that lead to
the descent into the Forest of St. Jaques; he had just turned the Corner of
the first Gallery, when a Young Lady makes up to him with all the haste and
seeming Concern imaginable: O Sir, says she, my Lady has been in Bed almost
this hour, and wonders extremely what should detain you so long, the Clock has
struck One, and all the Court almost are in Bed: Here, Sir, I beseech you, take
the (...), the Candle is in the Lobby; make as little noise as may be; you need
not lock the Door; I Will but just step to the Countess of Thunderlands Lodging,
and will be back in half an hour. Pedro was extremely startled at this
Adventure, but judging (as indeed it was) some Amorous Assignation, and his
Spirits, by Messalina's Charming Discourse, being a little before raised, he
was resolved to fill up the vacant place, and answer the Longing Ladies
expectation; he was confident the Man designed must be one of his own Tribe,
for by the little glimmering of the distant Lights, he was sure the Maid could
not mistake their Garbes, all that troubled him was to find the right Door, if
the Maid should have gone before she had opened it, and he durst not ask her
Ladies Name for fear of suspicion: In short, he tells the Maid softly, She must
go back with him a little, for that he had some Business of Importance to leave
with her till morning; The Maid readily returns, and being just come to the
Door, he bids her make what haste she could back, and he would defer his
Business till then. The Maid being gone, he opens the door and perceives they
were of Aspasia's Lodgings, another of the Queens Confidents, and Wife to
Latroon an Iberian Count, and lately made Viceroy of that Kingdom by King
Lycogenes. Pedro was well acquainted with the Lady, and remembered that Father
Sebastian was reported to be very intimate with her. Aspasia was about the
Thirty fourth Year of her Age, was always very Fair, had large Gray Eyes, very
languishing and sweet, she had a very fine Carriage, debonaire in her
Conversation, and Witty, a huge lover of Intrigues, and insatiate in her
Wantonness; She had formerly been Loved by Polydorus King of the Gauls; as also
by King Lycogenes, by whom she was first recommended to Latroon for a Wife; She
seemed to be the right hand of Messalina, who would unload her most secret
Thoughts in her Bosom; She was a great Bigot in Paganism, and would often boast
of the Virtues and good Nature of the Pagan Priests; She had, as it seems, been
often Charmed with the Conversation of Father Sebastian, and had that night,
appointed him to come to her Chamber; Father Pedro knowing the Lodgings, shuts
the Door, and immediately repairs, without Light, to Aspasia's Bed, who by this
time, with long Expectation, was fallen into a soft slumber; he locks the Door
of her Bedchamber, and without stay, undressing, steals softly in, and
clasping Aspasia in his Arms, she presently wakes; Mademoiselle de Elvira's
Beds head was near to Aspasia's, and separated only by a slight partition,
which obliged them to whisper low; Aspasia fell a Cliding the supposed
Sebastian for his stay, and Wantonly tells him, he ought not to have made her
suffer Penance before she had committed the Sin; he answers her with Kisses
and repeated Caresses, and in the intervals of their Amors, would whisper and
chat of all the little Intrigues about the Court; Father Pedro asks her how the
Queen fared, and whether Lycogenes had as yet been able to give her any
assurance of a Son and Heir? Aspasia sighing Replies; 'Alack! Lycogenes his
misfortune, together with Messalina's severe Virtue, she was afraid, would go
near to ruin the fairest Hopes that ever the Pagans in Albion had, or would
have while the Sun shone; and that unless some speedy Application and Remedy be
used, that glimmering Light, which by the influence of Lycogenes they did at
present enjoy, would with his Fall, be turned into everlasting Darkness: I
know, my Dear Sebastian, said she, that Messalina's haughty Spirit alone,
retards the Complement of all our Hopes: She has all the common Frailties of
our Sex; She Loves, and she Confesses too, and yet her mighty Pride restrains
her Inclination: She last Night saw Count Davila pass by, when in a sort of
Fxtasie, she grasped me eagerly, and cried; Look, there is the Count, Aspasia:
'And when the King once pressed her to retire with him to Bed, she turns to me,
and sighing, said, We are going to sleep, Aspasia.' Nothing could add more to
the satisfaction of Father Pedro, than this knowledge of the Queens
Inclination; and though he had not been mentioned by Aspasia to be any way in
the Queens Thoughts, he was resolved, to push on his own Fortune, to watch the
Counts steps, and to come in, if possibly, with him for a share in the Booty:
Aspasia's Maid in the mean time being come back, and supposing Sebastian and
her Lady safe together, was preparing her self for Bed; she was just putting
out the Candle when she heard a small knocking at the outward Door; but
supposing it to be only some of the Countess of Thunderlands Maids, considering
she was to wake betimes to let out Father Sebastian, she laid her self down
without answering: The two Lovers, who by this time had trodden all the secret
paths of Love, were now at length disposing themselves to sleep: Aspasia, whose
thoughts were pleased with this Enjoyment of her supposed Sebastian, was
quickly wrapped in Dream and gentle slumbers; but Father Pedro was kept awake
with the cares of manageing this Nights Intrigue; he was one while thinking to
rise softly and get off without discovery, another while he hoped by this
accident, to render Aspasia instrumental and assistant to his design with the
Queen; he feared not any thing from Sebastian's discovery, since his Fortune
was in his power; besides, Aspasia, for her own sake, would be silent in the
matter; so that at last he resolves to stand it out, and without any more
concern, turns himself about to his rest: In the morning early Cleone,
Aspasia's trusty Maid, gets up, and gives the signal at her Ladies door, to the
supposed Sebastian to rise; Father Pedro had taken care over night to draw the
Curtains close about, and clasping Aspasia in his Arms, he tells her he was
mightily disturbed in his sleep with a Dream concerning Father Pedro: 'Now you
speak of Father Pedro, cries Aspasia, I can tell you, that of late he is
mightily in favor with Messalina and the Count, and he seems to share all the
favors of her good opinion; and to speak the truth, Father Pedro has all the
qualifications in the World, that may be requisite for the Conquest of the most
stubborn Ladies heart; for besides the advantages of a comely Face and Person,
he has so many pretty ways of insinuating love and friendship, that the Queen
her self has told me,' That next to Count Davila, she did not know a Person in
the World so charmin^ in his Conversation as Father Pedro: 'You speak, replied
the supposed Sebastian, so feelingly of the Merit of Father Pedro, that I have
reason to fear and resent him as a Rival; and I can hardly assure my self I
have reason to boast of your Favors, till I can hear you speak with more
indifferency of him. But tell me, my Dear Aspasia, says he, How long have you
observed Messalina's so advantageous Opinion and Character of Father Pedro; the
Count, indeed, as well for his former acquaintance in Italy, as for the
Character he bears of the High-Priest's Legate here, may give him a pretense to
some small share in Messalina's thoughts; but as there can be no such reason on
the other side, so I cannot but wonder, by what Charm Father Pedro could so of
a sudden advance himself into the favor of the Queen:' Ask me no more, my
Dear, replies Aspasia, to tell what I am both by Honor and Interest obiged to
conceal, and assure thy self that the same motive that induces the Queen to
respect Father Pedro, will oblige Father Pedro to be both thy Friends and mine,
and all of our Profession: 'Accept then, Dear Aspasia, from this moment, says
he, Pedro's assured Love and Friendship; Pedro can never forget the favors of
this night, Favors by Fate designed alone for Pedro.' At the pronouncing these
last words, he raised his Voice a little, and withdrawing the Curtains, he at
once discovered the Counterfeit Sebastain, and the real Pedro. Aspasia, who at
the latter part of his Words, had perceived not only the Deceit, but the
Deceiver, seemed to be in the greatest confusion imaginable, till Father Pedro
first imploring her pardon, told her, He was extremely sorry, if he robbed her
of the satisfaction of a more worthy Bedfellow, that Fortune, and her Maids
unwitting importunity, had prevailed with him to lay hold of, and improve that
lukie minuite which his inclination, though with despair, had often made him
wish for, that by his future endeavors and services, he hoped to make her
sensible that Seba^tian was was not the only Man in the World worthy of her
favors; and in the mean time he begged her impartially to consider whether it
could be in the power of Man to resist so powerful Temptations, as yielding
Beauty and persuasive Opportunity. Aspasia having with abundance of Patience
heard the wanton Priest's Apology, had by this time very well recovered out of
her amazement, and having first reflected on the good Behavior of the Priest
in Bed, and the bad consequences that arise from a discovery of this Nights
Intrigue, she thought it her best way to make a virtue of necessity, and close
with the Priest without farther jangling, she remembered the Character she her
self had given him, and had now experimented the height of his perfections, she
could not perceive her self a loser by the change, nay, rather she had all the
advantage of the bargain, nor could the strangness of the Accident Afflict her,
since the satisfaction of her life lay chiefly in Intrigues; having briefly run
over these considerations to her self, she turns her self with a great deal of
assurance to her Lover, and throwing her Arm about his Neck, she tells him,
that since he had been an Ear Witness of her good Opinion of him, she thought
it now to no purpose to dissemble; that though she had not designed her favors
for him at that time, yet she was too well satisfied of his merit to find
fault with the error; that if she apprehended any misfortune to her self, it
was her fear that he had not found the treasure answerable to his hopes and
expectations, and that consequently she might find her self lessened in his
good Opinion hereafter; the crafty Priest, who by this nights Accident had, to
his thinking, laid a sure foundation to all his future Projects huggs the
well-pleased Lady in his Arms, and after a thousand reciprocal Wantonnesses,
they swear an inviolable Friendship to each other: Father Pedro repeats to her
all the design and project of advancing and settling the Pagan Interest during
Lycogenes his life, and, engages her to press the Queen continually to come to
a speedy Resolution as to the point of Regency and Succession; prevails with
her to give him a faithful account from time to time of all Transactions
between the Count and Messalina* as also to give him her assistance in any
matters he should propose hereafter; to all which Aspasia readily Assents and
solemnly Swears; and now the Morning being much advanced, Pedro takes leave of
Aspasia, and prepares to dress, when Cleone knocks at her Ladys Door, to know
if she were stirring; Aspasia desires Pedro to retire into a Closet, and
slipping on her Night Gown opens the door to Cleone; the Maid having a while
before seen Sebastian with some Company walking in the Court Yard, merrily
asked her Lady when the Lover got out, for that she had not seen him go;
Aspasia fearing Sebastian might ask Cleone questions, thought it her best way
to acquaint her with her own mistake, and bid her wait a while for her farther
Instructions; the Maid had just retired to the Window of the Withdrawing-Room,
when she straight runs back and tells her Lady she saw Sebastian in the Court
below making toward her Lodgings; Aspasia in a great fright runs to the
Closet, and desires Pedro to be silent and still, for that Sebastian was
coming; Father Pedro who by this time had got himself dressed, thought it would
be tedious staying there, and immediately opens the Closet Door and marches
off, having just got to the door going into the Gallery, he pops just upon the
Queen and Count Davila going to the Mosque at St. Jaques; Sebastian had got up
among the Queens Retinue and had perceived Father Pedro coming out of Aspasia's
Lodgings, he began to ruminate with himself what business Father Pedro could
have there, and at that time of day, and reflecting on Aspasia's loose Life,
his jealousy prompted him to think that he had lost his Assignation, and had
been supplanted the last Night by Father Pedro; Sebastian was but an Underling
in the Priests Tribe in comparison of Pedro, but was of a haughty revengeful
humor; he was a lusty big Bon^d Man, and had an indifferent good Face, he was
a Renegado Christian, and had by the influence and promises of Aspasia, while
she was in Gaul, been perverted to Paganism; he had had a long Amor with
Aspasia, and by her means had been preferred to the Brotherhood of the Pagan
Priests; upon his Jealousy aforesaid he immediately repairs to Aspasia's
Lodgings, to try if he could make any Discovery; Aspasia to prevent questions,
immediately chides him for his Disappointment, he tells her he came not so late
but that Cleone might have heard him knock; Cleone makes a little faultre in
her Speech and confirms Sebastian in his suspicion, and resolving to be
Reveng'dd, at least on Father Pedro, he clears up his look and falls a toying
with Aspasia, and owns himself to blame for staying past the time; in the mean
while Father Pedro having mingled among the Queens Retinue, perceived that
Messalina and the Count, by the distance that the Attendants kept, were in
private discourse, and guessing at the subject of it, he thought it best not to
interrupt them, so turning short he retired to his own Lodgings; Count Davila
having according to his last resolutions waited with diligence for an
Opportunity to try the temper and designs of Messalina, had that Morning, upon
p^etence of imparting some News to her which he had lately received from Italy
and France, been to wait on the Queen, who after some extraordinary marks of
her satisfaction for his presence, asked him to attend her to St. Jaques; This
kind reception and invitation, confirmed the Count in his resolutions of
discovering his love, and pressing on the main business, so that he readily
ushers the Queen through the Lodgings to her Chair, and in one of her Coaches
follows her to St. Jaques, where waiting in the Antichamber till the Queen had
done her Devotions at the Mosque, he was sent for by Messalina to her Closet.
The Count was so confounded between hope and fear, that the trembled all over
when he went in; he was considering what the consequences of his Attempt might
be, if by his overweening fancy he should have misinterpreted the freedom of
Messalina's humor; it amazed him to think of the dangers he should lay himself
open to, in owning Love to the Wife of a Potent Monarch, if she were pleased to
put a bad construction on it, and in the least resent it; such were the doubts
and fears of the Court before he came to the Queen: But alas! these glooming
thoughts were soon blown over, for Messalina very graciously receiving him at
the Closet-door, and with an extraordinary gayety giving him her Hand, after a
turn or two, seated her self on a Couch, and commanded the Count to sit by her,
and turning to him, asked him merrily, what News? The Count by this time was
come to himself, and with abundance of assurance, grasping her Majesty's Hand,
told her, 'That the Fame of her Majesty's Beauty and Merit had so taken up the
Hearts of the People of Albion, that where ever he came, he could hear no other
Discourse.' Well, my Lord, replies the Queen, I thank you for your Complement,
and though I am Ignorant of the People of Albion 's thoughts of me, I dare
presume, my Character pass^s with advantage enough in your Opinion. 'It is now
my misfortune, replies the Count, not to be able to express the sincerity of my
Zeal to your Majesty's Service any otherwise than in words, and that severity
with which your over nice Virtues treats all your Admirers, limits and
restrains the Innocent freedom even of them:' I must confess, continued he,
'the high Station, Fortune and Merit have settled you in, may with reason
render your Majesty regardless of any pr^er of Service from me; yet since the
necessity of your Affairs (as sometimes of the greatest Princes in the World)
require the advice and assistance of your Subjects and Friends, I hope your
long experience of my Truth and Love, may now prevail with your Majesty to make
me the happy Instrument of your future Satisfaction.'

The Queen who by the several remonstrances of her three Counselors had been
both pressed and convinced of the danger of her Affairs, and being partly
overcome by the Solicitations and Endearments of the Count in particular,
resolved now to give a loose to her natural Inclinations, and thereupon turning
to the Count, in a soft languishing Tone she replied, I must at length, dear
Davila, confess my own Frailty and thy Power, my haughty mind I see at last
will stoop, and thou art Born to be my Conqueror: The Count who was all this
while in a rapture, throwing himself at her Feet embraced her Knees, extolling
his own good Fortune and her happy Resolutions; he gave her Ten thousand Thanks
for her preference and good Opinion of him before any of the Nobles in the
Court of Albion that his whole thoughts and endeavors should be employed to
make good her Expectation, and he did not doubt but she should in a little time
find her self thoroughly disengaged from all sorrowful Apprehensions: This
minutes Condescension and freedom, had so emboldened and assured M^ssalina's
Heart, that raising the Count, who at every Word was pressing and kissing her
fair Hand, she threw her Arms about his Neck, and in ^morous Sighs and Murmurs
she whispered her Wishes in his Ears; Ten thousand times she kissed his Lips
and Eyes, while with his busy hand he roved over all the Fields of Love,
sometimes with eager have he would climb the Snowy Hills of Pleasure, and then as
quick retire down to the Valies and Fountain of D^light and Love; Dear Davila,
in Rapture would she cry, Divine Messalina, would he reply; Ah! can you -- will
you now refuse, said he; Ah! do not -- do not ruin me, said she; But the Count
who through Messalina's Eyes saw the Temper of her Heart, resolved not to slip
that lucky opportunity, and turning first to make the Door secure he like a
hungry Lion seizes his trembling Prey and in his Arms conveys her to the other
side of the Closer, and throwing her gently on the Couch thereby, in eager
Raptures he lays open and unfolds her secret Treasure, and rifles all the
Stores of Love and Beauty; And now Messalina having tasted the difference
between a Vigorous Lover and a Feeble King, clasping her yet panting Davila in
her Arms, I shall indeed be happy now said she, unless the Stars and Heaven
conspire against me, I feel at length my Crown fit fast upon me, and now my
Fate is disengaged from the weak slender Thread of poor Lycogenes's Life, my
Soul at length will reach its proper Sphere, and I shall with Pride look down
and see my most malicious Enemi^s bowing to my Royal P^sterity; no more shall
proud Albion rejoice over the Age and Weakness of the King my Husband, no more
shall they Triumph over my Barren Modesty; thou my dear Davila shall make their
Y^k, and with a Gordian Knot, I Will tie it on their Necks; I am big my dear
already with the Joy, and doubt not a happy result of our undertakings. The
Count who all this while lay Ravished with his Victory, was running over the
whole Series of her Charms, one while he reflected on her high Quality and
Station, and then her Beauty, Riches, and her Love, did so confound his Senses,
he could hardly convince himself his Happiness was Real; sometimes he would of a
sudden grasp her Hands, Embrace and Kiss, doubting it was all Vision, Dream,
and Fancy: Thus in these Transports did they dally out the time, till trusty
Aspasia gave notice at the Door, that Lyc^genes was come into the Forest, and
probably designed for St. Jaques; this news strait roused the stumb^ing wanton
Lovers, and hastened the Counts departure: The Count conjures her to bless him
speedily with such another opportunity; which with a thousand Kisses she
assures him, and so he takes his leave; he had not well got away before Madam
Marchioness de Tomazo came up, and finding the Queen in a very Pleasant humor,
thought to engage her in some discourse concerning their last Consultations;
the Marchioness being a great Bigot in the Pagan Principles, had been
influenced by Father Pedro to stand his Friend privately, in gaining the Queens
Favor upon this juncture, and by his subtle insinuations had (...) deluded
into her Opinion, that it would be much more meritorious for the Queen in the
case before proposed, to make use of the endeavors of a holy Man, and that it
was probable their business might better succeed if the Operation were begun by
a Sanctified person; these and the like insinuations had prevailed with the
blind Zealot to assure the lustful Priest of her Assistance and Interest, and
accordingly finding Messalina, as is aforesaid, in a jaunty humor, she thought
it now a fit time to move the business,

So making up to Messalina, she said, It Is not a little satisfaction to me, to
see your Majesty at this time so pleasantly disposed; and as I do believe it
proceeds from some considerable cause, so I should receive it as a peculiar
obligation from your Majesty, if I might be made either a partaker or an
assistant of your Joy' Thou shall be both, my dear Tomazo, replied the Queen,
and I shall give th^e reason to tax my Justice and my Friendship, should I let
thee participate only of my Sorrows; No, no, my dear Tomazo, since by thy
advice chiefly my satisfaction came, 'twould be unreasonable not to let thee
taste the fruit of thy own works; I have at last overcome that subtle
Disputant, Honor; I have reconciled those nice points of flashy Reputation,
and begin to taste the solid pleasure of Interest and Ambition: I shall be a
Queen now indeed, my dear Tomazo; the Count, the Count Tomazo, will make me a
Glorious Powerful Queen: Rejoice, rejoice Tomazo, and let the Pagans of Albion
all rejoice; Mahomet now will surely hear our Prayers, the time will now draw
near for our deliverance: Oh! that my Youth and Beauty should be thus long
Cursed to trifle with Age, and State-Impotency: Oh! How I nausiate my former
Resolutions, when every scrupulous thought of Honor lost me an Age of
pleasure: Forgive my Indiscretion, would she cry, when with an awful Frown I Would
check thy good advice: How have I fretted when in thy long and grave Debates
thou would urge the necessity of -- I thought Majesty could live without
Support, vainly believing I could carb the Politition, as the Lover with my
Frowns: Forgive me, dear Tomazo, since at last I am reclaimed. The Court, my
Dear, the Count will make us happy. The Marchioness, tho amazed at this
extraordinary humor of the Queen could not however, but guess how affairs
stood; and though she had been pretty well satisfied of the Queens Resolutions
to surrender, yet she thought she would have spent a little more time in
Capitulation; however, since the main design was in all probability answered,
she thought she could do no more than be sorry that the Count had outleap'd her
Frind Father Pedro, and yet upon better consideration she did not believe it
impossible, if matters between the Count and the Queen did not speedily answer
her expectation, but that she might be able at last to make good Father Pedro's
pretentions.

The Queens thoughts were all this while taken up with the Count, upon whose
Name in sudden raptures she would often call; Oh? my dear Davila; my Life, my
Soul, my Deliverer my Protector, would she cry, till the Marchioness making up
to her broke off her Contemplations, by telling her it was late, 'and asked her
whether she would 'go back to Alba Regalis? Ay, any where, replied the Queen,
so Davila be there. The King who all this time was walking in the Forest, had
been consulting and discoursing with the Count of Thunderland and another,
about establishing the Pagan Interest in A^bion, he was deploring his
unhappiness in the want of an Heir, and feared all his Endeavors without one,
would prove ineffectual. The wicked Priest and other corrupted Ministers about
him, had buzzed the Necessity and the Merit of this so far, that Good Prince,
he told them, 'He would be no way wanting to the furtherance and propagation of
his Religion in his Kingdom.' These Bloodhounds presently snapt at this
Gracious Condesension, and communicate the same to Messalina, The Queen, who
was conscious how fair a stroke she had made toward the accomplishment of
their desires, and her own Ambition, told them, 'She would leave all things to
the advice and will of the King her Husband; that she did not altogether
dispare of the blessing of the Gods, and of bearing a Son yet to her Dear
Lycogenes; but that at the same time she did verily believe, that if the Powers
above were not pleased to raise unto her a Son of her own to Inherit the Crown
of Albion, and to re-settle the Pagan Religion there, nevertheless she could
not in Conscience think her self disengaged from her utmost Endeauours to
advance it by some other extravagant means; but as her first Hopes were not
altogether as yet in vain, so she could not decend to particulars as to the
other.' The subtle Priests who saw both the Cunning and the Zeal of Messalina
in this answer, went away with all the satisfaction imaginable, concluding now
they had nothing more to do than to prescribe a due method for the management
of a suppositious Birth, in case the Queen, which they extremely feared should
fail in her hopes, as they supposed of Lycogenes. But alas! poor Wretches; they
shot extravagantly wide of Messalina's thoughts, while she could not choose but
laugh, to think how pleasantly she (...) them; She had had too long an
experience of the Capacity of Lycogenes her Husband, to hope for the least
encouragement or performace from him; and she had too lately found and approved
the difference between the Count and the King, to think of leaving her business
unfinished, or repenting the change she had made: No, no, she was so far from
relying on the Weakness of her Husband, that she was now continually employed,
in contriving Opportunites to ^et and entertain the Count, and the satisfaction
she had received at her last Conference with him, had so enlivened her hopes of
an answerable Success, that among her Considerats she would talk very assuredly
of the Business, and would many times be Calculating the hour and time of her
Delivery, as if she had known her self with Child by Inspiration. But alas!
these were only the flights of a passionate Zeal, for when her more lucid
Intervals would give her judgment scope, and free consideration, she found her
principles too weak to infer so weighty Conclusions, and was loath to let her
hopes rest on so weak a foundation. No doubt the Count had been as obliging as
a Man under those cricumstances could be expected, and the vast temptations of
Honor and Riches, besides the enjoyment of so beautiful a Lady as Messalina
really was, had without dispute put a double Edge on his Vigor and her
Expectation, but notwithstanding her own mighty Faith, she resolved to have a
repeated mixture of his good Works, and accordinly sends him a small Billet by
Aspasia to this purpose, 'Lycogenes designs within these two hours to go to W
-- and will not be back till to morrow; I design to go up the River, and lie to
night at R -- d, my Retinue will be very small; and perhaps I may wish for
Company: I Will leave you to guess who would be most grateful to Messalina.' The
Count receives the Summons with Joy; and with all speed and secresy prepares
for the Assignation. The Queen took no body but Aspasia and the Marchioness de
Tomazo with her: Within an hour after her Arrival comes the Count; the Ladies
know their Duty, and discreetly retire; Dalvia, whose longing Appetite had, by
his first delicious taste been increased, now gluts himself in Messalina's
Charms, while her officious Fancy builds worlds of Pleasure for her self, and
vainly flatters her with lasting Satisfaction: Oh! how she would dote and rave, and
k^s, then sighed, and in soft Murmurs wish, and wish, and then abruptly cease,
and hide her blushing amorous Looks in the Courts Bosom: Thus did they dally
out the winged hours, till Aspatia came and told them, the Countess of
Sunderland with another Lady, were landed, and coming to wait on her Mejesty;
Messalina fearing they would stay all Night, as indeed they designed, and not
knowing how to bestow the Count, thought it best to go back to Alba Regalis
that Night, and accordingly gives order for her Gally with all speed; and
meering the Councels on the Stair head, told her, She was just on her return,
and giving her her hand, they immediately take Water and away: The Count also
about an hour after, takes a small Gondola and follow^. At this rate did the
Count and Messalina correspond for two or three Months, and no hopeful
appearance yet of what they had with ^o much assurance promised themselves. The
Court even in Messalina's Judgment, had acquitted himself with all the Bravery
imaginable, and Messalina had not been wanting in her Endeavors ours to bring
about a Business of so great Importance to her Interest: She grieves, He
wonders, at so strange a Disappointment, they mutually encourageing one
another, they fall to fresh Endeavors, and love, and wish, and promise, but
still in vain: Messalina had during this amorous Juncture, considered both her
Pleasure and Interest, but finding that the feeding on the one would starve the
other, she told the Count frankly, That she saw plainly her Misfortune, and
that she must of necessity have recourse to some more immediate Remedy; that as
she had entrusted him with all her Secrets, so she doubted not of his best
Advice and Concurrence in a Matter she should propose, that she should still
retain her good Opinion of him, and wholly imputed the Disappointment to
Defects of her; That however she must make the best of her Affairs, and help
out by Art what Nature had denied: She put him in mind of their Consult and
Resolution, and that nothing but a Son and Heir could secure her Honor, and
settle the Pagan Interest in Albion, she did therefore desire him forthwith to
summon a Convention of two or three discreet Priests, together with himself,
Aspasia, the Marchioness, and some few stanch Courtiers, to propose Methods for
the due management of this grand Concern, and to engage Lycogines to consent
to, and further, not only this, but whatsoever else they should in their
Wisdoms think agreeable and necessary for the Advance of Paganism and the
Extirpation of the Christians throughout Albion.

The End of the FIRST PART
THE Second Part OF THE AMORS OF Messalina Late Queen of ALBION. WHEREIN The
Secret Court Intrigues of the Four last Years Reign are further pursued;
Particularly the IMPOSTURE OF THE CHILD.

By a Woman of Quality, a late Confidant of Q. MESSALINA.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, 1689.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
IT cannot be denied with how much Applause the First Part of this History has
been received in the World, according to the merits of it, which is in part
demonstrable, from the Account most Booksellers give of their being daily
importuned for the Second Part, and there having been but one Party appeared
against it, viz. the Pagans of Albion, the Publisher begs to be excused for
being so Dilatory in Completing this History, not being able to bring in the
Secrets of the LEAGUE, the Amors of MESSALINA and Polydorus, and other
Intrigues of the Gothic Court into this Part, on the account the Translator
has lain under great Indisposition of Body, for near these three Weeks past,
and it was not thought advisable to interpose the style of any other; but he
being now on the mending hand, you may expect the Third Part, which Compleats
the whole History, with all the speed imaginable; and he hopes it will prove in
this as it does in Mistresses, whose put-offs and delays in matters of
possession, does but more whet on the Gallants Appetites; so that when they
have once attained to Enjoyment, it becomes so Ravishing that their Lovers
fancy themselves amply rewarded for all their forbearance and expectation.

The Second PART.
THE Pagans of Albion, had from the beginning of the Reign of Lycogenes with
great assurance expected some hapy, and speedy overtures for their eternal
settlement in that Kingdom; Nor had Lycogenes himself been wanting in his
endeavors to overruled or destroy all that pretended to oppose, or question
his proceedings against the Foundamental Rights of his Christian Subjects, he
had already removed the most of them from all Places of Trust, and contrary to
the known Laws of the Land had introduced Persons, by the said Laws incapable
to Serve; he had Raised and kept up an Army composed of Mercenary's and
Foreigners, not only to Terrify, but upon the first happy occasion to Oppress
all that should contradict his Resolutions; he had for the first three years of
his Reign, carried all things with so high a hand, that the People of Albion
from the highest to the lowest, were in a strange Confusion to think of the
dismal consequences that would necessarily flow from such Arbitrary
Proceedings: and though they had by the subtle Insinuations of a Court Party
of Divines, been Poisoned with that pernicious position of Passive Obedience,
yet they could not without a great deal of regret behold all the fences and
enclosures of their Laws, and Libertiy's thrown down and trampled on, and be
obliged to hold their Lives and Estates on so precarious Terms as the will and
discretion of an Antichristian packed Council: what related to the private
satisfaction of the King's humor they did with all humility, and unexpected
alacrity submit and yield to, but when it was plain that the whole Kingdom was
Designed and Resolved a Sacrifice, to the Interest and Ambition of a few wicked
Councillors, and a small party of Men, that had been by public Acts of the
Realm declared the Inveterate and Irreconcilable Enemies of all Christians but
chiefly of the Albionites, they then began to search into the measures of their
submission, and diligently to enquire how far they were obliged to pay
Obedience to the Commands of their Magistrates and Governors; and realy upon
the scrutiny they plainly perceived their own weakness, and the Impositions of
their Enemies, who by this subtle Doctrine had ensnared them to set their
Hands to and Sign as it were their own Destruction, several of the Great and
Wisest Men in the Kingdom, had been Debating on this Subject, and all concluded
in an acknowledgment of their weakness in so manifestly exposing themselves and
their Country to the Capricious Humors, or Tyrannical Principles that very
often are found in the greatest Princes, and therefore though from their very
Souls they wished all happiness imaginable to their King and Governor, yet they
thought their duty stretched too far on the Tenter-hooks, when by a blind
submission to irregular Commands they were obliged to forego the natural
principles of self preservation, and that by seeking officiously to add to
their Loyalty they must necessarily detract from their Judgments, Conscience,
and Honesty: But Lycogenes, who by a diligent scrutiny, and long experience of
the Natures of the people of Albion, (to his great satisfaction) knew how
effectually the Doctrine of Non-resistance (which he and his party, with great
zeal and industry had insinuated and promoted) had wrought on his Christian
Subjects, thought he had laid a very sure foundation for the introduction of
those Novelties and Abuses we have since had imposed on us, and was by the
assiduous Instigations of his Pagan Counselors prevailed upon to resolve the
total Extirpation, or at least enslaving of the Christian Heretics, as he
called them, in his Dominions, and fearing that all he could do in his own life
time, would be insufficient to assure and establish the Pagan Faction and
Interest, unless he could find such a Successor as should confirm and
strengthen what he should now begin, upon these Considerations, I say, he was
easily wrought on to consent to any thing his Counselors should propose for
the benefit and establishment of Paganism in the said Kingdom, and now what
more remained, than that the Priests consult and find the most convenient and
speedy means to secure their own Interests to indulge Messelina's Ambition, and
to sooth Lycogenes his Bigoted Zeal: Several ways were proposed, and sometime
spent in Arguments and Debates before they could come to a final Resolution.

The Christians of Albion, by several Acts of their General Diets, had their
Laws, their Liberties, and their Religion secured to them, and in all, or most
of their Assemblies for one hundred years past, they had one or other express
Law against Paganism, though none did so thoroughly disable and lessen their
interest in Albion as that commonly called the Tests; and though some good
Christian Dissenters from the Church of Albion, were therein severely included,
yet they were chiefly intended for the discouragement and suppression of that
pernicious Sect of Pagans in Albion, Lycogenes his private Counsel therefore
proposed the taking away these Tests, as a necessary Preliminary for the
introduction of Paganism; the Project indeed was good, but how to bring it
about, was the difficulty, for besides that the general Diet would hardly be
induced to abrogate those very Laws which some of them so lately had stickl'd
for and promoted, and such Laws whereon their own and the Kingdoms security
seemed more immediately to depend (the Pagans having in all Reigns been proved
the irreconcilable Enemies and malicious designers against the peace and
welfare of the Christians in Albion) besides, I say, this difficulty, they were
obliged to gain the consent of Prince Anaximander and the Princess Artemisia,
the Presumptive Heiress of the Crown, for the Abrogation of the said Laws, and
this indeed was the great business that struck with Lycogenes, for as to what
concerned the election of such Members as should serve his turn in the next
General Assembly, he bid them take no care, for he was sure he could by his
influence procure such persons returned as should effectually answer his utmost
expectations: With all speed therefore persons are employed to negotiate with
the Prince and Princess for their consent aforesaid, and to lay before them the
sincerity of his Majesty's Intentions in that matter, and that his Majesty's
great and only alm was for the more general accommodation of all his Dissenting
Subjects, and that as their Highnesses could not believe that his Majesty would
resolve on any thing to their prejudice, so he did not in the least doubt of
their Highnesses ready concurrence in so pious an undertaking; but alas poor
Lycogenes and his Pensionary Counsel had far overshot themselves, when they
believed so wise a Prince as Anaximander could be so barefacedly decoyed into
an assent to a matter so necessarily and plainly prejudicial to his own and his
Princesses interest, as well as to a Kingdom and People, they had reason to
respect and take care of as their future loving Subjects, and present hearty
Friends, they were not unacquainted with the measures Lycogenes had taken from
the beginning of his Reign, so directly contrary to the Princess his Daughters
Interest, and pernicious and destructive to the Christians, and that by pure
force he had already obtruded so many illegal things on his said Christian
Subjects, that he wondered Lycogenes could retend to make him or his Princess
instruments of their further oppression and misery; such were the Princes
resentments, and such was the result of Lycogenes his endeavors to make him
and his own Daughter Parties for the Subversion of Christianity in Albion; and
now immediately a grand Gonsult is called to consider of Anaximander's
resolutions, and of some other way to promote the grand concern: In the mean
time Messalina had been tormenting her self with the Apprehensions of her utter
disappointment; for though she had kept a constant correspondence with the
Count, she could not yet perceive her affairs go on so prosperously as she had
promised to her self, and the loss of so much time, to her Ambition, did very
much qualify the satisfaction she received in her Amor; however though she had
promised to repair to Art and Policy, to supply the present defects of Nature,
she could not resolve to abandon the Love and Service of the Count: Nay, upon
mature consideration, she concluded, that the continuation of her Amor with
him, could not be any way prejudicial to the other design they were now
undertaking, for supposing she should really conceive any considerable time
after the feigned report of her being with Child, the absurdity of the report
of this could not any way be prejudicial to the real truth of the other, the
assured Birth of a Prince being all that could be expected or desired; and
consequently, any reflections on the other would vanish as a mistake, which
Women in such cases are very often subject to. The Marchioness de Tomazo, would
daily encourage her belief of succeeding, and promised her assistance, by
imparting to her a Secret to help Conception; the Queen was wonderfully
pleased, even with the Flattery of the old Matron; but for fear of the worst,
was resolved to have the other Project speedily set off foot, she went to the
King's Apartment immediately to hear what they had resolved on, and how it was
agreed to be managed, where she found the trusty Cabal in hot and close debate:
She had ordered Aspasia, the Marchioness de Tomazo, etc Father Pedro to be
there, and Lycogenes had introduced the Count and Poliorchetes the Chief
Commissioner of his Court of Conscience, having exrerienc'd his Fidelity in
matters of the greatest importance, and had raised him to that high Station
merely to be an instrument in his future undertakings.

Lycogenes upon the Arrival of the Queen arose, requiring the Company not to
separate till they had wholly concluded on the means and manner of new modeling
and settling the Kingdom of Albion, the Queen likewise as soon as she had seated
her self commanded them to give her an account of their Proceedings.
Poliorchetes the Chancellor then rising and making a profound reverence to the
Queen, delivered his Opinion thus: 'It is not unknown, mighty Sovereign, how
zealous I have been in bringing about and promoting whatsoever might be thought
advantageous to your interest; nor do I now presume to recount my Services for
any other purpose than to manifest my gratitude and willingness to engage again
and again for ever on any action and design your Majesty's, or this Honorable
Board, shall think meet to prescribe; I know the wisdom of this Noble Company,
cannot be wanting to appoint such Rules as shall for ever secure the Pagan
interest in Albion, and satisfy your Majesty's utmost Expectation;
notwithstanding since the nature of my Employments, and some years strict
enquiery into the ways and Inclinations of the people of Albion, may with
reason have rendered me capable of judging of the most secure, and convenient
ways to deal with them. I shall not be thought vain if I presume freely, to
deliver my opinion in this Matter. The Albionites where they have received
Graces or Favors from their Princes, are like the wanton Ass in the Fable,
ready to leap on their Master, and by the encouragement of two or three
benefits, they sawcily approach him with their ill natured Jeasts, and
constantly pester him with their rude Importunities, but when too much
Indulgence has rendered them Insupportable, do but show them the Rod, and like
Children they shrink, and with patience submit to the Justice of your
Correction; You remember their Insolence in Perkin's Rebellion, when with
unbounded Blasphemy they would threaten the Safety and Honor of our Royal
Master, and yet the Sword of Justice was no sooner unsheathed against them, but
with horror they fly, and call even to the Mountains to cover them, you have
heard with what patience they submitted to their Trials, and reproached even my
Sentence with their Base Servile Sufferings, my advice therefore is to follow
the example of the Great Polydorus, to get an Army of Pagans from Iberia and
Gothland, and so to Dragoon them inro a civil compliance, Oh! that every year
would produce a Western Expedition, I Would soon rid the Kingdom of all our
Antagonist's, and make every Circuit more Terrible than an Inquisition, we have
too long nursed them with the Milk of our Affection, and like the profligate
Israelites they grumble at their Manna, Albion has Surfeited on Ease and
Prosperity, and the Feavour cannot abate but by leting of Blood, let us make a
full Harvest of these Hotheaded Christians (as they boast themselves) and at
once root out these obstinate Disturbers of our Peace: The Queen who was
naturally of a malicious sullen Temper, and who was not ignorant how stubborn
and a verse the Albionites were to her Interest, had heard Poliorchetes speak
with a bundance of satisfaction, but being willing to hear what the rest would
propose, giving thanks to the Chancellor she expected with impatience their
Thoughts and Opinions. When Pedro rising up, said he could not but Applaud the
Zeal and Opinion of Poliorchetes, and wished that his design could be as easily
executed as proposed, that his aversion and malice to the Christians of Albion
had inspired him with such desires of Revenge, that with Nero he wished they
had all but one Neck, and that he among his Fraternity, did not doubt to find
thousands that would strive to be their Executioner, but that to his sorrow he
feared the Chancellours project, however well designed, would not be feasible,
for besides the Alarm that Foreign Auxiliaries would raise throughout the
Kingdom, the natural antipathy, that the Albionites had both to the Gauls, and
Iberians was such, that they would incontinently rise to Repel and Destroy
them, and that if those Foreigners should fail in their Attempt, the reproach
of the design would be wholly thrown on Lycogenes and his Court, and that it
would beget so implacable a malice in the Heart of the Albionites (who were
most of them Christians) that he might justly fear a general revolt, and
thereby the total ruin of the Pagan Interest in Albion for ever, his opinion
therefore was, that they should rather ensnare and delude them, and so at
advantage cut them off and destroy them, it is known said he how wonderfully our
fraternity have promoted the Mohammedan Interest by their subtle and secret
Plots and Contrivances, have not we by fomenting and raising Divisions between
the Regular and Dissenting Christians in Albion more weakened the strength of
the pretended Reformado's than ever Polydorus by his Dragoons or Contributions?
Albion (with submission to the Chancellor) is not by public Hostility to be
forced, they are valiant in their Natures, and stubborn in their Principles,
and though the hopeful Doctrine of Passive Obedience and sweet Non-resistence
has been useful unto us, and lulled them for a while, yet it may be dangerous
to raise those sleeping Lions within them, lest we too late repent our
over-fond Credulity, and to our sorrow feel the effects of their resentments;
set your Policies on work if you wish to prevail, and if you must strike, let
it be in the dark; we all of us know we are sick, and out of order, but few of
us consider the root and cause of our distemper, all disinteressed persons
would think at first view, that we were now in a hopeful way of thriving, we
have a King not only a Pagan and our Friend, but zealous and resolved to go
through with his work; but alas is resolution sufficient without means? It Is
true, by his power he ran sercure us for a while; but what will that signify
to a lasting satisfaction? How do our Enemies wait and gape for his death? And
with the hopes of revenge after his dissolution they patiently submit to their
present Impositions; we know the main Pillars whereon they all lean,
Anaximander and Artemisia are their delight and their hope, the Princess
Philadelphia waits too in reversion, and from these three do spring all our
fears and misfortunes, and I and my Brethren bear the Title of our great
Prophet, and suffer his Cause to be shaken by the weak intercession of three
single Lives; Oh Holy Loyold, our first Holy Patron and Founder, how would thy
mighty Spirit fret and and grieve within thee, should thou see the degenerate
baseness of thy unworthy Followers? Where are the Records of all our Glorious
Hero's that have trod on the Necks of Emperors, and pierced the Hearts of
Kings, to propagate and vindicate our Holy Religion, can we forget Borgia,
Clement, Ravilliac and others, who have freely Sacrificed themselves for their
Religion, and for reasons less considerable than ours, and can we tamely remit
all our present Advantages, and be bafled of our future hopes, by tue weak puny
opposition of three petty pretenders?' No, no, continued he, let us lay hold on
the present opportunity, and at once finish our long wished for deliverance:
These three must fall a Sacrifice to our Prophet, and from the removal of that
cause will all our other Apprehensions cease.

Father Pedro had always bore such reputation with Lycogenes and Messalina that
they looked on his Counsels little inferior to Oracles, and though the
execution of them had always proved prejudicial, through their great violence,
to the Pagan Interest, yet they could not but value the sincerity of his
meaning, and always applauded his wise apprehensions, they knew his proposals
in this Zealous Oration were very consonant to reason, and agreeable to their
true interest, but knowing that the Eyes of all Europe were upon these three
Princes, and that the least baseness and imposition upon, them would engage all
Christendom in their quarrel, they could not so readily conclude, or resolve
upon any violence against their persons; besides, Pedro in a small Apology
afterward insinuated to the Company, the inconvenience of letting the King
know any thing of this Project, if happily they should all agree upon it. For
(said he) though I know Lycogenes's Zeal would make him overlook a thousand
difficulties, yet nature and conscience could not with any decency or reason be
supposed capable of being so wholly obliterated as to consent to any barbarity
upon the persons of his own children; but again, what may prove a sufficient
ground of scruple in him, may at the same time leave us free and disinteressed
from every thing and person that stands in opposition to our designs. The
Company however upon the Considerations aforesaid were very unwilling to engage
in Pedro's Resolutions or Proposals, and incontinently desired the Marchioness
de Tomazo, to give her opinion of this grand Affair. The Marchioness who had
been a Woman of Amor most of her time, and who now, though Age had
ungenerously deprived her of the power to please, was very fond and Ambitious
of being thought a Woman of Intrigue, had heard the violent Counsels, and
Proposals of the Chancellor and Father Pedro with a great deal of impatience
and displeasure; she could not digest those rough and hard terms of cutting of
Throats, Poisoning, or Assassinations, she had been always used to Amorous
Sighs, Billet deux, and Assignations; therefore rising and making her
Compliment to Messalina, and giving a hard look on Poliorchetes and Pedro, she
thus began: It Is not without the greatest regret imaginable, that I find my
self obliged to contradict persons whose known wisdom and experience in the
world may with reason claim an entire submission of judgment from me, and
though the command and service of her Majesty, may sufficiently apologize for
the freedom and liberty of my opinion, yet I doubt not from the nature of the
business in hand to prove that what both these honorable persons have
delivered as their opinions, if followed, will be inconsistent with the safety
of her Majesty, prejudicial to the Pagan interest in Albion for ever, and
extremely difficult, if not impossible to be brought about; nor do I need to
say much to dissuade this Honorable Company from the following their
proposals, since Father Pedro has already evinced and made clear the fallacy of
the Chancellor's project, and the rest of the Company have sufficiently showed
their dislike of Father Pedro's; I shall now therefore proceed to give my
opinion, and if I shall have the good fortune to convince your reasons, and
draw you into a concurrence, you will then be so just to believe that the
freedom of my censue proceeds from other causes than that of mere
contradiction; we all agree in the main pint, that some course must be taken
for re-establishing and securing the Pagan Interest in Albion, so as that it
should not seem entirely to depend on the uncertain life of the King, and
though the opinion of my self and the Count Davila, who doubtless receives all
his measures from the Conclave, and from Boanerges the High Priest, have been
by these two Gentlemen opposed, at least neglected, yet I have not been so
apprehensive as to hear any new thing proposed, as is capable of making me or
the Count recede from our former resolutions, I am sure if it take it is the
only effectual way to preserve us entires; I am as sure it is as easy, as in a
matter of that importance can be wished, it may be brought about with so little
discomposure of the public peace, that it shall rather gain the general
applause of the Kingdom; will not the attaining our desires answer all
expectations? what necessity of cutting those Throats which with abundance of
ease we can make instrumental and accessory to our designs, the supposition of
an Heir Male quashes all other pretenders in a moment; and surely Albion is not
so barren or ill natured as to deny Lycogenes a Son. No, no, (replys
Poliorchetes, interrupting the Marchioness) we have daily experience of the
fruitfulness of the Women of Albion, but yet we cannot apprehend how Lycogenes
can expect to reap where he has not had the power, or the will to sow: The will
indeed (said Aspasia sighing) I believe her Majesty can vouch for, but to the
sorrow and confusion of us all, he wants the power: Let us then (continued the
Marchioness) no longer deplore, but endeavor to supply those unfortunate
defects of the King our Master, consider on what nice points our Honor and
Interest depend, time will not stay for vain and fruitless wishes, and if we
slip so fair an opportunity, we shall seem to despise providence, ruin our
interest for ever, and fall the reproach of our Enemies, and unpitied by all
the Pagans throughout the World. Polyorchetes had heard these last words with
wonderful surprise, for his thoughts having run wholly on the extirpation of
the Christians by Fire and Sword, he had not so much as dreamed of any
possibility of milder means, and now guessing at what the Marchioness had
insinuated, he was extremely tickled with the project, and desired the
Marchioness, That since she had proposed something extraordinary, she would be
pleased to explain her self, so as that they might endeavor to solve any
difficulties that might arise upon a strict examination of the design: The
difficulty's (replied the Marchioness) are so small, in comparison of that
advantage we shall reap, that among us they will not admit of a dispute;
besides, we have had a president of what I propose, which though it miscarried
in the main, yet it was not for want of power, but will of some Partys
concerned to bring it about; That an Heir is absolutely necessary to confirm
and settle our otherwise fading hopes we all agree; and shall not we submit to
necessity, and endeavor to restore by art what envious nature, or cursed
fortune have ruined or withheld? It must be so, (replied Messalina) it must be
so, and there is no other to uphold my tottering Crown: It must be so, and yet
my boding Soul foretells it will not succeed; these saucy Albionites, will still
be prying, and every step I make will have remarks. Rejoice, Dread Sovereign,
(replied Polyorchetes) (who had already taken that hint) the Marchioness has in
one word finished what the united strength of my dull brain could never
attempt, but now the game is up, I Will keep the scent, and work it on to a
desired perfection. Why should your Majesty (replied Pedro) despair at all of
due success? Does your Majesty want power, or friends, or opportunity to act
what a Predecessor and Namesake with so much disadvantage had effected if
Philippo had proved but half so generous as is the brave Lycogenes: Can you
doubt the success of any Enterprise when you have so powerful assistance even
from your Enemies? Could she carry on a design of the same nature even to the
brink of performance, so as to amuse, nay, to convince all orders of the
Kingdom of the reality of it? And can you doubt at last of failing? She had a
sharp-sighted Parliament, near five hundred of the wisest in the Kingdom to
combat with, who were strict in their observance, suspicious of her dealing,
and resolute against any imposition; she had the Nobility on one hand, the King
her Husband of the other; and yet she baffled all but that narrow-hearted
Prince, who like the Dog in the Manger could wither eat the Hay himself, nor
would suffer the Horses; he had seen himself incapable of re-establishing the
Pagan interest by the assurance of an Heir, and was so covetous and mean as to
hinder the propagation of it by another, whereas your Majesty stands on sure
grounds, you have a strong party in the Court of wise and able men to advise
you, you have a potent Army ready to protect and defend you, but above all you
have a Husband and a King to assist, and further you; who dares even suspect
you? who would presume to prove you? By your word, you create an Heir, and your
command settles the Kingdom for ever. Thus Pedro spoke, and a general applause
run through the whole Company, there remained only Aspasia and the Queen to
give their Sentiments and Opinions, and Aspasia declaring in short, that Father
Pedro had wholly satisfied her thoughts and desires in this juncture, and that
she wholly submitted to the judgment of the Queen. Messalina raising her self,
briefly gave her resolution thus: Nothing can give us greater encouragement and
assurance of success, than the zeal and fidelity of you our beloved
Counselors, and since our business pesseth for a speedy conclusion, I shall
need say no more, than that I do, and shall assent to what the Majority of you,
viz. the Marchioness de Tomazo, Aspasia, and Pedro have laid down; there
remains therefore no more but that you immediately consult of the manner and
method of bringing it on, and from time to time to communicate your advice to
us; I advise and think fit that Boanerges the High Priest our most Holy
Kinsman, have timely notice of your proceedings, as also Polydorus our Royal
Friend and Ally, that they may take care to order Affairs in Foreign Parts, so
as that we way have the universal assistance of all our Friends to promote a
Project so highly advantageous to all their Interests.

This gracious Speech and Condescension was received with unspeakable joy by
the Counsel, and Father Pedro stepping to the Door, gave orders for private
Thanksgiving throughout all the Mosques in Albion, as also for Processions?
Feasts, and other expressions of joy; and having again seated himself, they
immediately fall close to the point. The first business hey resolve on is, That
being five in number, viz. the Count, Pedro, Polyorchetes, the Chancellor, the
Marchioness de Tomazo, and Aspasia, they severally have several Employments and
Offices assigned them, for the more effectual and speedy accomplishment of
their business. The Count who by his Office and Interest with Boanerges, could
claim a Domination over the Pagan Priests, was to summon a Convocation, and to
give them instructions how to disperse the News of her Conception, and to
insinuate, as if by Divine Inspiration they knew it would be a Prince, as also
to quash any Objections or Doubts concerning it, and to make remarks of the
persons: Father Pedro was to be made one of the Privy Council, and as he was
one of the chief Contrivers at first, so now he was to enliven and confirm the
report of the Queens Conception at the public Board, and to represent it with
all the seeming Candor imaginable, he was to silence all Disputes and Contests
that might happily arise upon it, and to make motions to the Board, to give
such order concerning her Majesty, and the Child, as should gain a General
Approbation and belief throughout the Kingdom, and though there arose a
Controversy whether it were not fitter for some other Pagan Lords of Albion to
espouse this part, yet they soon concluded on the ability of Pedro, who was
better qualified to represent it in handsome Colors, and consequently would go
down the glibber, and pass secure with the people, seeing they had so good
Vouchers as Privy-Councellors: The Chancellor being a Man of an hardened
Constitution, was appointed to wait with diligence against the time of the
pretended Birth, and by a positive Asseveration, if any suspicion should arise
(as in all Cheats probably may happen) he was to maintain the Rem in Re, which
from so grave a person as the chief Judge of Conscience, would surely be
believed, and as readily assented to, as the words of an Oracle: Aspasia being
concerned so near Messalina as Lady of the Bedchamber, etc. She was to Caress
the Ladys with the joyful News of the Queens Conception, and from time to time
insinuate passages belonging to Childbearing, to give an account of the growth
of the Burden, and to make the thing feasible she was to carry. on a suspicion
or fear of a Miscarriage, and it being once granted that she could possibly
Miscarry, included the belief that she was really Teeming: And now there was
none but the Marchioness remaining, who being a Woman, as is before said, of a
quick Judgment in Intrigues, and who knew well how to manage an Imposture of
that nature, it was laid upon her with Secrecy and Assurance to procure two or
three young wholesome Women whose time of Delivery should critically agree with
the Queen's time allotted and set down by this Council; the Marchioness was not
dissatisfied with the Task, though she could not but be sensible it required
depth of Judgment, a great deal of discreet Enquiry, and continual Care to
manage them to a Hairs breadth, lest any unlucky accident might spoil the whole
Intregue, but upon a little consideration she remembered she had heard an
Inkling of a young Kinswoman of her own, how that through weakness she had been
forced to surrender her Virginity to the Assaults of a young Spark, who had
since forsaken her, and had withal left her a sure pledge of his Love and
Vigor, so that being so well encouraged at first she readily submits to the
Commands of the Board, and engages upon Honor to answer their Expectation; and
now the generals being concluded on and appointed, they disperse, and forthwith
apply themselves to their several Employments, and as a Prologue to their
intended Villainy, they give out, among their own Party, at least, the necessity
of Unity in their Prayers to their Saints and the Deity, to send their
Majesty's an Heir to succeed him in his Throne and Dominions, and to settle
their Holy Religion in this Heretical Land, they cause Processions and
Pilgrimages, Offerings and Supplications, to be made, first to the great Saint
at Loretto, then to St. Winifred; and they cause Messalina to repair to several
Waters that are famous Antidotes against Barrenness, tho at the same time they
did not consider that the People looked upon it very awkard and strange, that
the Queen had never found out this way of preparing for Childbearing before;
but such are the practices of the Pagan Religion, that the greatest Villainies
and Rogueries they intend to commit are still preceded and ushered in with
great appearances of Sanctity; and now all things being in a readiness; the
Queen declares her self publicly to be with Child, and Orders were given for
public Thanksgiving throughout the Isles, and in other Foreign parts;
Rejoycings and Feastings were made by the Kings Residents and Ambassadors;
especially in Rome and Gaul; as if it were not enough to impose so great a
Villiany on the whole Kingdom, without enforcing them to prevaricate with the
Deity in their Prayers, and to make Petitions for that which really was not;
but notwithstanding all the Contrivance and Advice to carry on this Intrigue,
the People, especially the Christian Nobles and Gentry of Albion were mightily
surprised with so improbable an Accident; and though by reason of an
Indisposition, which Messalina for some while before lay under, the Kings
weakness and other circumstances, they could not readily free themselves from a
suspicion of Treachery, yet they resolved to bear themselves with all
moderation, and to have a diligent Eye upon Messalina and all about her, the
f^st real occasion of dislike was, that the Queen did not treat the Christian
Ladies of Albion, especially the Princess Philadelpha, with that freedom as the
joy and pride of so great a happiness, if real, would naturally have prompted
her to; for she would resent it highly if she could but observe any of the
Christians making the least observations of her Breasts, Belly, her Look, or
any other Symptom, by which Women in that Condition are easily distinguished;
another great reason was, that she seemed to slight the Pretensions of the
Princess Artemisia, so as there was not the least intimation given her to be at
the Queens Labor till within a very few days before she was Delivered;
besides, the Confidence of the Pagan Party did strangely startle the People,
when like Oracles they would affirm that of necessity it must be a Prince:
These and many other material circumstances made the Albionites talk broadly of
the business; nor were Lycogenes and Messalina ignorant of their Sentiments;
however having the Power absolutely in their hands, they were resolved to cut
that knot which they found impossible to untie, and since they had thus far
advanced in a business of that importance, they resolved to go through and
bring it about, though with a thousand absurdities and incoherences; for
besides the alteration of her Reckoning, which proceeded partly from a fear of
disappointment if the Woman that came first should have brought forth a Girl,
but chiefly to amuse the Nobility and Gentry of the Court and Kingdom, who
would doubtless have made it their business in behalf of the Princess Artemisia
and the Kingdom, to attend and watch that all things might have been carried
fairly and above-board; I say, besides the alteration of her reckoning she
would give out upon every turn different places of her pretended lying-in,
sometimes she would give orders for R -- d, at other times she would remove her
fancy to H -- Court, but in reality St. Jaques was the place resolved on, for
Alba Regalis the whole party disallowed, because by reason of the multitude and
concourse of People that constantly attend there, she could not possibly have
been so privately Delivered as the Intrigue did necessarily require; besides,
there was no convenience for the Child to be brought through the Galleries or
Lodgings, but in the Palace of St. Jaques, there was a Seraglio and a Mosque
adjoining with abundance of winding by dark Chambers, secret Passages,
Trap-doors and dark Corners, where not only one or two of the Women were with
great security and secrecy kept till the time of their delivery, but where the
Queen might have the Child foisted into her Bed reaking and hot from the Womb,
but in the heat of all this intrigue and design Lycogenes was unluckily put in
mind that by the Laws of Albion the presence of one or more of the Christian
Prelates was to be at the Birth of every Royal Infant indispensably required;
to resolve this difficulty a Council is immediately called, and after sundry
debates it is concluded, that some way or other must be found to bring all or
most of the dissenting part into a praemunire, and so by aggravation either to
endanger their lives, or at least to clap them up and secure them till the
Queens Delivery; accordingly a flaw was immediately found and the Prelates
forthwith confined: and now nothing but the presence of the Princess
Philadelpha was feared, but what cannot the craft of the wicked Jebusites bring
about? that Princess had unfortunately complained of some small indisposition,
when the Queen immediately takes the hint, and by the means of Pedro and some
other Malcontents, she prevails with her Physician to persuade her to take a
Journey to the Waters of Baijae, though the Operation of those Waters was
manifestly known to be contrary to the Princess's Distemper, they being
loosening, and she wanting Restringents, but her absence was absolutely
necessary, and therefore by any means to be obtained; the Princess according to
their wishes leaves the Court, and they were resolved to do their business
before her return; and now all things to appearance seemed to favor the
design, the time prescribed drew near, their greatest Adversaries were removed,
the Court Party, and Pagan Priests, with daily Stories and Shams were amusing
and taking off the attention of the Christians; all things seemed smooth, and
the Critical Minute was at hand, when news was brought to Messalina, that one
of the Women was in Labor, immediately the Queen takes her Chair, and hastes
over to St. Jaques, but before she had well ascended the Stairs, she was told,
that Woman had brought forth a Girl, with which being for the present
confounded, she descends, leaving before such Orders as were necessary; the
other Women expecting their Times Daily and Hourly; and indeed ere three Days
were over she receiving another Summons, repair forthwith to St. Jaques, she
stays there all Night with long expectation of Success, early the next Morning
she receives the glad Tidings that a Man Child was Born, which with all speed
was conveyed to the Dormitory adjoining to her Bedchamber, in the same reeking
Circumstances it was Born in, and having before taken care for the conducting
of it to the Queens Bed, the Alarm is given at Alba Regalis, that the Queen was
in Labor; Lycogenes had that Morning rose something earlier than ordinary, and
had crossed over to his own side on purpose to draw off the Men with him, and
consequently to favor the Cheat, by leaving as few as possible about the
Queens Apartment; in the mean time Madamoizell de W -- s having before given
the Infant a small Opiate to hinder its Crying for the present lays it gently
in a large Warming-Pan made on purpose, and lined with velvet for the more
commodious and easy carriage, and the Queen rising under pretense of giving
liberty for warming the Bed Madomonelle unlades her vessel and leaves the
Infant in the place appointed; the Queen strait returning to Bed the Room
immediately fill^, tho none were summoned but such as Lycogenes thought were
afraid to make a doubt or a scrutiny into the truth of it, or those whom
Lycogenes had already prepared to swallow and favor the imposition; and now
the pretended Prince being Born the Pagans of Albion begin their Jubilee,
Latroon Governor of Iberia begins to double the Persecution of the Christians
there, Polydorus by a strict Alliance and LEAGUE with Lycogenes, thinks of
nothing but an Universal Monarchy, Lycogenes doubles the Oppressions of his
Christian Subjects, Messalina boasts of the downfall of Heresy, and a
perpetual Regency, during her Life: The poor Christians, especially the
Albionites, though something apprehensive of the Consequences of this Intrigue,
were yet by their constant Remarques of all Transactions since the Report of
Messalina's Conception sufficiently satisfied of the fallacy and cheat, and
resolved on measures which they doubted not would in a little time unravel the
whole Mystery.

FINIS.
THE Third Part OF THE AMORS OF Messalina. WHEREIN, The Secret Intrigues of
the Four last Years Reign are Completed. AND THE Love Adventures of Polydorus
King of the Gauls, AND THE Late Queen of ALBION, Made Public.

By a Woman of Quality, a late Confidant of Q. MESSALINA.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, 1689.

THE Bookseller TO THE READER.
THE Promised, and long Expected Third Part of the Amors of our MESSALINA, is
here at your Service: And though some Critics I am informed (and indeed my
Sale tells me as much) have not put an equal value on the two foregoing Parts,
the Second lying under the Repute of much Inferior to the First: My Historian
makes no other Apology, than that the Fair Messalina had so many Engines at
Work, in turning that great Hinge of the Pagan Glory, Her Warming-pan Plot; and
her Hands and Head so full of Politics on that Important Occasion, that She
then wanted Leisure for Intrigue and Amor; which indeed being the main Delight
of the Generality of my Readers, might perhaps lessen the Satisfaction expected
from the Second Part. But since her Majesty's Departure from the Heretic
Albion, has Translated her to a more agreeable and natural Element, the Pagan
Court of Gothland; her heavier and sullen Business she begins to shake off, and
resumes the lighter Air of Love and Pleasure. And accordingly we dare, without
Vanity, assure our Kind Reader, That the former Defects are supplied in the
Entertainment of this Third Part of her History. An Amorous Polydorus, little
less famed under the Banners of Cupid, than the sometimes Glorious Britomard
himself, lying at the Feet of the Adored Messalina, affords a little ^re Matter
of Adventure and Diversion. With this Recommendation to our little Volumn of
the Great Messalina, We beg your present generous Acceptance. And if you find
your Messalina warm with any extraordinary Spark for the Imperial Polydorus;
you are to consider, that the Sanctuary and Glorious Reception she meets in the
Court of her ever firm Friend, the King of the Gauls, have Inspired her with no
small Gratitude to that MOST PAGAN Hero, and Champion of her Altars.

The Third PART.
LOVE could no longer brook this interfering Business in the Court of Albion;
for seeing with Indignation, how Ambition daily had entrenched on his
Prerogative, he reassumes his long neglected Darts, and vows severe Revenge on
his Rebellious Subjects. And now Messalina's haughty Heart, which vast aspiring
Hopes had long engaged, softens again in Gentleness and Love: She had seen the
Languets of her Charming Count, and heard his gentle Murmurs with Compassion;
she knew the great restraint he forced upon his Heart, when by reason of her
numerous Attendants, and Visitours, he had not opportunity to breath his Love;
sometimes a Wink, an Amorous Look, or Sigh, she would by stealth return; or
otherwise, in some Ambiguous Words, she would discover her Concern and Care,
for his endearing Passion; but in such dumb shows alone, as there were more
than Three Weeks spent, e're she could possibly engage, or speak with him
alone. During which time, her Beauty, with the Satisfaction of her Mind, was
much improved; and that forced Abstinence, which her pretended Childbearing
had made her undergo, conduced as well to carry on the Cheat, as to revive some
fading Glories in her Face, caused by the Fears and Apprehensions of
Miscarrying. Now, in Triumphant Wise, she would Walk, and Look, and with Disdainful
Jests, among her Confidents, Laugh at the weak dull Christians of the Court.
Come Dear Aspasia, would the say, let us no longer doubt of good Success; le^s
every Year bring forth a Son, and stock the Kingdom with a Race of Pagan
Princes; shall my aspiring lofty Soul, s^p to the ri^e Destructive Rules of
their insipid Morals? One flight of Pagan Fancy quite out-strips their heavy
tedious Motions; and till now, our Fears alone have been our Bugbear Appa^ions:
With how much ease, did we Contrive and Finish what some faint puny hearted
Creatures thought impossible? Oh how I am pleased to think how naturally I
managed the Intreague: Did thou observe, how gravely some would stand; and
when my feigned Groans and Cries, would reach their Ears, how then O^ici^usly
they would shake their Heads, devoutly lifting up their Hands, and pray for my
Delivery? Then, when my seeming Pains would make me faintis^, with what Concern
they would Sigh and Whisper, while I would gently grasp, and turn to thee, and
smile at the Success of our Invention. Come, Come, let us see this Darling of
our Hopes, this Groundwork of our Everlasting Joy; long Live, and Live to
Reign, my little blooming Life, and Live to be the S^ourge of our Cursed
Christian Foes; I Will swear thee, like another Hanibal, their Mortal Foe; each
drop of Milk thou suck'st, (...) an Age of Malice in thy Heart; A Christian
Name shall grate upon thy Soul, and thou shall prove the Plague of their
Profession; I Will breath my Spirit through thy tender Pores, and make thy hatred
of them Everlasting; Down, down ye Pagans, to your Great Deliverer; Adore your
Mighty Prince, and your Redeemer. See how the base dejected Christians shrink;
see how they Tremble at his Awful Frown: Albion is once again Redeemed,
Aspasia, and ^ow my Crown sits firm and easy on my Head. Thus in Vain Raptures
would the Queen break out, and boast her Promises to be Prophetical; but soon,
alas, she found her self deceived, and all her Glorious Promises vanish of a
sudden. Anaximander, and the Princess Artemisia, while Licogenes, and his Pagan
Counselors, continued only to make some small Encroachments, and Breaches on
the Laws of Albion, seemingly designing, for no more than a small Toleration of
the Pagan Religion in Albion, kept themselves within all bounds of Modesty and
Submission, to the King their Father; only in some small Remonstrances, they
did Declare their Unwillingness to appear Parties in the Annulling, or
Dispensing with those Laws, made purely for the Security of the Christian
Religion, against the Practices and Contrivances of the Pagans; but when they
plainly saw, their Own, and the Kingdoms Interest, resolved to be made a
Sacrifice to the Ambition, and Covetousness of a small Party, that by the known
Laws of the Land, were declared the irreconcilable Enemies of the Christians;
they thought it then high time to look about them, and though they paid all the
Reverence imaginable to the King, their Father; yet they could not resolve to
yield their Rights and Inheritance, and hold precariously their Estates, at the
Discretion of an Antichristian packed Council; besides, by several
Remonstrances and Petitions from the Chief of the Nobility and Gentry, they had
been solicited to take them into their Protection, and to endeavor a Redress
of their Grievances, and heavy Oppressions. Anaximander, being a Prince of a
Vast and Generous Spirit, was easily induced to condescend to their Relief;
for, besides his proper Interest in the Crown of Albion, which by the common
Principles of Nature, he was obliged to Maintain and Defend; he often would
revolve on the Glory of the Action, and how Heroic and God like it would show,
to appear the Great and Glorious Champion of the Christian Religion, which by a
Secret League, between Polydorus King of the Gauls, and the King Licogenes, was
resolved to be wholly Extirpated, and Roured out of Eur^. Upon these
Considerations, the Prince Anaximander immediately imp^ his Desires and
Resolutions to the High and Mighty Lords and States of the Low-Lands, desireing
their Lordships Advice and Assistance in a Matter of that Importance, to the
Security of themselves, as well as all other Christians; which upon due
Considerations, they with all Alacrity imaginable Grant: And now the Prince
having a Gallant, though small Fleet, equipped with all the speed that could
be, makes for the West of Albion, and with such prudent Secrecy were all things
managed, that Lycogenes had not the least Intimation in the World of his
Designs, till his Fleet was ready to Sail. Messalina had, that Night the fatal
News arrived, assigned Count Davila to meet her at St. Jaques, and the
Marchioness de Tomazo in the Absence especially of Aspasia (who a while before
was gone over to her Husband Latroon, Governor of Iberia) being her chief
Confident, was ordered to attend. The Count, who had once or twice been Tardy
in the Hour appointed, thought now by early Diligence to make amends, so that
by Twilight he was gotten up into the Bedchamber, being a private Retirement
for Messalina, during the King's Absence at any Time, or her Indisposition;
where sitting down near the Bed, he waited with Impatience for the Queen; and
in the mean time, was contemplating on the Happiness of his Enjoyments; by this
time, Darkness had o'er-spread the Earth, and the Marchioness being to give the
Orders for the Candles of that private Apartment, especially at that season,
the Count found himself for some time very solitary, and without Light, and
being about to make to the Door, he heard some stirring and breathing on the
Bed, when drawing the Curtain softly, he could just perceive by her Clothes, it
was a Lady fast asleep; the Count was mightily amazed at first, but
recollecting himself, he thought it doubtless was the Queen, who had retired
thither before the Hour appointed, and had prevented even his Diligence in
coming; so without scruple, throwing himself on the Bed, he clasps the supposed
Messalina in his Arms, and having in his first Transports run with his curious
Hand over all the private Recesses of her Charms, he was just preparing to
attack the Fort, mingling with his Kisses, his short Amorous Sighs, foretelling
Transports, Ecstasies and Dyings; when Messalina hastily comes in with a small
Taper in her Hand, and calls: Tomazo, is not my Dear Count yet come, Tomazo?
The Marchioness at the very Instant, whether the Amorous bustling of the Count
had operated on her waking Fancy, or whether by the Impression of some pleasing
Dream, she was thereto incited, Cried passionately out, "Make haste my Dear
Antonio, make haste, the Marquess will be here and Ruin us." The Queen who had
heard her speak those last Words, by this Time had opened the Curtain, and
there discovered the Count, raised on his Knees between Tomazo's Legs, and in
a posture which plainly discovered the drift of his Intentions; never were
Three Persons (for by this Time the Marchiones had waked) so severally
astonished and confounded; the Queen with Shame had shown her Face glowing Red,
and then with Anger straigt grown Pale; the Count, though in that awkward
Posture, was so much confounded, he could not move himself, nor had the Sense
to cover the Marchioness, or his own Nakedness; but between Wonder, Anger and
Fear, was wholly bereft of even Sense or Motion: The Marchioness, whose Age and
Experience had rendered her familiar with the same or the like Adventures, was
not so much Ashamed of being seen in that Condition and Posture, as
Apprehensive of the Queen's Resentments, if, as was probable, she should
suppose any Amor between her and the Count, her Lover, and whom she had but
that Night appointed, and designed for her own Use and Service. In such
distracted Thoughts and Manner, did they for a great while stand and gaze, and
wonder at one another, without one Word between them, till at last the Queen,
whether heightend in her Fancy, with the pleasing sight and intended Action of
the Count, or upon due consideration, believing and judging, by the Words she
had heard the Marchioness utter, that it was wholly a mistake on all sides,
burst out in Laughter, and turning her Face a little, told the Count in
Drollery, the Weather began to be Cold, and therefore he would do well to take
care and cover his Mistress and himself. The Count with this short reprimand
was thoroughly waked out of his Trance, and slipping off the farther side of
the Bed, was bustling a long time to put himself in order, while the
Marchioness, half distracted, rises and pulls the Curtains close about her;
which the Queen seeing, She calls out to her: What Tomazo! You are resolved
then to keep the Count to your Self this Night; and making to the Bed, She
threw the Curtains again open, and discovered Tomazo in a fresh Confusion: By
this time the Count had gathered a little more assurance, and coming from
behind the Bed, he strait threw himself at Messalina's Feet, humbly asked her
Pardon, and told her, he hoped she was not insensible of the fatal mistake he
had like to have fallen in; and consequently, he doubted not of her favorable
Interpretation; he was sorry he had first appeared in so indecent a Posture,
and his continuance therein, She could not but (...) the consequence of his
Astonishment. The Queen, who upon a just consideration of the Circumstances,
was sufficiently satisfied of his Innocence, was so far from being angry or
disturbed, that after two or three sits of Laughter, She threw her delicious
Arms about his Neck, and with Ten Thousand Kisses Sealed his Pardon: then
turning to her dear Tomazo, She would Laugh, and say, Make have my Dear
Antonio, make haste; O Dear, my Husband comes! Alas, What shall we do? we are
ruined Dear Antonio. Thus did ^he Droll on the poor M^chioness, 'till the Count
putting her in mind of the time of the Night, they were retiring to the Closet
to Converse, when a Messenger from Alba Regalis, comes in haste, to give an
account of an Express, Lycogenes had received from the Belgian Lowlands, giving
an Account of the Preparations and Designs of the Prince Anaximander, to come
and redress the Grievances of the poor Christians of Albion: the Queen (who was
no otherwise read in the Politics and Affairs of State, than as Father Pedro,
the Count, or some other of her Priests upon particular occasions had
Instructed her) was not at first so apprehensive of the Danger as the Count,
who was so vehemently startled at the News, that without any more Complement
than Bowing to the Queen, he descends and takes Coach for Alba Regalis; where
he was no sooner Arrived, but he sound the whole Court Alarmed; and Lycogenes
in Solemn Council was gone to Debate the Business: The next Day the News was
confirmed by another Express, and then all was in an Uproar; Lycogenes in a
great Fright comes to Council, tells them his apprehensions of Anaximanders
Design, requires their best and speedy Advice, puts them in Mind of all the
Breaches he had made in the Laws for their Sakes; and that now, without speedy
Assistance, he was likely to be ruined, and the Pagans Hopes throughout Albion
to be utterly lost. Such dreadful Words as these, and coming from a Prince that
had been in every Panegyric cried up and applauded for his Constancy of Mind,
and Invincible Courage, did so amaze and terrify his Counselors, that they
could not in a long time set their Hearts on any serious Consultation; some of
them withdrew, then in again; presently others that had been absent, came
Posting to understand and enquire into the Business; some would relate it as
terrible as their Fears, and represent the numbers of the Princes Ships and Men
double; here you should see a haughty Stiffnecked Priest, come humbly fawning
to a Christian Noble, as if confessing past Mis-carriages and Crimes, he wished
for good Conditions: Some would be packing up their Goods and Treasure, their
guilty boading Consciences foretelling their forced Flight and Ruin: But
Pedro and Poliorchetes, the Chancellor, who were sensible they were likely to
share the sum and substance of all unhappy Revolutions, thought it now no
longer time to dally, or spend the precious Minutes in useless idle Fears, but
to apply the most healing Medicines, that the present bleeding Wound would
bear; and accordingly persuade Lycogenes to re-call several Edicts, that by
their Instigation and Council had been promulg'd against the Interest and
Safety of his Christian Subjects: And Father Pedro calling a Convocation of his
Inferior Priests, makes them Dis-robe, and in disguise to mingle among the
Christian Assemblies, in the Forum, Burse, Temples, and other public
Meeting-Places, and there with Confidence to utter false Reports, to lessen the
Strength of Anaximander, to cry up the miseries of a Civil War, to Extol the
Loyalty of the King's Christian Subjects, to make comparison between young
Perkin's Expedition and this, and thence to conclude positively of the like
success: The Court party also of Renegado Christian Divines, were ordered to
Preach up the necessity of Obedience and Loyalty, to withstand the Prince in
his Attempts, and to brand his Expedition with the horrible Title of Invasion.
These, and many other Arts were used to take off the Edge of Anaximander's
Sword; sometimes they would Brand His Royal Person with base and ignominious Names;
other times they would think to terrify the Rebels (as they would call all
that should assist him) with the Exemplary Punishments, inflicted by the
Chancellor Polyorchetes, in his bloody Western Campaigne: But all would not
do, the Christians knew the Pagan Punick Faith, as well as Inhumane Cruelty,
they saw their Laws, their Liberties, and Lives at Stake; and that now was the
only time to assert and recover them; the Pagan Priests had often mocked the
King out of his most Solemn Promises, and Messalina had endeavored to entail
their Slavery upon them to all Posterity. Nothing therefore could stagger their
former Resolutions, but like the Adder, they were Deaf to all their treacherous
Charms, and false Insinuations: Notwithstanding, Messalina's dauntless Pride
could not 'till the Princes Landing stoop to the apprehension of any material
Danger; she would often chalk out time and place to see the send weak Prince
brought bound to Troynovant; She Would Laugh and Jeer at his few puny Forces, and
would in every Table Talk defeat his whole Battalions; sometimes She Would call her
Melancholy Lover, whose deeper apprehensions, now had changed his usual Mirth;
sometimes, I say, She Would call him to her, and reproach his needless Fears: What?
would She say, Can Davila suspect or fear, when Messalina 's Heart is free? Can
thy so much applauded Courage stoop to what a poor weak Woman's Soul can stand?
Stand did I say? By all that is good, this Hand shall bow the Neck of that poor
Spirited Prince, that weak presumptuous Wretch, that dare Invade my Husbands
lofty Crown: What my Dear Davila, can thou lament? Have thou a Diadem to
loose, a Throne to be pulled down, Subjects and Slaves to be destroyed before
thy Face? These may create a Monarchs doubts and fears: What then should thy
Eyes swell with needless Tears? Remit, remit, alas, thy useless apprehensions!
I sure am the Center of thy Thoughts: In me thy utmost Wishes are determined;
while then I stand secure, What need'st thou fear? Cheer up, cheer up, my dear
loved Count; let us not lose our present happy Minutes, for vain weak doubts of
future Cares and Sorrows.

The Count both wondered and rejoiced at the great Heroic Heart of his beloved
Royal Mistress; and though he knew, and was perfectly sensible that her words
were rather the effect of her dauntless Spirit, than of a solid Consideration;
yet he saw so much Love expressed in her frequent concernment for him, that he
could not but in common Gratitude and Honor, make her the same, or suitable
returns; he therefore told her Majesty, That his apprehension of being
separated from her, was without doubt, a sensible affliction to him; but above
all he deplored his great unhappiness, in not being able to afford more than
his own personal assistance, to repel her own, and their great Prophet's
Enemies; that he cordially wished the Prince Anaximander's undertakings might
prove as frivilous and ineffectual, as she had declared them; that his great
care of her Majesty's Safety and Honor, was the only Foundation of his Fear;
that he did indeed object the worst to himself, but did not believe he had yet
any reason to despair of the best; that he was sensible her super-eminent Merit
had rendered her Obnoxious to the Slanderous reproaches and envy of the Wicked
Christian Albionites; that the King her Husband's Zeal, in a good and pious
Cause, had incurred the wicked Malice of his rebellious Subjects; and that if
his Affairs (which Heaven forbid) should happen to fail, it would be the total
ruin and destruction of his Life and happiness, to think she should fall into
the Hands of her Enemies, or be lessened in her Fortune or high Station; that
therefore it was his humble and hearty request, that she would suffer himself,
and some other select Friends, to consult and lay before her such measures for
the security of her Person and Honor, as should appear to be most convenient;
that providing against the worst, would be no hindrance of her enjoyment of the
best; but above all, that she would give him her resolution and firm promise to
let himself accompany and wait on her in all, and every Misfortune that
possibly could befall her. Messalina was ravished with this so zealous and
tender demonstration of her Dear Counts Love, and in a loving transport
catching his Hand and Arm, she pulled him to her on a Couch whereon she sat,
where with unspeakable Raptures she would Circle her Snowy Arms and Hands,
about his Neck and Wast; Oh! how she would suck his Amorous ruddy Lips and Checks,
and with her Balmy melting Hand stroke, and press, and play with his Manly
Neck, and Face, "Oh! could thou think Dear Cruel Heart, said she, that e're
my Panting Soul could yield to part with thee, the Dearest, blessed Fountain of
it is joy; Fortune, indeed with rude or Impartial hands may catch and grasp my
Shaken, Tottering Crown; but sure my Heart and Will, are still my own; and
being mine, who Dare Pretend to Stop, or Claim what I resolve to Share, to
Give, to Keep for only Thee." No, no, my Life, my Davila, continued she: "If
Fate or Cursed Inconstant Fortune have decreed my Separation from this Ill-bred
Isle, Thou like my better Genius shall attend me, thou like my happy Star
shal't lead the Way: where e're we come we'll be each others Heaven, and in thy
Bosom will I place my Land of Joy, and Rest." With these last words they fell
together on the Couch, and tired with busy Love and Rapture, soon dropped into a
gentle Slumber. Faithful Tomaso, in the mean time was hovering about the
Out-Guards to prevent surprise, and to divert the access of any suspicious
Persons: She had waited half an hour or little more, when comes a Messenger
from King Lycogenes to Messalina, which brought account, the Prince was now at
Sea, and with a numerous Fleet was making all the Sail he could for Albion: the
Marchioness receives the Message, and all in Tears repairs with open Mouth to
the Queens Closet: the Queen waking abruptly at the Noise she made, starts up,
and with a sudden Shriek alarm's the Count; Anaximander comes, Dread Sovereign
cries the Marchioness, he comes with Speed and Power and Swears to Unravel all?
O Mighty Operations! the Count who had hardly yet recovered himself, was
looking about when he had heard the Marchioness declare he was come, and
putting himself on his Guard, swore he would Defend his Royal Mistress to the last;
Oh! that his Single Fate, Cries Mesalina, were to be opposed to thine: Inspired
by Love and my auspicious Prayers, how would thou crush his Puny Soul. Soon
should thou nip these daring Christians hopes, and with one happy blow
secure our Pagan Friends and Interest for ever. In the mean time Lycogenes in
late and early Councels, was contriving how to stop this overflowing Current of
the Princes designs; he had observed an unusual blithness in all his Christian
Nobles Faces, and was sensible that the Prince Anaximander could not presume to
attack the Albionites, without very good Encouragement from the Grandee's:
however, with all his industry he was not able to learn out who were
Anaximanders Abettors in this bold design; Father Pedro and others of his
Antichristian Council were advising him to lay hold on, and secure all that he
could but in the least suspect; but this being controverted was found too
Violent, and more than the present Circumstances of affairs could bear; others
suggesting the doubtful Loyalty of the great City of Troynovant, 'twas thought
advisable to secure the Citadel, in some Peculiar trusty hands, and thereby to
scare that Populous and Powerful Place into a just Obedience: this was found
good and Feazable, and strait a new Commander is ordained, with secret orders
how to manage things to the best advantage. In the mean time, the Prince
Anaximander, steers away, and without any let or hindrance, in a few days
arrives safe at a convenient Haven, in the West of Albion; and now the Thread
of Poor Lycogenes his Fate began to crack, now he could plainly see the errors
of his Government, and when it was unhappily too late, might Curse the base
designs of his pernicious Counselors: now was he forced to stoop that
Glorious Lofty Heart, which dauntless heretofore had braved the mightiest force
of Europe. How was he changed, alas, from that brave Invincible Lycogenes, that
did through Clouds of Smoke and Fire, Charge through the Belgian Fleet, and
with fresh Laurels Crowned, returned in Triumph to his joyful Country: now
every little Western breeze that heretofore did serve to blow and kindle up his
flaming Courage, like some cold Pestilential air damps his Misgiving Soul; now
Poor, forsaken of himself he stands, Conscience alone of Ills past done remains
his tiresome guest: Attend ye cursed race of wicked Jebusites, see the
Prodigious effects of your Pernicious Councels, ye Cloggs to Crowns, and bane
of Power.

Empires to Shake, and Monarchs to Dethrone,
Cursed Race of Loyala's thy Work alone.
Kings, Crowns, and States over thrown! no more? alas;
Those Records fill not half thy Leaves of Brass.
What need those stored up Coals (scarce worth Heavens while)
For mighty Doomsday, Nature's Funeral Pile:
Let Thee but loose for the Universe over turning,
Thy Single Brand would set the Globe a Burning.
The Prince Anaximander no sooner appeared with his Fleet, but the Christians
all about the Country flocked to the Shore, and with loud shouts and all other
demonstrations of Joy, welcomed the arrival of their great Deliverer: and
several with Boats stocked with fresh Provision put off and dispersed them
about the Fleet, for the refreshment of the Seamen and Soldiers, and having
provided before small Bridges and other conveniences for the Landing his Army,
and his Carriages, he found himself in a condition within three days to draw up
and muster his Men, who had by this time heartily recovered the Fatigue of
their Voyage. Lycogenes in the mean time, though very much dejected, had taken
care to Levy a Gallant Army, and it was one while thought a very doubtful
thing, to which, to ascribe the Victory. Anaximander had not brought with him
above Fourteen Thousand Horse and Foot, but those indeed Experienced Veterane
Bands, very Completely Armed; besides, Lycogenes before the Prince landed, had
at least Thirty Thousand well appointed Soldiers, so that when he began
thoroughly to compute his own strength, and his Enemies weakness, he thought to
take heart, and resolved for the greater Encouragement of his Men to appear at
the head of them himself, and withal speed to give his Enemies Battle, and
hinder their further Progress into the Country; but alas, while he was
flattered and amused with the strength and bravery of his own Army, Anaximander
was mustering and entertaining the Choice Young Men of all the Western Country*
for the People considering the Cause, and that their Liberties and Lives, were
now their only last stake, they came flocking in so fast to the Prince, that he
had in eight days more Substantial choice Men than he could handsomely make use
of; besides, the Major part of Lycogenes his Army, being Christians, they could
not but be sensible that those Swords that they should draw against their
Brethren in the West, would at the long run be employed against their own
Throats and Lives; and therefore, being already weary of submitting their
Freeborn Souls to the Bondage and Tyranny of their Pagan Officers, they
associate and take Council together how to free themselves and their Country,
by either, laying down their Arms, or going over to the Prince Anaximander, and
now the fatal Period of Lycogenes his Reign drew near, for first whole
Companies, Troops, and Regiments of his Army revolt from him, and then his
Friends and Near Relations, touched with the sense of deeper obligations due to
their Country, their Religion and their God: Thus the Trump being turned, the
Pagans quickly find their disadvantage of the Game, and in Confusion, like
distracted Men fling up their Cards, and scamper to secure themselves from
payment. Messalina also to her Sorrow sees what hitherto she never would
believe; now Pedro finds the fallacy of his conclusions, while Polyorchetes,
Sunderania, and others of that wicked Grue curse their unlucky Stars, and seek
in every corner for some place of refuge: Poor Lycogenes flies in confusion
from his distant Foes, not able to endure even the report of their approach: He
that like another Xerxes saw himself begirt even with a world of Guards, now
flies bereft almost of necessary Attendance: He no sooner arrived at his old
Palace of Alba Regalis, but in have he calls a Secret and Solemn Council of
all his few remaining Friends, and after such Debates as the time would afford
and permit, they resolve to send proposals to the Prince, who like a Swelling
Tide had now over spread the Country; and the danger being grown beyond
recovery, Messalina, at last thinks it high time to prepare for her retirement,
and with all speed provide for her Security; the Young Child also by the advice
of the Council was to be nicely taken care of, being likely to prove a very
good after Game. The Queen therefore immediately sends for the Count to a
private Conference, who as greedily comes, in hopes to persuade her to a speedy
Flight: Just as he approached the Closet Door, the Queen all in tears gets up,
and not being able for a while to speak, leans on his Neck, and after many
growing Sobs and heavy Sighs, falls Fainting in his Arms: never was Lover in so
sad distress as was the Count at this unhappy accident; call out he dare not,
for fear of any Suspicion or ill interpretation of his being with the Queen
alone; to go and leave her Dying as he thought, his Soul could never agree to;
how to assist, what remedy to use, where to get any thing to apply he knew not:
distracted thus he Tore himself, and Raved, and Cursed his misfortune, then
would he kneel by the Couch whereon he had laid her, and kiss, and sigh, and
Pray, and call, till at last the Queen coming to her self opened her dying
Eyes, and casting a Languishing look at her Dear Count, who was now in a bitter
Agony of Sorrow, and hardly able to support his oppressed Spirits, she raised
her self a little on the Couch, and in a Sorrowful manner lifting up her Hands
and Eyes, recounts a fresh the sum of her Misfortunes: All, all, is lost, Dear
Davila, said she, my Hopes, my Peace, my Joy, my Glories, my All. And if I have
ought left me worth the Thought of Life, it is, that I enjoy thy Love. That
Coronet's my own, though my Crown's lost. Messalina is now driven to the Fatal
Period of her Grandeur in Albion, a shock so dismal, that the Agonies of such a
Fall, to such Soaring Ambitition as Mesalina's, are only to be conceived by
those that feel them. In her fit of Desparation (for 'twas almost come to that)
she is Mrs. however of Reason enough still to provide at least against the
Worst of shames, and Last of Miseries, her falling into her Enemies Hands, the
Christians, a Danger at that Time much threatened; the united Murmurs of Albion
looking up to no other Fountain, and Original of the Woes and Calamities, of
the Pittyed and Deplored Lycogenes, then the Hot Counsels, or rather
Enchantments of Messalina, and her Pagan Abettors. And how heavy the weight of
such an Inquisition would fall, even her Flatterers are but too sensible. Her
Flight therefore, being now the last Plank she has to lay hold off to escape
sinking, she prepares a small Diminitive Yatcht, and hires (command she could
not, so feeble is Sovereignty without Hearts) a handful of Select Seamen, all
well bribed, and well sworn, privately, to waft her safe to Gothland, the only
Sanctuary. (Such Universal Enemies had her Politics pulled down) the World
could yield her. Oh Zeal, Zeal, mad Zeal! what Humane Distresses, Miseries,
Ruins are Thine, and Thy only Creation? -- Nay, is there scarce that one
Conflagration, that ever set whole Nations in a Flame, that has not been
lighted by a Cole from an Altar? Unfortunate Messalina, and deservedly so, the
late Royal Partner, to no less than Neptune's Sovereign, the Oceans Lord, and
the still Terror of the World, had not Zeal, Infatuating, Destroying,
Dethroning Zeal, blazed out; Poor misguided, deluded, hard-fated Lycogenes!
This very Messalina, of all those Floating Castles, the late attending Pageants
of her Triumph, all those once Impregnable Famed Walls of Albion; left Mistress
of no more than a poor Cock-boat! Instead of glittering Flaggs, and flowing
Streamers, ushered by all the Tritons of the Main, and as She past, Saluted by
all the Ecchoing Thunder from the Shore; now to Steal away by Night, Skulk like
a Fugitive, obscured by Shades and Coverts! Yes, Destiny and Zeal have so
Decreed it! For Sea therefore (such her Equippment, and such the hastening
Cause that called her) She prepares; and takes with her, her Tomazo,
Sunderania, Count Davila, Sebastian, and Pedro, and some others of her Cabinet
Friends; the last Three only being a little Transformed, by Disguises of Buff,
Scarlet and Feather, metamorphosed into downright Militants: For indeed her
Ecclesiastic Confidents, especially Father Pedro, were grown so notoriously
Infamous, that they durst not trust themselves in their own Shapes, even with
Sworn Hirelings and Mercenaries; not Gold it self being sufficient to purchase
Trust or Safety. The Queen had but very little left, to save and carry with
her, except her Jewels; for truly in spite of all that good Husbandry, that
eminent and singular good Quality in Lycogenes; yet what with Standing Armies,
and no Taxes (for he neither loved or pleased Senates enough, for any new
Donations from them) and from the continual daily Dreine, he received from
those innumerable Spiritual Horse-leeches, that hung upon his Purse-strings,
his Exchequer was but low. Messalina's Jewels therefore, being all the Treasure
she could save; those by Father Pedro's particular Advice, were committed to
the Charge and Custody of an Italian Priest, recommended to her by him, as a
Heavenly minded man, a Recluse from the World, and who as a Person under a Vow
of Poverty, of a Character and Profession above any Temptation, was the only
man she could best repose that Trust in. Thus Embarked, with their best Sails
to their small Frigate; with a Fair Wind, and Prosperous Gale, they arrive at
Gothland: for indeed the just Ordaining Powers, that had punished her with the
loss of a Crown, after so heavy a Wreck at Land, thought fit to bound their
Indignation there.

From her Arrival in Gothland, the Scene begins a little to Change: For the
Pagans there, with no small Homage and Adoration, resound her Welcome. The
Entertainment she received, as peculiarly influenced by the Commands of
Polydorus, was every where Splendid and Magnificent: I dare not call it his
Bounty, or Generosity. For truly, all the utmost Services, Respect,
Obligations, Protections, or Assistance; and indeed, all, and more then
Polydorus has, or can do for Lycogenes, or Messalina, so near a part of him;
are but poor and faint Returns, to compensate those Miseries and Sufferings, in
which his own private Leagues and Cabals, and the too prevailing Gallick
Councels and Measures in Albion, have involved the ruined Lycogenes. With a
Noble Train of Persons of the Highest Quality, and a Band of Guards, a truly
Royal Retinue, is Messalina Conducted to the Gothic Court; whilst Polydorus
himself, with that solemn State and Grandeur, comes to meet her, and
Congratulate her Arrival; paying her all that Humble and Profound Respect, and
Awful Attendance, as if she came nor from Quitting, but to the Possessing of a
Diadem: So Pompous was her Entry, that scarce an Antique Roman Triumph could
exceed it. And indeed she came to Triumph, the very first Sally of her Eye,
bringing her back no less a Trophy, than the Heart of Polydorus. To give her
her Right, even without Flattery; never was Conquest so Expeditious: No sooner
was the very Lightning seen, but the Bolt had Executed. So Dazzling were her
Charms, to the surprised Polydorus, that he truly dated his entire Vassallage,
from the first Moment he saw her. His once Adored Dear Vestal Divinity, or his
Haughtier Montezania's Charms, were nothing to the Influence of Messalina: so
unaccountable is the Archery of the Blind God: For Messalina had been no
Stranger to Polydorus: when before her Marriage with Lycogenes, in her Travel
from her own Italick Duchy, to the Kingdom of Albion, she took the Court of
Polydorus in her way; yet, then her Beauties, though in their Younger Bloom,
could be beheld without half the present Fatality. For, whether his then
Regnant Vestal Mrs had so filled his Soul, as had left no Room for any other
Guest, or for what Reason else; a common Veneration was all the Offering he
made her then; when Sighing, Desiring, Languishing, Dying, whole Hecatombs are
all too little Sacrifices now. In fine, so Capricious an Ascendant had his
present Governing Planets, that that very Polydorus fated for the Dethroning of
the Unfortunate Lycogenes; the same Matchivilian Part, before Practiced against
his Crown, must now be Acted against his Bed. For from this Hour, Friendship,
Honor, Hospitality, (Obligations not the first time dispensed withal by
Polydorus) and all other ties quite cancelled; the Possession of Messalina,
though at the price of a Kingdom, is his whole and sole Ambition. For Messalina
he Burns, and were her Virtue a Rock of Ice, (which for ought he knows it may
be); for though indeed he was no Stranger to all other her Intrigues and
Affairs, however in her Curtain Arcana, her Amors, he was no Cabinet
Counselor) he resolves to melt it down; and that so far from a scruple at the
Undertaking, that he should account it not only the sweetest, but the most
glorious of all his Achievements. For setting all other Considerations apart,
what Polydorus once but willed, he could not will unjustly; his Ambition was
Commissioned of his Conscience's High Chancellor, whilst to Desire was to
Determine; and whatever but once Determined, took the immediate Stamp of Right
and Equity to pass it into an irrevocable Decretal; insomuch, that the very
Dethroning of a God, if once thought practicable, to desire it was enough to
render it justifiable.

As there wanted no Magnificence in all her Entertainment from her first
Landing, even before the Captivity of the enamored Polydorus, you may imagine
no excesses of the highest studied Gallantry were omitted now. The Adored
Messalina is Lodged in a Palace so Glorious, as might have fitted the
Reception of a second Cleopatra in all her Pride; and which her Anthony, the
then Competitor for Universal Empire, and in all that Love that lost him the
World for her, could not have furnished out more rich and Splendid: Nor did the
Brightness and Richness of her Palace consist only in the outside Wealth and
Beauty of her Shining Beds, Embroidered Canopys, the richest of Tapistries,
Cabinets, Seruitores, etc. The unseen Treasures, outvy'd the glittering
Frontispiece: In this Drawer of a Cabinet Forty, 'tother Fifty, a Third a
Hundred Thousand Pieces of Gold; a Fourth, Lockets of Diamonds, a Fifth, Ropes
of Pearl, etc. And all too mean a Tribute to his Sovereign Messalina. And truly
now we talk of Pearl and Diamonds, her own Cargo of Jewels, committed to the
true and trusty Italian Priest aforesaid, were under Suspicion of miscarriage;
both the Treasure and the Treasurer being at present Invisible: We dare not
surmize so unkindly, that Avarice, or filthy Worldly Lucre, could prevail upon
so Sanctified a Recluse from the World, under a particular Vow of Poverty; and
above all, thought worthy (as we told you) of the peculiar recommendations of
Father Pedro, could make Him tardy in such a Case. But whether, on the more
charitable side, by some impulse of Religion he reserved them for Holy and
Pious Uses; as to present them to the Shrine of the Lorrettian Diana, to
implore from her Celestial Benediction, her Albion Majesty's Conception of a
Duke of Eborac, to her Prince of Cambria; or for any other like Dedication to
Holy Mother Church, so it is, that he was no sooner gotten on Shore, but modest
good Man, he withdrew, and was never seen after it. And notwithstanding
Polydorus published an Edict, promising a very ample Reward to that Person that
should find him, and recall the Wanderer: Either his Divine Contemplations, and
sublimer Meditations, had rapt him above the listening to humane and mundane
Proclamations; or else his Devout Pilgrimage had carried him beyond the hearing
of them, so that his Recallment is utterly Despaired of; insomuch, that unless
her Albion Majesty be content to take out their Price in Dirges for her Soul,
it is thought for any other Restitution or Payment, she now hopes but little.
Polydorus now begins his approach to Messalina, resolving an immediate vigorous
Siege, with all the Forces he can bring to lie down before her: His daily
Visits, Observance, and constant Attendance, which at first carried only the
Face of common Gallantry, and looked upon by all Eyes as no other than the
Generous Treatment of a Royal Hospitality to Greatness in Distress, and under
his Protection; are now both by his Looks, Behavior, and Address, so
Industriously managed, that Messalina (unless she wanted Eyes) must find that
in the Assiduous Polydorus, there was something more then a kind Host, viz. an
Adoring Slave.

The Queen now fully satisfied how great a Vassal her Eyes had won her, begins
to consider the Wise Management of so Important a Conquest. Polydorus's Address
and Personage, even abstracted from his Imperial Character, and the Luster of a
Crown, were such as always stood fair in the Female Eyes, and rendered his
Heart no dis-acceptable Present to the very Proudest and most Disdainful
Beauty. And our Messalina who was neither the Coyest, or most In-sensible of
her Sex, already felt a Commiseration about her, that told her the Sighs of so
Royal a Languisher must not go unpittied. Time, Assiduity, and Appl^cation, she
plainly foresaw, would at last inevitably prevail; and therefore fancying it no
less then the Absolute Ordainment of her Fate, she has no farther Thought then
an entire Resignation to Immutable Decree. However, though the Stake must at
last be lost, yet the Playing her Game out Politickly, and managing her Cards
to her best Advantage, are in her own Choice and Power. Yes, that, and that
only takes up all the business of her waking, and indeed sleeping Thoughts.
The Terms and Conditions of a Surrender; What Parley and Capitulations first;
what Resolution and Obstinacy (for the Victory must not be Cheap) she must hold
out with, before the White Flag is at last to be hung out. Her Meditations on
this subject had one Evening led her alone from all Company into an Inner and
Private Walk of the Garden; When Polydorus, whose unresting Soul had led his
Body abroad too with much the same Contemplations, fortunately meets her. This
opportunity as it gave him the Blessing of a more Private Interview, then
before he had met, so it inspired him with the Courage of making a more ample
and particular Declaration of his Love, then all his hitherto fainter and
distant Addresses had made. Accordingly throwing himself at her Feet, in the
Tenderest and most Passionate Expressions (the never wanted Eloquence of Love)
he told her how entirely the Soul of Polydorus was subjected to the Eyes of
Messalina: Nor did he more heighten the Progress of her Victories, and Power of
her Charms, then the Fatality of them; that without a Return of Pity his Death
was Inevitable, whilst his Peace, Happiness and Life were absolutely in her
Hands. The Queen, whose part was now to Play, with a seeming Amazement, rather
than a listening Attention, gave him the Liberty of finishing his whole
Declaration; when as Wakeing from a Frightful Dream, or Starting from a
disturbing Vision, Good Gods, she cried, are not your Quivers Empty yet? Have
^e more Shafts reserved still for the unfortunate Messalina? Is it not enough
that your Persecuting Powers have Ravished an Empire from me, and Driven me out
an Exile, a Wanderer of the World; but I must yet fall lower; low as the most
abject of my Sex, when my Chaste Ears must be Profaned with the Rude Sounds of
Lawless Love; Oh! Polydorus, Cruel Polydorus, has Misery and Ruin made the
fallen Messalina so little, so despicably little -- No, Glorious Madam,
(Passionately replied Polydorus) so Great, so Divinely Great, that the Gods
have singled you out to Weild their Thunder, whilst there is not one Bolt of
Heaven that Strikes with Fate but Messalina 's. Oh! Madam, if ever Compassion,
Mercy, Charity, Entered the fairest Temple that ever Lodged a God, have Pity on
the Adoring, Kneeling, Dying Polydorus. My Life, -- alas, my very Soul depends
upon no other Doom but Messalina 's; for if the Deaf, the Cruel, the Inexorable
Messalina must not, cannot, will not Pity me, to Die is but half the Tribute my
Despair must pay her: The Transports of a Passion like mine are such, that when
I lose all Hopes of one kind Smile from Messalina, she leaves me abandoned to
that Wild Torrent of unbounded Horrors, that less then the Abjuring of
Humanity, the Execrating of Providence, and Cursing the very Author of my
Being, will be the fatal Consequences of my irresistible Desperation; a
Desperation so hideous, that when I fall a Victim to her Scorn, will shut me
out at once from Earth and Heaven. Messalina, not at all Displeased at so
Passionate a Declaration, however to continue the Masque of a most Rigid and
Obdurate Virtue, Reprimands him with all the Severest Resentments imaginable,
desires him, nay, Conjures him for ever to Cease a S^it so Fruitless, and a
Thought so I^pious, a Language that her unblemisht never sh^ken Virtue can so
little hear, that rather then liv^ within the Air of so much Guilt, her wounded
Innocence must be forced to Fly a Cruel Court, and seek a Refuge in some kinder
and more Hospitable Desert. Ah! Madam, replied Polyderus, Then you have Decreed
Mankind must be undone! Shall Empires, Nations, People, have Peace, when I have
none! No Madam, it is resolved that Mess^lina Hate, Scorn, Loath the Unworthy
Polydorus. Yes, his Destruction, his Irrevocable Destruction's Sealed; and by
the Malice of my Stars, the World shall Groan as I do. He was once more falling
at her Feet, when a Princely Train of the^ Noblest Quality of the Gothland
Court appearing in the Garden, interrupted him. He had scarce recovered Reason
enough to suppress the too visible concern and disorder, that appeared in his
Eyes, much less the Load that lay at his Heart, when one of his Generals
Advancing from the rest of the Noble Company, threw himself at his Feet,
telling him, He was immediately in Obedience to his Royal Commands, setting
forward to the General Randezvous on the Banks of the Rhine, and came in Duty
to Receive his farther Commission and Orders. Commission and Orders! Answered
Polydorus; Why, Burn, Ravage, Ruin, Destroy; make Nations w^ste, and Kingdoms
Desolate; spare neither Age nor Sex; but above all, where ever thou meetst that
loathed detested Thing, that calls it self a Christian, double thy Fury there,
Banish all thoughts of Pity or Remorse; be Bloody and be Canonized: Remember
the Christian Pride is swelled to Vlceration; and it is the Glory of our Sword
to Lance it. And if thou meetest a Temple, lay the Accursed Consecrated Roof in
Ashes; the God that sills it is my Enemy; and it is but Just my Vengeance
Battle Heavens. If thou make Treaties or Capitulations, my Orders are, you
break 'em all. Betray and Conquer. Heaven never kept Faith with me, and it is
but Reason, we the Vicegerents of the Gods should Copy their own everlasting
Falsehood, and Reign Immortal Infidels like themselves. You have my Orders; to
your Post; Obey and Prosper. The General, upon the Kings Command, makes his
Humble Obeisance to the King, and Retreats, Ruminating with some little
Surprise on the severity of his present rough Commission; which however, on
what unknown occasion that had transported him into such Vehemence and
Bitterness in the expressing himself, he nevertheless knew to be the true and
constant Sense of that Great Monarch; and all his former Orders, though perhaps
something gentler and softer worded, carried in reality the same Contents and
Mandats; and accordingly in all Duty prepares to Execute.

But to return to our Polydorus, whose Tormenting Reflections on the Cruelty of
Messalina had, withdrawn him from all Company to his Closet; In all the Agonies
of defeated Love, he could not yet entirely yield to Despair: Were her Virtue a
Rock of Adamant: Nay, were she possibly as Deaf, as Pitiless, and Remorseless
to all his Bleeding Sighs, as himself to a Dying Christians last Prayer, he
will not quit the Siege yet. Accordingly not a day, nor scarce an hour passes
that he does not Visit, Court, Sue, Plead, and spite of all Denials, all her
Pleas of Virtue and Chastity, that Mountain Honor shall not block his way.
Sometimes he Woes her with the Promised Restoration of her Albion, the
Re-instating her in all her former Grandeur; and if the Crown of Albion will
not purchase a Smile, he will throw his own in, to make up the Sum. In short, No
Gallantry, Address; no Protestations, Vows or Oaths, though never so
Extravagant, are wanting to pursue the Coy Disdainful Messalina: till one
Morning in her Walk in the same Garden, his successful Rhetoric prevails; or
rather Messalina thinks she has now held out long enough to yield with Honor:
For after his Repeated Protestations of the Crowns and Scepters he would lay at
her Feet, and the Vassal World he would make her Mistress of; He told her, If
Messalina would but Condescend to Crown his Love, he would pay his
Acknowledgment of so Divine a Blessing, with no less a Sacrifice then a hundred
thousand Christian Lives. A hundred thousand Christian Lives! my Generous
Polydorus, replied Messalina. Such Merit, such Transcendent Merit! An Offering
of that price enough to Court a Saint, and Win a Goddess. Such Eloquence is
irresistible; nay, the name of such a Sacrifice so pleased her, that had the
strongest Bonds of Conscience held her, that single Thought had burst the
Feeble Manacle; and the offering of so much Heretic streaming Blood, were such
an Atonement, as would not only expiate but consecrate the very Sin it self. So
pleased and so conquered, she generously tells the Ravished Polydorus, That she
will expect him at Vesper-time, when she will send all her Retinue to the
Mosque to their Devotion, and Attend his Company in her Closet.

Polydorus being now Arrived at the Haven, just upon entering to the Inland of
Paradise; the Hour, the Place, the Means and Opportunity all assigned for the
Consummating of his Happiness; and what heightened the Charm, his Divine
Messalina her self the generous Designer of the whole Scene of Felicity; the
Plot, the Introduction and Conduct to this more then happy Meeting, so much her
own* that possibly, our Amorous Monarch could not conceive more Rapture at the
Queens Concession of her Highest Favors themselves, then at the Endearing
management of the blessed Minute to bestow them; even the Portal to Happiness
being oftentimes with Lovers no less Ravishing, then the very Temple of Bliss,
to which it leads. -- In short, All things contributing to make him the
Happiest Prince in the World; whether a Soul, so unbounded, as that of
Polydorus, whom the Empire of the Universe ('it is very well known) would hardly
satisfy, had the Transports of his Passion, as exalted as those of his
Ambition; and was thereby elevated above the Common Height of an ordinary
L^vers Ecstasy; let it suffice, his Joy, his u^expressible Joy was such, as
burnt in his Face, and glowed in his very Eyes; and the expected Enjoyment of
Messalina was at that Moment a Trophy above all the Conquests that either his
Sword, or his more Victorious GOLD ever won him. But to leave our Royal Lover
to all his Furious Longings, Impatient Expectings, and Restless Burnings, those
Amorous crowding Attendants, that always make the Leading Cavalcade to the
Coronation of Love: My Reader must be entreated to interrupt his Expectation of
the success of this Grand Scene of our two Imperial Inamorato's, by the
interposing of a little Comical Intrigue of Lactilla, the Cambrian Princes
Nurse; which, whether by a Frolic of Fortune, for some particular Diversion of
that Fickle Deity, or by mere common chance, it matters not; casually
intermixing it self in this Sublimer Amor, must make up a part of our History.

It is not unknown to the World what Artful Tenderness our Messalina has all
along expressed for that dear Infant. But indeed, 'twas the subtlest part she had
to Play, and therefore it must be Acted to the Life. In the late Storm that
drove her from the lost Kingdom of Albion, and cast her on the Gallick Shore,
however that darling Infant, with all the Tenderest Care, was preserved from
the Universal Shipwreck, and not only the honest Bric-kill Nurse that Suckled
it, was carried over with the Queen, and her Cambrian Nursery; but also the
very Warming-^an Midwife too, crossed the Hering-pond with her Royal M^istress;
and as some think very timely and prudently, for fear of that Inquisition from
the Grandees of Albion, had she ventured to have staid behind, that possibly
would have put her to that Test her Circumstances would not well bear; though
truly for a fairer Face to the World, 'twas Industriously given out, That her
Majesty was with Child again, and therefore the Midwife's Attendance being her
Majesty's special Command, 'twas her Duty to wait on her Royal Mistress to what
part of the World soever her Misfortunes should carry her.

The Amor of Messalina with Polydorus, etc. (since Lycogenes Retiring to
Ibernia,) swelling so big, we are forced to make the Completing of the History
the Subject of a Fourth Part.

FINIS.
Advertisement
TO this part is Prefixed a Key, which renders the History of the Four Parts,
Intelligible to the meanest Capacity.

THE AMORS OF THE French King WITH THE Late Queen of ALBION. BEING The Fourth
and Last Part of the History of Messalina.

By a Woman of QUALITY.

LONDON: Printed for John Lyford, 1689.

TO THE READER.
THE Bookseller has been Advised to Add the following Key, for the benefit of
the meanest Capacity, in understanding the whole History of Messalina.

ALbion, England. Belgic, Holland. Gothland, France. Iberia, Ireland. St.
Jaques, St. James 's Alba-Regalis, Whitehall. Forest of St. Jaques, St. James
's Park. Pagan Temples, Mosques of Albion, Temples of Diana; all signifies
Romish Mass-Houses, and Chapels. Waters of Baijae, the Minerals of Bath,
Britomardes, C. II. Lycogenes, J. II. two Brothers, late Kings of England.
Anaximander Prince of the Lowlands, The then Prince of Orange, our now, our
Gracious Sovereign. Artemisa, the then Princess of Orange, our now Gracious
Sovereign Queen. Philadelpha, Her Royal Highness the Princess of Denmark.
Polycrates, the Northern Prince, His Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark.
Messalina, the late Queen. The huge Prince in Italy, the late Duke of Modena.
Bonerges the High Priest, the Pope. Pagan, Papist. Count Davila, Dada, the
Popes late Nuncio at the Court of England. Father Pedro, the Jesuit Peter's.
Latroon, Tyrconnel, the Rebbel Deputy of Ireland. Aspasia, the Deputies Wife.
Marchioness de Tomazo a great Friend of Don Tomazo ali^s, Tom Dangerfield Young
Sanctifore, a Baron of Rome, and Gallant of Messalina before she came for
England. Father Sebastian, A. B. Ellis, Titular A. B. of York. Madam de Elvira,
An Italian Jilt, one concerned in the Warming-pan Intrigue. Cleone, a Doxie of
Tyrconnels. Madam Wilks, The Queens doughty Midwife. The Water of St. Winifred,
A Spring in Wales. Lady of Lorretto, The Popish term for the Virgin Mary.
Traynovant, London.

The Fourth Part.
IT is not unknown to the World what Artful Tenderness our dear Messalina, all
along has expressed for her Cambrion Prince, that she carried over not only the
honest Brick-Kiln Nurse that Suckled it, But also the Warming-pan Midwife to
Cross the Herring-pond with her Royal Mistress, and as some think very timely
and prudently, for fear of that Inquisition from the Grandees of Albion, had
she ventured to have stayed behind, that possibly might have put her to that
Test her Circumstances would not well bear; though truly for a fairer Face to
the World, 'twas industriously given out, That Her Majesty was with Child
again, and therefore the Midwifes Attendance being Her Majesty's Special
Command, 'twas her Duty to wait on Her Royal Mistress, to what part of the
World soever her Misfortunes should carry her; Her late Able performance in
Delivering the Queen of her Cambrian Heir, having recommended and called her
(as she pretended) to the Queens particular Choice for her Skilful hand at her
next Lying-In.

But to return to our Nurse, and her Intrigue we promised you; Amongst the
public and solemn Addresses and Veneration made and paid by the Nobility of
the Gauls to the Fair Queen of Albion, a great part of the Daily Devotion, you
may well guess, was offered to that young Prince. For if such Sublime Blood, as
was thought to run in that little Heroes Veins, exalted him at scarce three
Days old to the solemn Reception of Foreign Ambassadors, and giving Audience
to public Ministers, and that too in the Heretic Land of Albion; You may
easily think that the great Gallican Votaries, those Pagan Wise men of the
West, (pardon the Allusion) brought him no common Oblation of Myrrh,
Frankincense, etc, But of the Princely Crowd of Devotes, that amongst their
Orisons to Messalina, made their Homages to this Imperial Babe; it happened
that a young Gallick Lord, Named Laforse, a Man of a Noble Personage, making no
little Figure in Polydorus Court, but above all a mighty Adorer of the Female
Sex; and like the natural Constitution of the Gauls, a general Admirer of every
new Face, without any great Sin of Constancy to answer for: This Laforse paying
his Devoire to the Cambrian Prince, entertained a strong Inclination to his
Nurse. What he saw in her more then a good wholesome Complexion, and a
plain-spun Cleanly Woman, we cannot imagine; but take her altogether, as the
maggot bit with him, nothing would satisfy him but an Amor with Lactilla. Her
downright Country Innocence even to Clownishness and Rusticity, had something
in it, that at this time Captivated him more then all the Allurements of Wit,
Humor, Gayety, High Blood, and H^gher Pride. None of all the Court Stars, in
all their Glory, at present took up so much of his Thoughts as Madam Nurse.
Lactilla he fancies for a Miss, and Lactilla's Affection he must Vanquish if he
can. Accordingly our Lordly Lover under pretense of making Court to the
Cambrian Prince, takes the daily opportunity of Addressing a Kind Look, and
Kinder Complement to Lactilla; which he carefully prosecutes with that
particular Assiduity and Application, as would best suite the Humor and
Breeding of such a Mistress. The poor Nurse whether dazied with the Presence,
the Looks and Garb of so Glorious a Servant; or confounded with so fine Words
from so fine a Person, began at last not only to listen, but ^o be pleased and
tickled with so Gallant a Suitor. It is not worth our while to recount the
several Courtship Scenes between them; to draw therefore to the Consummating
part of the Amor, it fell out so, that what through the Importunities of the
Assayling Monseigneur, together with poor Lactilla's being several Months tied
up from all Recreations of that kind, (a shackle for some Physical Reasons
always laid upon Mil^h Nurses to Heirs of Quality;) which possibly might
heighten her Longing for what she had so long been kept Fasting from, and so
facilitate his Conquest upon her; however so 'twas, that the Creature came to
yield at last. And by an odd Caprice of Fortune, it happened that Lactilla was
brought to the delivering up of her Fort, the very same day her Royal Mistress
had Capitulated and Signed the Surrender of hers. For the Fortunate Lover for
his last Effort, lighting of a lucky Hour, when the Queen and all her
Attendants, for the curiosity of seeing ten new Raised Regiments of Light Horse
pass under her Palace Window, in their March toward the Rhine, were withdrawn
into the Balcone of an outer Room; had the satisfaction of finding his Dear
Lactilla with her little Nursery all alone. To improve therefore so kind a
Minute to the best advantage, throwing his Arms about her Neck, and Assaulting
her Lips (for those outworks he had long since won) with a whole Volley of
Kisses; at last he cried, Oh my Dear, dear Sweet Rogue, are these empty
Embraces, these half-Joys all I must expect? When, Dear Lactilla, Oh when, will
that Blessed, happy, Ravishing Minute come? Poor Lactilla Interrupting him,
Replied, Nay, fie my Lord; a Man of your great Quality throw away your Thoughts
upon so poor a Creature as I am; If you would talk like your self, methinks you
Lordfolks should make your fine Speeches to none but Kings and Queens; if you
have a mind then to show your great Breeding, you would do well to make your
High Compliments to that little pretty young King in the Cradle there. No my
Dear Lactilla, Replied Laforse, I have other better work to do at this time;
it is time enough to make fine Speeches to that little young King, as you call
him, 20 years hence. Twenty years, quotha, [Answers Lactilla] By my troth, my
Lord, no longer ago then we were last in Albion, as young as he is, and as many
years as he wants, we have had Your outlandish great Lords and Bassadours have
made many a Scholarly Speech, and a great many fine Compliments to him too; But
above all, I shall never forget the Bassadour of Catalonia: that great tall
Man, with a rueful dun Face, and a swinging pair of black Whiskers, no sooner
came to receive Audience of my little Master here, but the poor Baby fell a
Roaring at him, and would not endure the sight of bim. On my Conscience, my
Lord, the poor Lamb was as much frighted, as ever his Father was at S -- Bury;
and upon my Womanhood I believe it, had it been able, would have run away as
fast too: I vow and swear my Lord, 'twas so terribly scared at him, that I
profess I could scarce get it sweet again in an hour after. The Lord could not
forbear Smiling at this Innocent Relation; which downright Language of
Lactilla's, as a Novel Charm to him, was one of the g^eatest Whets to his
Inclination for her. But as Talking was not his present business, he pusht on
the matter a little more Vigorously, and told her a meeting she must and should
give him, that should more completely Bless him, then all the fainter Favors
she had already b^stowed upon him. The poor Nurse, after a great many other
urging, and at last prevailing Arguments, could resist no longer; and truly at
last told him, That if he had any thing more to say to her, the only time she
had to give him the hearing with Convenience, was at Vesper time; for, says
she, the Queen and her Attendants are all then so devout, (though truly I know
not how it comes about that they are so over and above Religious here, then
they used to be in Albion, unless Misfortune and Miseries make Folk Pious) that
they never miss Prayers; and because I, and only I am one of those Paw Things
they call Heretics, my little Master, and my self, excepting some Guards in
the outer Rooms, are always left alone; and if your Lordships Intentions are
Honest and Virtuous (as I trust in Heaven, they are,) if you have any thing
more to talk to me, you may come then and welcome. The Happy Monseigneur at
this generous and cunning Assignation made by his kind Lactilla, (for there
never wants Woman's Wit even in Simplicity it self on such an occasion) felt a
Delight Answerable to the satisfaction so acceptable a Minute would give him,
and resolving to Return at the appointed Hour with that desired Honesty and
Virtue as should be best agreeable to her, leaves his farewell in a Kiss, and
Whispers in her Ear, that she should find him a Man of Honor; and so Retires,
and falls in with the Ladies in the Balcone. The poor Nurse waiting for the
Vespers, (which indeed was the first time that ever she had a kindness for the
Pagan Worship before) found her Expectation a little baulkt, when the Queen
pretending Indisposition refused to go to Prayers; at which the Ladies likewise
in Complaisance to her Majesty resolved not to go neither, but stay and pay
their Attendance to the Queen; which the Queen absolutely forbid, Commanding
them all to go to Prayers, and leave her only to her Nurse till their Return.
The Ladies accordingly Retiring; at their Departure, the Queen instead of
Staying in the Bedchamber with the Child and Nurse, bid Lactilla have a Care
of the Prince, for she had occasions to Retire into her Closet, where she would
not be disturbed. This gave Lactilla some little hopes again; for the Closet
being on the farther side of a large Room of State lying beyond the
Bedchamber, she fancied her dear Lord might gain Access without any Baulk, at
that Distance and Retirement, from any thing of the Queens Interruption of
them. No sooner was the Queen got into the Closet, but Count Davilah, having
received a Packet from Albion just at the Chapel Door, defers his Devotion,
and finding matter of Importance in it, together with an enclosed Packet for
Messalina, with Commands of a Delivery at sight, and with Orders of Immediate
Communication with the Queen, about Affairs that required a speedy Result; the
Count in pursuance of his Orders received, hastes instantly to the Queen, and
delivering her her Packet, together with the Instructions contained in his own,
requests her speedy Conference. The Queen was much surprised at his Approach,
and in no small Dilemma, for if she dismissed him without Reading her Packet, and
Conferring with him as desired by the King her Husband, she should be Guilty of
a Fault highly against the Character of that Respect and Duty she ever paid
him, and which in his present Circumstances would be an unpardonable neglect;
and if on the other side she stayed in her Closet or Chamber to Read her
Letters, and Debate their Contents, she was Jealous that the appointed Visit of
Polydorus at so unseasonable an Hour as the Queens known Retirement, would give
matter of Suspicion to the Count; and which besides her unwillingness to
disgust a Person whom she was not yet prepared to disoblige and quite break
with, might thereby raise some Blemish upon her Reputation. Between these two
Considerations, with a sudden Presence of Mind, she thought of this Expedient,
which was to Invite the Count down into the Garden, and there Dispatch the
Conference: whereupon she desired him to Walk down with her; and as she past by
the Bedchamber, she told the Nurse whither and with whom she was going, and
bid her expect her Return immediately. By this Projection she thought Polydorus
coming in her absence according to appointment, and not finding her within,
would undoubtedly ask the Nurse for her, and thereby informed, be Invited to
stay, and Attend her Return.

At the Queens Departure it was just drawing toward the Evening, being a
little past Sunset: And Lactilla extraordinarily pleased to think she should
have the whole Lodgings free, and by that means, if her Lord kept Touch, enjoy
all the Privacy and Freedom her Heart could wish; being truly in her Nature a
little more fearful, and something bashfuller in an Amourous Transgression,
then the Fairer Court Sinners generally more hardened, and more Courageous at a
Love Adventure, had already drawn all the very Window Curtains of the
Bedchamber close, to be as much Retired as possibly she could. -- Just as the
Queen was got down the Back-Stairs, Enters the King by the other Stairs, and
immediately with all the haste of an Invited Lover makes to the Closet; but
finding the Queen not there, and imagining she might be in the Bedchamber
Trips as Nimbly thither. The Nurse hearing some body Walk cross the Room of
State, with that eager pace that spoke him a Lover, as she thought by his
Tread; and not doubting any other, but that her Dear Lord was come; in a kind
of a Panick Fear, fitting Perdue upon the Bed behind the Cu^tains, and almost
Trembling to consider what she was going to do, not daring as she thought to
Expose her Blushes to the Light, (being the first time of her offending in that
kind) out of pure Modesty puts out the Candle. The King just upon his Entrance
into the Bedchamber, fancying nothing else but Love could put out the Light,
that it is own might blaze the bolder, and consequently the Golden Minute was
now his own, makes his Instant Approach to the Bed, and Grasping in his Arms
his yiedling though mistaken Sacrifice, and breaking out into a Rapture of --
My Life, my Soul, my Heaven, my Eternity, with Two or Three more such Pious and
high flown Ejaculations, the usual Devotion of Lovers, (those few short
Preliminaries (to say Truth) being as much as the little Patience of much Love
could dispense with) without staying for one Syllable of Reply from his Twining
Mistress, for indeed her Elevated Thoughts we^e too full for her Tongue to get
Vent; besides she had her Mouth so sweetly stopped, that she wanted Power as well
as Leisure for talking; Polydorius without farther Ceremony immediately Rushes
into her Bosom, Launches into a Torrent of Bliss, and Riots and Revels in
unutterable Delight; for Messalina, his Angel Messalina, filled both his Arms
and his Soul; so Potent is Imagination, that Deity-like, what she Enjoys she
Creates. The Ravishing Dalliance ended, with no Love lost on either side: For
Monsigneur was as Divinely Charming to the Ravished Lactilla, as Messalina could
be to Polydorus, and the very Grandeur of a Lord in her Arms, (though otherwise
perhaps no heartier a Performer then her own honest Lime-Pit Clod-Pate Drudge
in Albion,) had so much outvyed the poore^ satisfaction of her Man of Clay and
Sea-Cole, her Spouse at home; that in pure Gratitude for the Honor as well as
the Pleasure she had received, having not only recovered both breath and
leisure for a kind word or two of her own, but also gotten a little more
Assurance then before (for Love soon makes Equal^ty) she turned to her Panting,
as she thought Laforse, and throwing her Arms about his Neck, thinking it her
turn to talk a little Amorously now; Well my dear Laforse (says she) I hope you
have no reason now, to think your poor Lactilla so hard-hearted as you have
sometimes told her she was, for if such Love as mine -- Lactilla! -- cries
Polydorus, starting up from the Bed, in a surprise so killing, that not the
Ghosts and Specter of all the Christian Victims his own Edicts had ever
doomed, or his Booted Disciples executed; nay, nor all his broken Leagues
turned Goblins, could have Staggered him more. At first, in the height of
Agony and Bitterness of Soul, he thought 'twas a Trick of Messalina's; that his
high-flown Ambition of attempting the Queen of Albion's Virtue, had put her
Pride and Scorn upon this Stratagem of punishing his Audacious Love by so
contemptible and despicable a Creature Foyster'd upon him: Such Dirt and
Rubbish in the Arms of Polydorus! The Transport of that thought, and his
enraged Sentiments of so unpardonable an Affront, could hardly withold him
from drawing his Sword and Executing his Fury, (though never so unmanly,) on
the Heart of that Sordid Engine and Tool, in this Insolent manner made use of,
to abuse him. But these suggestions were soon suppressed by some kinder thoughts
of Messalina, it being impossible, as he thought, for so Excellent a Creature
to be so great a Jilt, or rather greater Devil, as this piece of Imposture must
render her. Besides, were she all the Furies and Feinds of her whole Sex put
together, yet, as a Woman of Imperial Quality, her very Character, if nothing
else, would never suffer her to make choice of this, of all the Revenges in the
World, (if any such she had against him.) For whatever Stratagems a Great Woman
might make use of to Gratify her Spleen, Spite, Malice, Hate, or any other
Passion; she would never turn Bawd for any of them. That part of his Fear upon
these Recollections being pretty well cleared up, he resolved however to
satisfy himself by some Interrogatories to Lactilla (as much as he could make
without discovery of his Person,) what Sorcery, Enchantment, or Malicious Devil
of Fortune had Snared him into so poor a Noose as the Arms of Lactilla; a
Thought that so much Disgusted his Haughty Pride, that he would not, for half
the Price of a Kingdom, be made so much the Jest of the World, as so Humble and
Course a Love Adventure, (he fancied) if it should take Air, would render him;
more especially if it should get to the Ear of Messalina; for his mere
Indignation could never digest so shameful a Reproach, that his Imperial
Caresses (though never so innocently) should be Debased to so Sordid an
Embrace. And therefore, if for no other Reason, from Her above the rest of the
World he must endeavor to stifle the Discovery of this Accursed Accident:
Turning then to Lactilla, (who still lay upon the Bed in no small Surprise, and
as you may imagine, in no less trouble at her Dear Lords so abrupt and unkind
Start from her Arms.) Well, Dear Lactilla, says Polydorus, I hope the Queen has
no Suspicion of our kindness -- The Queen! suddenly replied Lactilla, Good
Heaven forbid! should my Lady Messalina know what I have been doing, the more
Naughty Man you, -- But what do you fear? Who, I, her Nurse, and let the Queen
know I Lay with a Man, and Spoiled the Princes Milk! Not for a Thousand Pound!
To be Burnt for Heresy, or Hanged for High Treason against that little
Princely Babe, would be the least I must look for in this Pagan Land. No, my
Dear Lord, we poor Country Folks are not so dull neither; how simple soever we
may be in other matters, we have always Wit enough in our Loves: and if my Dear
Lord can be kind to so Worthless a Thing as I am; never fear Queens nor
Emperesses discovering of us: let me alone to take care of that. This Innocent
Answer of Lactilla's, (excepting the Resentments of so Nauseous a mistake, and
so unhappy a disappointment, which he could not yet so easily, Conquer)
satisfied all the rest of Polydorus disquiets; for now he plainly found, that
the Nurses mistaking him for the Lord Laforse, had not only dispel'd all his
first ungenerous Suspicions of Messalina, (a Thought, which how Momentary
soever it lasted, he could now hardly forgive himself for) by convincing him,
that not only Fortune was the true and only Jilt that had put this Trick upon
him; but also by Virtue of his still passing for the supposed Laforse, together
with the Favor of the Dark, he had now an opportunity of Marching off utterly
undiscovered, and defying the utmost Malice of his Stars themselves to expose
his shame. Without any stay therefore, or any other parting Compliment, then
Adieu Dear Lactilla, I Will see thee again very speedily, he Starts out of the
Chamber, and clapping the Door after him, lest any of the Lights in the Room of
State should give her so much as a glimpse of his Backside, he bolts down the
Back-Stairs with all the Expedition he could make. He was not gotten three
paces below the Foot of the Stairs, but Messalina crossing a Walk in the Garden
popt just upon him, who by this time having adjusted matters, and dispatched the
Count, was indeed with no less haste Returning to her Closet in Expectance of
Polydorus, whose Expectation by this time she might possibly have over
heightened; if not a little, tried Patience. But meeting him moving off in such
haste. My Lord the King, why so fast? I hope the Face of Messalina has nothing
so Terrible in it, as to fright you. The King, between Surprise and Confusion,
(occasioned by the sight of Messalina, and the fresh Remembrance of his
unfortunate Adventure with the Nurse, his own Consciousness of which, though
unknown to the World beside, made him Redden with a Blush almost Scarlet deep,
though the growing Night partly concealed the discovery of it;) what through
the suddenness of this Encounter, and the perplexity of his Thoughts, being not
well provided with words to Answer her, was studying for a Reply, when the
Queen continued; Well, Polydorus, I suppose you found but dull Entertainment
above, by your haste in running away; though if the Expectation of my Company
had been worthy of one Minutes longer Dispensation, and your patience not quite
Exhausted, I had returned to tell you, that the Receipt of an Express from
Lycogenes, brought me by Count Davilah, drew me some Minutes into the Garden.
The Contents of which requiring some short Conference between us, I took him
down thither for it, lest your expected Visit at that time, to a prying Eye, or
a censuring Thought, might have afforded matter of Surmise to my disadvantage.
But that fear is now past, for I have given him such a Dispatch as may assure
Polydorus, that Messalina cannot be guilty of forgetfulness -- This obliging
Language of the Queen, as it could not but infinitely Charm the Amorous
Polydorus, so it could not but as much distract him too. For to tell her, he
had been in her Apartment, and stayed there for her not full a Quarter of an
hour, (for indeed his whole Ingress, Egress and Regress from Lactilla, was an
Execution of no more Minutes dispatch,) and that truly (let him mince it in as
fine words as he pleased) he had not patience to wait longer, though for so
Divine a Blessing as the Possessing of Messalina, would be an excuse
impardonable. And on the other side, to own the Truth of his Adventure, that
frighted him thence; that Thought was all Death and Hell, and not Wild Horses
could draw him to so shameful a Confession. In this distraction of Thought, it
came at last into his Head, to tell her, That if her surprising Absence at so
blessed an hour, and after so Solemn and Generous an Engagement, that had so
entirely filled his Heart, and taken up every Faculty of his Soul, might run
him into any Impatiences or Extravagances worthy a Rebuke, as his not waiting
longer for her Return, and his over-zealous coming down in Quest after her,
might be; however, he hoped she would excuse all Effects, how blameable soever,
that had no other than the Transport of her Charms, and his own Passion for
their Cause. The Queen made him an obliging Answer, and told him, She was very
well satisfied, the Fault that was, being of her own side. But since
interposing Business had made her lapse some Minutes in her Promise, however,
she would make Reparation for it, and if he pleased to Return with her, as she
had Expedited her Husbands Express, she was now at leisure to listen to any
Expresses of Polydorus, and as ready to Dispatch them. At which, giving her
Hand to Polydorus, which he received with a profound Reverence, they Returned
back again, the King only Murmuring all the way to himself, to think what good
substantial Love he had lately Prodigally Lavisht, or rather thrown away; and
which in his present Payment might be something wanted to make up his Sum. But
above all it grated his very Soul to think, that so Abject a Creature as
Lactilla had (...) considerable a part of what was (...) to the Divinity of
Messalina. Nay, (...), had got the first start too in (...), that he must be
forced to come all S^lye^ and Defiled, (for a less Taint he could not fancy it)
to such Celestial Embraces. But to bring our Lovers to the Closet; the Door
Shut; and the Queen thrown upon her Couch, and Polydorus by her side; she cast
those Languishing Dying Looks upon him enough to Thaw a Stoic, and Fire an
Anchoret. The King who needed no Invitation, but already Melted into Kissing,
Toying, Dallying, Embracing, Twining, all those Outworks of Felicity, the
Supreme Beatitude only unpossest; Nay, and even That too just entering, and on
the very Brink of Paradise; Oh! too imbecile to grasp at so Divine a Treasure,
though admitted even into all the whole fragrant Ravishing Bed of Sweets; Alas,
he wanted strength to Crop the Flower. -- At this accursed Damned Defeat (no
Name too black, nor Thought to hideous for it) poor Polydorus fell down by her
side upon the Couch so Abasht, and so Confounded, that he could have wished all
the Graves, that his own Sword e're Dug, to Swallow him; or some kind
Mountain, high as the Cries, if possible, of all his own Martyred Christians
Blood, to cover his shame.

The Queen her self no less Defeated, though not so much Abasht, (for in such
Cases the Failure is never in their Sex) perceiving his Confusion, threw her
Arms about his Neck, and laid her Cheek so close to his, as if she had resolved
to show, that she either did not, or would not see his Disorder; a Behavior,
which carried not only Endearment in it but Policy too. For to triumph over
Weakness, and jocque or cajole an unperforming Lover, as some foolish resenting
Beauties in such disappointments have done, has sometimes been too well known,
to their own loss, to have given that entire Check even to much younger and
abler Nerves, than Polydorus, as has Invalidated a whole Assignation: Whereas,
on the contrary, an Unconcern or Endearing Connivance at Frailty, has
encouraged the Retreating Unsucceeding Assailant, to Rally again, come on, new
Storm, and Conquer. Polydorus in all this staggering Shock, excepting some
Restless Starts and Flings, and now and then a Murmuring rougher sort of
Breathing betwixt a Sigh and a Groan, that spoke better for him, uttered not
one Syllable; his Rage being too big for Words, and his Shame, alas, too Odious
to be Palliated with Eloquence, had he Recollection or Sense enough about him
to study for any. Messalina all this while, as a Cordial against a Pang so
violent, generously plied him with all the healing Balm that her kindest
Kisses, Toying, Caresses, and Embraces, could give him: till Polydorus at
length so sweetened, new warmed, and enlivened again, by such Languishing,
Melting, but above all (her brightest Attribute) such Forgiving Divinity, began
to feel new Animating Fires; and to Retrieve his Honor, with all the Prowess
of a Recovered Champion, he Renews the Assault once more. But the second
success too like the first; a mere thin Airy Flash and ineffectual Fire. -- At
this last Defeat he could hold no longer, but started from the Couch, and flew
into that Storm and Rage, Madness and half Desperation, that no Execrations
against himself, or Invocations against Heaven and Earth were too terrible for
him: till the Queen Interposing -- Fie, Fie, my Lord, why all this Rage, this
most Unmanly Rage! Why do you thus unkindly play your own Tormentor? Can
Polydorus Execute before I Sentence? The Punishment's Unjust that comes before
the Sin: and I know none -- No Sin! Not Polydorus sinned against his Messalina!
[Interrupting her.] Oh Injured Madam, Your Divine Innocence knows not the
Weight of my Accursed Guilt, a Load would sink a World. Oh that Vile, Black,
Infernal, Damned -- [Casting a Furious Eye toward the Bed-Chamber] and then
turning toward the Queen.] Beast, Monster, Traitor as I am -- The Queen
[stopping him.] Nay, no more my Lord, Wrong not your self with these unjust
Reproaches; what you would call your Crime, perhaps I Have reason to esteem your
Glory; perhaps you Love me too well, and that has been the cause. Desire
sometimes has been foiled even by Desire; and Loving bauk'd by Love. Alas, my
Lord, there are Heavens even above Heaven, and it may be your Ecstasy has rapt
you above your Paradise. And to recall your Peace, I am content to be so Vain,
to think my Charms have had that Power. Oh Royal Excellence (replied Polydorus)
[Astonish'd at so Amazing a Kindness.] You are so Divinely good, that to lay
hold of such Transcendent Grace to save me, without Desert, would but double my
Damnation. At which he began to launch out into such bitter Reviling and
Railing against himself, that the Queen not knowing their true Cause, began to
think of a new Style to recover his Reason, and therefore was resolved to Rally
him into his right Wits again. Well Sir, If this will not satisfy you, perhaps I
have a new Discovery will answer all. I have either Heard or Read somewhere (no
matter which) [Smilingly] of Enchantments used in this case. It Is not the first
time, that Malice, and the Malice of a Woman too (for such they say there are
in the World) has made use of Spells to defeat the Expectation of Lovers; and
the tying of a Magical Knot (as some such practice, you know not, may have been
used upon you) and the Winchcraft of an Ill-Tongue have sometimes had that
strange Power. Bewitched by an Ill-Tongue, Madam! (replied Polydorus) Oh Madam!
[Sighing] There went more then all Ill-Tongues (Confound the Enchantess) to the
Bewitching of me. Tying of Knots too say you? A Plague of the Knots I Tie! Oh
that Sprightful, Confounded Witch, Hag, Forceress, Beast, Bawd, Strumpet -- [he
had almost said Lactilla] Beast, Bawd, Strumpst! When Messalina Interrupting
him, What Beast, Bawd? Fortune Madam, Fortune, (Recollecting himself) that
Jilt, that Cheat, that Harlot, that Impudent Harlot, Fortune, the spite of my
Stars, and the Malice of the Gods, that envyed my Immortal Happiness, and in
downright Gall, rank Gall, Hemlock, Wormwood, Poison, have ransakt Hell, and
Mustered all the Imps of Lucifer to rob me of my Bliss.

A necessary precaution often wanted by Messalina.
The Harange had went on, had not Fornacos Approach, a nimble Forerunner before
the rest of the Zealots returned from their Devotion, giving them warning to
retreat from the Closset, and the King to prepare himself for the appearance of
a more indifferent Visitor, which with much ado he endeavored; though the
concernment in his Face was not easily masterable. The Court beginning to fill
soon after, Messalina produced, and Read her Expresses, importing the Landing
of her Lycogenes in one of the Ports of Gothland, a piece of News not
ungrateful to the whole Company, since it brought them the Expectation of the
speedy Honor of so Royal a Guest in the Gallick Court, and which indeed had
been the Subject of no Common saying, had not the fatal Cause that lent them
that Honor much rebated the Delight. The Queen told them further, That she had
before communicated the Contents to Polydorus, to which indeed she was obliged
to him for his pleasant Visit. Yes Madam, readily answered Polydorus, I came to
obey your Commands, and the Care and Application I shall make for a Reception
suitable to the Majesty of Albion, shall Convince the World that the Bonds that
have tied the Hearts of Lycogenes and Polydorus are Eternal.

Some Days after Lycogenes arrives, neither unlookt for, neither welcome; for
they knew he came to them like a Gamester at an Ordinary, that had lost all his
Money, and came for a new Recruit. By my Soul, our Lycogenes, I have had ill
Luck; but I Will Play the other Game for it. It Is ill venturing upon a Loosers Hand
quoth Polydorus. Sir, quoth Lycogenes, Lend me but the other Threescore Tousand
Pounds, and you shall have all Ireland for it. Sir, said he, then proceeding,
Remember the Proverb, He that England means to win, with Ireland must begin.
That is a Proverb I have often heard, quoth Polydorus; but if I Lend you this
Threescore Thousand Pounds, I Will have all Ireland to my self, I Will send
Officers of my own to take Charge of all the Employments in that Kingdom; you
shall have nothing to do there. Not I by my Soul, quoth Lycogenes, I will have
nothing to do there; I Will only be your Deputy there, I Will receive the Sword
from Tyrconnel in your Name, and Execue your Commands by your Authority.

These Conditions being Signed and Sealed between Polydorus and Lycogenes, Men
and Money were provided with all the speed imaginable. For Messalina was soon
weary of his Cold Embraces; having by this time a fair Cover for whatever
should after hadpen, should she really chance to be Impregnated. And therefore
being present at the Colloque between her Husband Lycogenes and her Champion
Polydorus. She at the same time tipped the wink upon Polydorus, and pointed to
the middle of her Placket; which so inflamed Polydorus, that he was as ready to
Condescend to Lycogenes, as Lycogenes was to Demand of him.

During these Transactions of a higher Nature, and a deep Intrigue between the
two Monarchs and the Monarchess. La Force plyd his business with Lactilla. It Is
true La Force had brought her to his Bow, but the Consummation of Pleasure
being interrupted, as you have already heard; that interruption brought
Lactilla to bethi^k her self. For, not to conceal the Truth, Lactilla, honest
Lactilla, Nurse in Ordinary to the Gallick Prince, she from whom the Sovereign
Swayer of the British Scepter was to suck his Masculine Inclinations, had been
dabling already. Which made her out of a Scruple of Conscience begin to
contrive, which way she should put off La Force. For, Lord quoth she, must I
Adulterate the Milk that Suckles the Monarch of Three Kingdoms. So that when La
Force came to Reiterate his Addresses to her, she dealt with him like a plain
good honest Country Nurse, and told him, that she had placed her Affections
before upon a certain Soldier in the Lifeguard of Lycogenes (for those sort
of Cattle will be always endeavoring to get between the Thighs of your Court
Lawndry-Women and Nurses, to Eek out their Preferment) who had overcome her;
and that by him she was Young with Child: And truly her Pains were so
extraordinary, that being afraid something more then ordinary would come of it,
she was resolved to prepare her self for Repentance. La Force who had an Eye
that could pierce through a Millstone, presently apprehended what Lactilla
would beat, which was enhancing the Price; and therefore pretending to be a
Doctor; Oh Madam quoth he, I understand the reason of your extraordinary Pains:
The Gentleman who the last time had your last Favors, left his work
unfinished; so that what you carry in the Womb, must want either an Arm, or a
Leg, or a Thigh; and then if it come forth so imperfect, it will be the cause
of great Trouble and Affliction to you. But for that, be of good Comfort, give
but me the liberty, and I will make all things well and perfect, and your
Travel shall be as Easy as the flipping of a Cherry-Stone from between your
Thumb and Forefinger. La Force made this so demonstrable by Dent of Argument
to Lactilla, that for future Convenience-sake she condescended to whatever he
could desire.

While Laforce lay thus at Rack and Manger with his dear Lactilla, Polydorus
chassing for his last misfortune, longed for a second Trial of his Abilities.
But the presence of Lycogenes was a new rub in his way.,It Was therefore thought
convenient to march him off with all the speed that possible might be; nor was
Messalina less desirous to be rid of him, as one whose Reign over her
Affections was now as much at an end, as his Reign over the hearts of his
People. Polydorus therefore sends for Lycogenes, and having agreed upon
Conditions, hastens him away into Hibernia, with permission to retain the Title
of Lycogenes the Second, King of Hibernia, but to deliver the real Possession
of the Kingdom to Polydorus, and the Command of all his Soldiers and Forces to
such Officers and Commanders, as he had ordered to accompany him.

So soon as Lycogenes was departed, Polydorus prosecutes his Amor with great
heat; nor was Messalina who had already surrendered up her Fort, less diligent
to afford Polydorus all the Opportunities that could be with Circumspection and
Caution omitted: She was mainly desirous of a Prince to be Born of her Body; by
which means she might bequeath perpetual vexation to the Christians: And to
that purpose she thought that now she had both change of Air and variety of
Persons, she could not fail; and as for the Legality of it, she never minded
that, since she could have Absolution when she pleased.

Polydorus therefore therefore sends her an Invitation to his Country Palace of
Versellais, and appoints her an Apartment not far from his own, with so many
private avenues to it, that it was impossible one would have thought to have
made the least discovery of their private Congresses.

Under the Covert of this Retirement, Polydorus had several Opportunities to
enjoy the Carresies of his endearing Messalina; while she on the one side
labored for Pregnancie, and he on the other endeavored to recover the
Reputation he had lost in his first Venereal Attempts: Nothing could outvie
the Dalliances of these two Royal Lovers, unless the efforts of Youthful
Clepatra, to please her Mark Anthony, or the Gallantries of Mark Anthony, to
gratify his adored Cleopatra. Moreover, Messalina thought that if now she
should prove with Child, the World would be the sooner Convinced of the Truth
of her being Delivered of the Prince of the Cambro Britans; which made her more
eager to devote her self to the satisfaction of her Polydorus. However Love had
only a Design to exert his power, and would not admit Lucina to come in for a
share, in blessing the strong Endeavors of the Amorous Pair with effectual
Success: It Is true Fame did her part and spread abroad a rumor over all
Gothland and Albion, that Messalina was with Child, and so it holds; but as to
that, it is lest to Time to make out the truth of it.

By this time Cupid, who seemed to study nothing more then to enlarge the
Conquests of Messalina's Charming Eyes, had smitten the Heart of Young
Delphinus, only Son of Polydorus, who began to be no less Enamored of the
Bewitching Messalina then his Father. It Is true he knew nothing of certainty of
what passed every Day between his Father and her. For now it being known that
Lycogenes was gone of Polydorus's Errand, it was easy to feign pretenses of
Frequent Consultations with Messalina; but as the Actions of Princes will be
pried into, in spite of Fate, Delphinus had some Inkling of the Intrigue. And
indeed the more then ordinary Credulity and Obsequiousnes of Polydorus to an
Exild Princess, could not choose but Enhance her Suspicion. However Love is
such a Tyrant, that what he will, he will have done. The Young Delphinus is
enflamed, and though he were pretty sure, that in giving way to his Passion, he
must be his Father's Rival, and Fish in the same Stream with his own Parent,
yet his Ardour was so Violent, that those Considerations could not withold
him, nor stem the violent Current of his Affection: So that he never came into
Messalina's Company but his Amorous Looks betrayed the Passion of his Heart; so
easily discernable, that Messalina could not perceive the double Conquest she
had made both of the Father and the Son. But Messalina who had Abandoned her
self over to the Father, made the Punctillio of Honor so much her present
Excuse for not condescending to the Son's Addresses, that she still put him off
with fair Complements, so that all his Efforts proved ineffectual.

FINIS.

