THE ANATOMY OF Transubstantiation.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Ally, near
Paternoster Row. MDCLXXX.

ROME'S OVERTHROW, In a FATAL BLOW At her GREATEST IDOL, etc.
WHereas when Popery has prevailed in England, the sorest stroke which fell on
the sincere Protestants, was for their confessing against their most Idolized
Transubstantiation, and on the consideration of the danger of its return, and
consequently the need we have of being fortified against their Principles, and
especially their Magic of Transubstantiation, I would herein endeavor to lay
open its first Invention, as also to Anatomize and Confute it.

Whereas the People of Pagan and Infidel Rome, being not content with the
Pompilian Institution in the Communion of little round Loaves; but that the
Roman Idolatrous Pontifes must needs further ordain the Killing and immolating
of Beasts, that they might eat, and communicate of the Flesh of Victims in
their Sacrifices, especially the Sheep, the Sow, the Goat, and the Ox, which
was first instituted by Evander King of Arcadia: Wherefore, that the Missalians
might not degenerate from the Idolatry of their Predecessors, they must needs
follow this communion of flesh: And they not content with their little round
Azimal Hosts, consecrated, and printed with Images, but with time they have
invented a new Magic to transubstantiate their little Hosts of Flower, into
Flesh and Bones, the bread being no more bread but an accident without
substance; and by this means to convert the round Host of flower into a Carnal
and Sanguinolent Host.

The Wine also offered in their Missal Chalices to be transubstantiated into
Blood, the Wine being no more Wine, but an Accident without Substance.

Was there ever a more abominable Magic, or a more detestable Heresy than
this Missaline Transubstantiation? When the People of Israel murmured against
God, because they were weary of Eating Manna and celestial Bread, calling for
flesh, was the Manna transubstantiated into Fesh, Bones and Blood? When the
ancient Roman Idolaters meant to change their round Host of Flower or Meal, and
grew to eat Flesh in their sacrifices, did they use this Magic of
Transubstantiation? Wherefore I freely averr, that this Missal Addition was
lately invented by the Missalians, more than a Thousand years after the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

This Heresy began to spread very much by a Nicolaitane Antichrist, climbing
up to the Roman Pontificacy; by the monopoly and suggestions of Hildebrand,
expelling by force the other elected Pope, which was Benedict the second of
that name, in the year of Jesus Christ 1062.

Afterward by a Monopoly held in St. John Lateran in Rome, it was advanced
during the Eclefiastical Tyranny of Innocent the III. of that name, about Two
hundred years after the Palinodie canonized by Berengarius Dean of St. Maurice
in Angiers.

Against which abominable Magic and Heresy we must briefly by form of a
Recapitulation compare the Institutions of the Sacraments ordained by God.

First of all, the Fruits of the knowledge of good and ill, forbidden to our
first Father Adam as sacred Signs and Sacraments of Fear and Obedience, whereon
depended Life or Death, were they transubstantiated or converted into Knowledge
or into Death; to leave their nature of being Trees or Fruits, reduced to an
accident without substance?

The celestial Manna, and the Rock gushing out lively water, Sacraments that
had reference to the holy Sacrament of the Supper, were they transubstantiated
into an accident without substance?

The unspotted Lambs immolated by Abel, in his acceptable Sacrifice to God,
were they transubstantiated into another nature?

The Foreskin circumcised, for a note and mark of Covenant to the good
Patriarch Abraham and his Posterity, was it converted into an accident without
substance?

The Blood of the Paschal Lamb, for an assurance of Isreal's salvation, was that
converted into any other substance?

The Flesh of the immaculate Lamb, to be eaten on the day of the Passover,
having reference to the holy Sacrament of the Supper, was it transubstantiated
into an accident without substance?

The brazen Serpent, which being only beheld, Health was granted to the Sick,
did it not continue a Serpent of Brass? was that transubstantiated, being
ordained for a Sacrament and sacred sign to the People of Israel?

Victims offered in Sacrifice, both of Beasts of the Earth, and Azimal Loaves,
with other sacred Signs ordained of God, for holy Signs and Sacraments of
Expiation and Salvation for the People of Israel, were they ever
transubstantiated into accidents without substance?

All sacred Signs ordained by God in the Israelitish Church, though they
Sacramentally represented that which was by them figured, and not as a simple
Picture without real effect, yet did there never live so detestable an
Heretic, which invented or added thereunto this Magic of Transubstantiation;
And nevertheless, O Papists, you must needs confess that the good and holy
Fathers of Israel were adopted, engrafted, and regenerated by Faith in Jesus
Christ, that they were nourished, and obtained Eternal Life by the Lord Jesus
Christ; that they and we have but one God, and one only Jesus Christ, one
Mediator and Redeemer; that by Faith, they Sacramentally communicated, and
participated spiritually of the Blood of Jesus Christ, for their salvation and
eternal Life: That there is no difference touching God, between them who did
precede the Incarnation of Jesus Christ, and us that were since his
Incarnation: But both they and we are equally the Church of God, redeemed by
the blood of the Just and unspotted Lamb Christ Jesus. For the rest, they had a
Faith of the future Promise, and observed the holy Sacraments and sacred
Symbols of the Sacrifice which should be consummated by Christ Jesus; and we in
the New Law celebrate the Memorial and remembrance of the Sacrifice now
finished by Jesus Christ, having a fruition of the Promise accomplished.

If then the Israelites eat the same celestial Bread, and drank the same saving
drink which we do by Faith in one only Jesus Christ; if they had sacred signs
to represent actually and really the future death of Jesus Christ, even as we
retain sacred signs of his present or past death; they for the future, and we
for what is past; why did the Papists invent this new Magic, to convert an
holy Sacrament ordained by God, into a Magic of Transubstantiation, and into
an accident without substance? If God to approve his power, and to manifest the
hardness and obstinacy of Pharaoh, was pleased to perform wonderful things by
Moses and Aaron, by converting a Rod into a Serpent, Water of the River into
Blood, and into Frogs; and dust of the Earth into Lice; and then to make the
Navigable Sea dry, performing many other Miracles; can we by this infer a
Transubstantiation of the little round azimal Host, printed with Images, into
an accident without a substance? In what place of the Holy Scriptures, when
mention is made of sacred Signs and Sacraments, or Sacrifices Ordained by God,
is it said that the Sign or Sacrament was transubstantiated? But on the
contrary, Gods will, accommodating it self to man's Infirmity, he ordained from
time to time common signs, for notes and marks of assurance of the thing
signified: wherein Gods power is the more renowned and exalted, in really
giving us what by the sacred sign is represented, by the virtue of Faith, and
of the Holy Ghost, as if the Sign it self had been really transubstantiated by
some ocular Miracle. For the Sacraments comprehend in them, more spiritual than
carnal sense. For this reason God by his Prophets ever blamed his People
Israel, for understanding the Sacraments too carnally.

But tell me, ye Papists, when Jesus Christ made it (...) how he was the true
Bread of Life descended from Heaven, to confer Life Eternal; and how these
sacramental words of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, were to be
understood, wherewith the Capernaites your Predecessors were offended; did he
teach us in this Interpretation, that to eat his Flesh should be meant, by a
little round transubstantiated Host? That the round Host of Flower and the
Wine, is no more Bread or Wine, but Accidents without Substance? Is this your
abominable Magic the Doctrine of Jesus Christ? Nothing less. But Jesus Christ
like a true and heavenly Lawgiver, who can only sincerely interpret his own
Law, made answer to the Capernaite Doctors, how they were gross and carnal
minded, minding only the Flesh, as you Papists do, though the Flesh alone
profits nothing; alleging how his sacramental words were spiritual: The
Flesh, says he, profits not; but the Spirit quickens.

As also, O Papists, how can you religiously accord your Transubstantiation
with the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which promises and assures Eternal Life to
those that shall eat his Flesh and drink his Blood, if you conceive these words
carnally? For you cannot be ignorant but that your own Bodies when they have
devoured these round transubstantiated Hosts into Flesh and Bones, drunk and
taken down the transubstantiated Wine into Blood, notwitstanding live, and are
mortal through the necessity of the Law. Wherefore, Eternal Life promised by
this Communion, cannot be understood by a mortal Body, or Flesh. And therefore
of necessity you must needs acknowledge, for the most sacred Interpretation,
that to eat the Body and drink the Blood of Jesus Christ, must have reference
to a spiritual and heavenly Life; and that the flesh profits nothing, but the
spiritual words; and the Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, by
Faith and Spirit give Eternal Life. This Interpretation is many times recited
by the holy Apostle St. John: when Jesus Christ himself uses these words, He
that comes to me, shall never hunger; he that believes in me shall never
thirst, but haave Eternal Life; are not these terms intelligible enough, to
express this holy Sacrament of the Communion of the Body and Blood of Jesus
Christ, without running to your Magic of Transubstantiation?

Another Interpretation of the holy Doctor and Author of the Sacramental Law is
described, when Jesus Christ was interrogated by Nchodemus, of the Means how a
man might be Regenerated, and born anew: Is it possible, says Nichodemus, that
a man can return again into his Mothers Womb? Did Jesus Christ answer this
demand, by affirming that in the holy Sacrament of Baptisin, the water was
converted into the body, into Flesh and Blood, and transubstantiated in a
carnal womb, to be there again ingendered, and regenerate? Was there not also
as great reason, according to your Magic, to have returned this answer, as
well as in the holy Sacrament of the Supper? For the one of these Sacraments
signifies Regeneration, the other Nourishment. Now Regeneration is as admirable
to humane Wisdom, as Nourishment; for conformable to humane and carnal Judgment
it may seem impossible, that we can be twice engendered and begotten. But our
good God uses the like Interpretation of Regeneration, as of the Communion of
his Flesh and Blood; which is, that these Sacramental terms must be spiritually
conceived, and not carnally; for the Flesh profits not, but the Spirit
quickens. What is of the Flesh is carnal, what is of the Spirit, spiritual.

The holy Apostle relating to the Corinthians, what he had received at Gods
hands, admonished them of the coming of Jesus Christ; during the expectation
whereof, he commands them to communicate of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
by the fraction of bread, and the Cup of Benediction, called the New Testament,
and New Covenant, contracted by the blood of Jesus Christ: Wherefore, seeing we
are assured of the second coming of Jesus Christ, being ascended up into
Heaven, and set at the right hand of God the Father; till the day predestined
that he shall return to judge the quick and the dead: How, O ye Papists, will
ye reconcile this passage, when by the Magic you utter, you make him descend,
and return the body of Jesus Christ in flesh and bone, before the time
preordained for his second coming?

This Magic was by you restored, since the first Author of your Missal
Sacrifice, Numa Pompilius; who by his Magic divulged, that he made his Nymph
and Goddess Egeria come down from Heaven, as also his Jupiter Elicius, by whose
means there were celestial secrets and Mysteries revealed to him. If by your
Magic the round consecrated Host, was transubstantiated into the true and real
body of Jesus Christ, the bread being no more bread, but the true body, how
came ye to be so presumptuous, to break and tear in pieces the body of Jesus
Christ, according to the invention of Sergius the 2d. of that Name, your
Predecessor Roman Pontise? Are not you far more execrable Executioners than
your Predecessors Lieutenants of the Roman Church, which crucified Jesus
Christ, and yet they never tare nor rent his body in pieces, as he Prophesied?

And notwithstanding you are not contented to have broken it into three pieces,
but in your Missal Sacrifices you presume to drown and steep one portion in
Wine, transubstantiated into blood, to be swallowed and drunk.

To confirm your Magic of Transubstantiation; why took you no order to
preserve from corruption your little round printed Hosts, which you keep and
lay up so curiously in reliquaries, and boxes, after they are transubstaniated
into flesh, and bone, and into the real body of Jesus Christ? Is it not an
abominable heresy to believe that the body of Christ is capable of corruption?
Nay, and often times is eaten, by Worms, Weasels, Rats, and Mice? Can you
interpret this, to be an accident without substance? When your Hosts become
many times stinking and corrupted Cibaries; many times also devoured by bruit
beasts of the Earth, which you cause to be burned and their Ashes laid up in
Reliquaries?

When Victor the 3d of that Name, Pope of Rome, received Poison by your
transubstantiated Wine into blood; was this an accident without substance? or
when the Emperor Henry the 7th of that Name, was poisoned, by eating of a
little round consecrated and transubstantiated Host, was it without substance,
when it procured death? There was much more appearance for the celestial
Manna, given to the People of Israel, the which though it corrupted, when it
was kept, yet that which was reserved in secret, within the Ark of the Lords
covenant was preserved without corruption; but yet for all this was it
transubstantiated into Flesh, and bones to be called celestial bread descending
from Heaven, the bread of Life, or the bread of Angels?

Now it remains for us to contest with the subtle Reasons of the Priests, who
to make a foundation for their magic, insist carnally upon the word Est,
saying, that these words were expressly written, This is my Body, This is my
Blood, when Jesus Christ instituted the holy Sacrament of his body and his
blood, under the Symbols of Bread and Wine. But I desire all those that are
zealous for the honor of God, exactly to weigh the sacred Institution of this
Sacrament, by which God meant to symbolize and signify the communion of his
body by the Bread, and drinking of his blood by the Wine and Cup. All will
confess that the true and principal nourishment of man's body, is comprehended
under the kinds of Bread and Wine: so that the term of Bread is often taken in
the Holy Scriptures for the nourishment and life of man.

Let us enter into an Examination of the passages of the Bible. Was not the
first Man, created after Gods similitude, for the penalty of his offense, told,
that he should eat his bread with the sweat and labor of his body? Can any man
be so ignorant as not to confess, that this was understood by the living and
life of man? When Jacob prayed unto God to give him bread and raiment, did not
he understand by Bread whatsoever was requisite for his whole nourishment? when
we hear recited, that God rained bread upon the People of Israel being in the
Desert, and that the Israelites were replenished with this celestial bread;
this term of bread was it not conceived by the Celestial Manna sent by God to
sustain the People of Israel? Is this Manna called the bread of Heaven, and the
bread of Angels, given to the People without labor or travel?

When Melchizedeck meant to furnish good Father Abraham's Army, did he not
present him with Bread and Wine?

When Abraham was to gratifye and refresh three Angels that appeared unto him,
did he not expose unto them bread baked upon the Embers? Did not he give Agar
Bread for her nourishment? Isaacs mother to favor her best beloved son, gave
him bread. Joseph in Egypt offered Bread to his Brethren for their nourishment.

When we go about to describe a Famine and scarsity of Victual, do we not say,
there wants bread? when God promised any mercy or favor to his people that did
keep his Commandments, did he not give them an assurance of Bread in
sufficiency? when he recommends unto us the poor, as his members, commands he
us not to give them bread? Its bread therefore which nourishes and satisfies
the heart and life of man.

When Satan enterprised to tempt Jesus Christ to testify that he was true Man;
did not he make choice of Bread, when he invited him to make the stones bread?

When Jesus Christ celebrated his Banquets to give bodily nourishment, once to
5000 men, and then again to 4000 persons, did he not show his power under the
Symbol of bread? when he taught us to address our prayers to God, did he not
expressly ordain in the Lords Prayer, that we should request of God to give us
our daily Bread? and Bread is not only mentioned in the Holy Scriptures for
vulgar and corporal nourishment, but also in Sacrifices celebrated by the
Hebrew Priests, and the prescript Law of Sacred Bread ordained by God, that was
Azimal bread without Leaven, other Bread was termed the Bread of proposition,
which the Priests every week renewed and eat, which David used, presented to
him by Achimilech the high Priest.

Contrariwise the term of bread, ( Hos. 7.) is appropriated to the Bread of
iniquity, of Lies, of Sorrow, to polluted bread of Idolaters, to bread of
Coinquination offered upon the Altar; to bread of Mourning, and to bread of
Trembling. The Ephramites also called Ashy and unturned Loaves, that is to say,
half-baked, half circumcised, and Idolaters.

And therefore, O ye Popish Capernaites, you must not be so obdurate and
inveterate in your Carnalities, as not to observe the Phrases of the Holy
Scripture, in which bread is oftentimes taken for Terrestrial and Corporeal
bread; as when it was said, that Man did not live by bread alone, but also by
whatsoever proceeded out of the Mouth of God.

Sometimes also bread is taken for the Word of God, and Doctrine: when Jesus
Christ commanded his Apostles from eating Leavened bread with the Pharisees;
these terms of bread and leaven, are they not expressed by the Doctrine of the
Heretical Pharisees? when the Canaanitish Woman demanded Grace and Mercy for
her Daughters health, detained in a long Malady of sickness; did not Jesus
Christ answer her, how it was not lawful to take the Childrens bread, and to
cast it to Dogs? Was not the bread in this answer taken for Life and Health,
and not only for Corporal nourishment? Wherefore if bread is taken for the Life
of Man, which depends principally upon bread and wine, and that Gods goodness,
accommodating it self to our infirmities, made choice of these two Signs and
Symbols, or notable marks, to signify his Body or his Blood; that is to say,
the bread, and the wine, these two Provisions being common to all Nations, was
this any reason, to build upon it a Carnal Transubstantiation, as if God
without it were not mighty enough, really to figure, and represent unto us
Sacramentally, that Life was given us: Yea, Life Eternal, by the Communion of
consecrated bread and wine of benediction; these being Figures and Symbols of
his Body, and of his Blood?

Jesus Christ produced these words, that the bread is his Body, and the wine is
his Blood; he also said, that himself was the bread of Life, the living bread,
and that he was the living bread come down from Heaven. Further he says, that
he who eats of that bread shall live eternally: Does this infer by the word
Est, that Jesus Christ is converted and transubstantiated into bread, and that
he is no more Christ, but an accident without substance. O abominable Heresies!
have you any more reason, Oh you Obdurate Popish Priests, to interpret these
words carnally: This is my Body, to transubstantiate the bread into the Body,
than when he testifies, that himself was the bread, to transubstantiate him
into bread, considering that it is written, how the Communion of this bread
gives Eternal Life? Jesus Christ said, Hoc est corpus meum, he also says of
himself; Hic est panis qui de calo descendit, in both these places, is not this
word est used? and yet must we needs hereupon infer that transubstantiation,
instead of Orthodoxly interpreting the same by Metonymy, a familiar comparison
of bread to Jesus Christ, that we might apprehend how Eternal Life was given us
by him, and likewise by him our spiritual Food is Ministered, even as by bread a
nourishment corporal?

Howsoever we must always have recourse to the true expression of Jesus
Christ, the absolute Lawgiver, and Author of this holy Sacrament, who
expounding his own institution says in the first place, that he is the bread
of life, then afterward he says that his bread is his flesh, and his body,
which must be offered for the salvation of the world; he said, his flesh is
true meat, and his blood true drink, he says, that whosoever eats of his
flesh, and drinks of his blood, he will remain in him. How does he himself
expound this manducation? Jesus Christ his own words expresses himself;
Whosoever comes to me, shall never hunger; and he that believes in me, shall
never thirst, (Joh. 6.) Is not this a true eating, and a true drinking, never
again to be hungry, nor never to thirst? must not we in this have faith, which
consists in Spirit?

To address our selves to Jesus Christ, our celestial bread, our spiritual
drink, wherewith to be satisfied for ever, to quench our thirst of sin
perpetually, must we run to the Magic of Transubstantiation, and forge an
accident without a substance? Wherefore, O Popish Priests, do ye presume to
invent any other interpretation, than that of Jesus Christ, who witnesses that
the flesh profits nothing; but the Spirit quickens? and that his words are
not carnal, but spiritual, giving spirit and life, by faith and confidence,
that he is our Savior, incarnate, dead, and crucified, to purchase for us
eternal life; and then raised up again, he did ascend into Heaven, sits at the
right hand of God his Father, remaining an eternal Priest, Propitiator,
Mediator and Redeemer.

To return to this term, Est, that does so molest the Priests Brains, that they
dream out of it a Transubstantion: If Jesus Christ uttered how he was the true
Vine, that God his Father was the Keeper, and that we are the Branches; can we
hereupon conclude by this word, Est, a magic of the Transubstantiation of God,
into the Keeper of a Vine, of Jesus Christ into a Vine, and of our selves into
branches?

If Jesus Christ was said to be the immaculate Lamb that takes away the sins of
the world; ( John 16.) can we hereupon induce a Transubstantiation? If Jesus
Christ said, that he was the door of the Sheepfold, by whom we must enter to be
saved; and that he is the good Pastor, and we his Sheep; must we needs so
strain and wrest these places of the Holy Scripture, as to think it necessary,
because the word Est is mentined, to believe a transubstantiation?

When Jesus Christ admonished his Apostles, saying, that they were the Salt of
the Earth, did he therefore transubstantiate or convert them into Statues or
Pillars of Salt, as he did Lots wife?

If the Holy Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. wrote, that Jesus Christ is the Rock, out of
whom came living water, to wash and purge us from our sins; must we wrest out
of this a transmutation of Jesus Christ into a Rock, or a material Stone?

If the Holy Apostle testifies that we are the body of Christ, may we by this
infer, that we are translated, and now no more men, but transubstantiated into
an accident without a substance?

I readily foresee, O ye Obdurate Priests, that ye will object all these
prealledged Places, wherein this word Est is, and make no mention of the
Sacrament, which must the more exactly be observed, in that these be sacred
Mysteries ordained of God, which is most true.

And this word Est is not found only in the Holy Scriptures formerly cited; but
when we speak of Holy Sacraments first instituted by God for his People Israel;
it is written, that circumcision is Gods alliance and covenant?

In the Sacrament of the Communion of the Paschal Lamb, was it said that the
Lamb was the Passover, which is to say the passage? but shall we induce
hereupon a magic of Transubstantiation? will not you confess, O obdurate
Transubstantiators, that in these passages of the Holy Scriptures, speaking of
Holy Sacraments, that this word Est, cannot be otherwise interpreted, than to
signify some real performance, and that Circumcision was a sign and a mark of
the Covenant and alliance contracted by God with Abraham; the Paschal Lamb was
also a Sacred Sign of the Passage, for a remembrance of their delivery out of
Egypt? The Ark of alliance for another Sacrament, of which it is written, That
it is the Truth and Power of the Lord; must we understand by this, that it was
transubstantiated into the real Majesty of God? We must, we must, I say,
interpret the holy Scriptures with discretion, and in humility and sincerity,
without sophistication, and without Magic, soundly to apprehend the conception
of words, and not stick so close to the Letter, which kills; but receive the
word of God in lively spirit.

If then the sacred Ark is called the Lord, and Nominated God, because in it he
exercised his omnipotent power, and declared his Oracles and Mysteries by
exterior signs, to draw the Israelitish people to be mindful of God, and to
fear and obey him: If Jesus Christ said also, that he is Bread that came down
from Heaven, the bread of Life, and the Wine was his Blood; that the Cup is the
New Testament; by the External signs of Bread and Wine, to give us to
understand, that our life and saving Nutriment depended only on Jesus Christ,
and that by his Death and Bloodshed we have assurance of eternal Life, even as
Bread and Wine serve for corporal nourishment, and that he meant and ordained
these sacred signs, to be to us for Sacraments to approve and confirm our
Faith; did he determine we should hereby Capernize and Nicodemize, to enquire
or make doubt of God's power, how it is possible to eat the Body, or drink the
Blood of Jesus Christ? How we can possibly be born anew? seeing the promise was
made unto us by the word, wherefore, O ye blind Priests of the popish Idolatry,
have ye conceived a carnal transubstantiation, distrusting in the
incomprehensible power of God? May it not suffice you simply to believe, that
the body and blood of Jesus Christ was really and Sacramentally offered, to
communicate thereof for our spiritual nourishment the Bread, being truly his
body, and the Wine his blood, to the faith of the worthy receiver, which we
must worthily receive by faith, and purity of conscience, as sacred signs and
marks of the Divine character, without searching too subtly after the means,
other than the plain interpretation of Jesus Christ, that the flesh profits
not, but the Spirit quickens, that his words are Spirit and life? Should we
doubt whether God has power by the Symbols of Bread and Wine consecrated, to
make us communicate of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, though the bread
remain bread, and the Wine wine? if it were otherwise, this could be no
Sacrament, but rather called a Miracle, as when Jesus Christ converted the
Water into Wine, he then used the Miracle of transubstantiation, changing the
water into wine; but he ordained not this for a Sacrament, as he did the
communion of his body and blood, by the sacred figures of bread and wine.

Was it not also as easy for God to change the wine into blood, or the bread
into flesh, as for Moses and Aaron to change the water of the River into blood
to confirm the hardness of Pharaohs heart; or when the clouds were turned into
the flesh of Quails, that rained upon the people of Israel? Nevertheless, God
did not ordain that these Miracles should serve for ordinary Sacraments; but
herein he applied himself to our infirmity, exhibiting to us Sacred but not
Transubstantiated signs, and yet are not vain or fantastical; but signs
external, that we may Behold, Touch, Eat, and Taste, remaining still in their
substance: and nevertheless they represent Sacramentally what is by them
comprehended, and intimated, wherein consists the approbation of our faith, to
manifest by a Sacramental work and Ministration, that we are in the number of
the regenerate, and sustained by the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper.

And further I would leave with you, for your further confutation in this
Horrid Heresy of Transubstantiation, this apt Similitude of the Sun; seeing by
some Apostles, Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness, to whom the Son may
not unfitly be compared, because Light comes down from Heaven by this luminous
and glorious spherical Planet; and so spiritual Light is exhibited to us by
Jesus Christ, who out of the night and darkness of Sin has brought us into the
brightness and clear Sunshine of of his Grace. You may now therefore
understand, carnal and gross Capernaites, this sufficient and evident
comparison, to intimate that the Infinite power of God is much more complete
and perfect, than your abominable invention of Transubstantiation.

Will you not acknowledge, except your Eyes be blinded, and obfuscated with the
palpable darkness of Obstinacy, that the Sun gives us his light, his force, his
heat and vigor, and yet nevertheless, the Body it self of the Planetal Sun
remains and continues in his Spherical Orb? Do you not use to say in ordinary
common Language, when the Window of an House is open on that part where the Sun
shines, that the Sun is come into the House, although the Sun remains still in
the Firmament? Must we therefore hale and violently pull the Body of the Sun,
to make it descend, and be transubstantiated into this Earthly substance,
before it can afford its heat, beams, light and nourishment to Plants, Trees,
Herbs, and Beasts of the earth? are you so brutish, O Capernaites! as not to
recognize, that the true Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, has more power
than this Astral Sun, being but Mortal and Created?

If then a Mortal Creature has this power to infuse into us the virtue and
efficacy of his Body by his Beams, Light and Heat extend really and effectually
over the whole Earth, the Body remaining still in its Heaven; and shall we not
believe that God an immortal Creator has much more power to grant unto us the
true Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, to give us the virtue and power of his
Body and Blood shed for us by the beams, light, and heat of his Holy Spirit,
except he be by your Magic plucked from the right hand of God, and his Body
drawn out of Heaven, to be transubstantiated upon Earth? Why should not Jesus
Christ have this power to afford us his light, and to offer his Body and Blood
to enter into us, if by Faith and a pure Conscience we be ready to receive him,
by the efficacy of his Holy Spirit, as well and much better than the Spherical
Sun can enter into our Houses with his force and power, and never be drawn out
of its Heaven, to be transubstantiated?

The Sun is an entire Body created, residing in Heaven, the cause of the
generation of Plants, Trees, and Herbs, which by its force and calidity, gives
sustentation to whatsoever lives upon the Earth, and in one and the same
moment, has power to quicken, heat, and nourish an infinite number of Plants,
Trees, and Beasts of the Earth; and yet his Body is never separated, divided,
drawn out of his Sphere, nor transubstantiated. The Body also of Jesus Christ
which he assumed up into Heaven, set at the right hand of God; has not that
more force, more virtue, more power, to regenerate, nourish, and sustain us; to
give us his virtue, light, and beams; to inspire, quicken, illuminate and
nourish us, and in a moment to make us all by Faith partakers of his Body and
Blood; to make us his Members, united in and by him, through his true promise,
comprehended under the Symbols and sacred Signs commended to us, till the
second coming of his humanity be revealed upon Earth?

Wherefore then, O ye Popish Priests, have you devised this Magic of
transubstantiation, to blaspheme against God, to impair his Omnipotency, and
disable his virtue more than you do that of the Spherical Sun, but his Creature?

Thus do I conclude, praying that God would be pleased to open their blind
Eyes, if it may be; but because they are wilfully blind and see not, because
they will not see; O Lord, if thou will not turn them, for the good of thy
Church, and for the glory of thy Power, overturn them, and hasten their utter
fall, and Eternal overthrow.

FINIS.

