The Ancient Manufacture of White Saltmaking at South and Northshields,
Sunderland and Blyth, ought to be preserved and encouraged, for the ensuing
Reasons most humbly presented.
1. First, That in the time of Hostility with Spain and France, which was in
Anno 1627, 28, 29, 30, there was such a scarcity of Salt in this Nation, that
it was sold at extreme rates, (viz.) 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 s. per Bushel, and
upwards, and in many places in England not to be had for any money.

2. When Peace was concluded beween England and France, the King of France made
an Edict, that no Salt should be exported out of his Kingdom, upon confiscation
of Ship, Goods, and Life.

3. The Peace being concluded between England and Spain, diverse Merchants of
England sent between 2 and 300 sail of Ships to Spain, to fetch Salt for the
supply of this Nation, And the King of Spain taking notice of Englands
necessity thereof, did not only a long time imbarge the said Ships; but did
immediately impose upon his Salt such a great Imposition, that it came to the
double value of the Salt there usually sold: whereby the Merchants lost many
1000 l.

4. By making Salt of Seawater there is great quantities of course Coals spent
there, which are the refuse of their best Coal-mines, and fit for no other u^e,
and so the Owners of them selling them for that use, are the better enabled to
go through with their Cole-mines, in preventing mixture of those bad with good,
which otherwise would be to the great annoyance of the whole Commonwealth.

5. Considering the great charge, cost and pains bestowed and disbursed before
that Manufacture could be brought to perfection; as first, out of a waste and
rockie piece of ground adjoining upon the River of Tyne, in taking up the said
rocks and stones, and in building Wharfs and Staiths along the said River, and
after in placing Salt-pans thereupon; the removing of which rocks has made the
River there abouts far better navigable than before, though with great charge
to them.

2. After the Salt-pans were erected, the late Deane and Chapter compelled your
Petitioners the Salt-makers, to take Leases of them for the said Wharfs and
Saltpans and forced them to pay an annual rent for the same, and every seven
years to renew their Lease, or otherwise to pay a great sum if they continued
them longer; which brought a great charge upon them.

3. In the time of these late distractions and wars their Salt-works were
destroyed and ruinated by the Kings Forces and the Scots, the re-building
whereof has cost them many 1000 l.

4. Since the repairing and re-building thereof, they have been lately
compelled to purchase them of the Commonwealth, whereby most of their Estates
are engaged, and likely to be the overthrow of them and their Families, who
has spent their Estates in bringing such a Native and good Manufacture to
perfection, which is able (if encouraged) to supply the whole Nation of England
with Salt sufficient for preserving both Fish, Flesh, and other Victuals,
without dependence upon any foreign State whatsoever, and then he it war or
peace, scarcity or plenty, this Commonwealth may be supplied with a sufficiency
of good Salt, and at moderate prices.

5. If this Manufacture be not encouraged, it will tend to the destruction of
many Thousands of poor People in those places whose dependancy is wholly upon
the said Salt-works, who eat their daily Bread by their daily Labor in that
Manufacture.

It is humbly prayed, That for these Reasons the Petition of the Salt-markers
of North and Southshields, Sunderland and Blyth, depending in the hands of a
Member of Parliament, may be taken into speedy consideration.


