AN ACCOUNT OF THE Late DESIGN of BUYING up THE WOOL OF IRELAND in COMPANY.

In a Letter to J. L.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1674.

SIR,
HEre has been lately a design set on foot, for buying in Company all the Wool
not Manufactur'd in Ireland, and to prevent the Transporting it into Foreign
Countries, they would be obliged to sell it only to the Cloathiers and
Manufactors here, as Persons who cannot be supposed to be so ignorant of their
own Interests, that they would for some little gain, send Wool abroad to
hinder the Sale of all they shall Work at home. By what Method, and how far
this affair proceeded I will show you as briefly as I can.

1. IN Order to the Erecting this Company, it was humbly offered to his
Majesty, that in regard the Wool of Ireland is a Commodity Prohibited, to be
Exported out of that Kingdom under great Penalties, by several Statutes there
made, (viz.) 13. H. 8. C. 2. 28. H. 8. C. 17. 11. Eliz Chapter 10. 13. Eliz. chapter 4.
and notwithstanding those Statutes were made both to hinder the Dutch and other
Foreigners from carrying away the Wool, and to necessitate the Subjects of
that Kingdom to Manufacture it at home, (which cannot be done without
prejudicing England, by making any other place the Staple for
Woollen-Manufactures:) yet from time to time, almost ever since those Laws were
Enacted, the chief Governors, by Authority from the Crown, have given Licenses
to Transport what Wool could not there be Manufactur'd into England; obliging
the Transporters expressly to enter in the Custom*House every Stone, and to pay
the Duties imposed by Act of Customs on that Commodity, when Licensed to be
Exported; and to enter into Bond to return Certificate of its being Landed in
England.

Notwithstanding all this caution, many Merchants greedy of gain, have
adventured by stealth to Transport Wool into France and Holland, (whereby the
English Woollen-Manufactures have been much prejudiced, and Foreign by
consequence advanced,) for they, if they succeeded in one Voyage of three, were
considerable Gainers; so much the rates of the Wool of Ireland were higher in
those Foreign parts than in England.

The Act against bringing the Cattle of Ireland into England, did Necessitate
the People of that Kingdom to breed fewer black Cattle, and fall into the breed
of Sheep, whereby that Kingdom has much more Wool in it, than ever it had
before, and is likely to increase every year; so that if some speedy and
effectual Regulation be not made in the Trade of the Wool of Ireland (the
Manufacture of that Country not being able to employ the fortieth part of it:)
particular persons will, notwithstanding the Laws, venture to Transport it into
Foreign Countries, rather than make it a drug at home.

It were therefore to be wished, that since none can Transport Wool out of
Ireland into England, but by his Majesty's License; and that He, or His chief
Governor may grant or deny such License to whom they shall think fit, that his
Majesty would be graciously pleased to take the whole Woolltrade of Ireland
into his own hands, and advance the Stock necessary to carry it on, which is
computed to be about 150000 l. Sterling. and would Employ some honest and knowing
Persons to buy up Annually, all the Wool brought to the Ports for Exportation,
at honest and equal Rates, to be adjusted between Buyer and Seller: And
faithful and honest Commissioners in England, to manage the Trade, by which His
Majesty will advantage His Subjects of both Kingdoms, and gain into his own
Exchequer a sufficient profit: Nor is it unbeseeming his Majesty to be
concerned in a Trade, which, by securing all the Wool from Foreigners hands,
enriches, re-peoples, and strengthens His Subjects and Kingdom, by giving a
full employment to all, and adds so many lost hands to the labor of the
Public; seeing other Princes abroad (where the effects are not so glorious)
have Stocks going in Trade. The French King in the Manufactures of Lace, Paper,
and Salt. The Emperor of Muscovy, the King of Spain, Portugal, and Duke of
Florence are great Merchants.

But if his Majesty thinks not fit to advance the sum requisite for carrying on
his Trade, then others of England and Ireland will advance the Sum, if the sole
liberty of Transporting Wool be granted to them: They will give constant and
sufficient Rates for the Wool to the People of Ireland, as high as they
received formerly from single Merchants: And whereas heretofore they were often
forced to batter their Wool for other Commodities at dear and unconscionable
rates; or give long days for payment; they will pay them ready money
immediately upon delivering their Wool, and engage to Land it all in England;
and they will yearly pay unto His Majesty's Exchequer of Ireland, 10000 l.
Sterling. over and above the usual Fees, to the chief Governor of that Kingdom
for granting the Licenses.

This (Sir) is the substance of the Proposal made to his Majesty; but before it
was delivered, one of the Proposers did long since, in December last, give an
acc^unt of this whole Affair to a person of great Honor; one, as eminent for
his Candor and Prudence, as for Quality; a Privy Counselor in both Kingdoms,
entreating his Lord^hip would promote it, if it proved just and rational. He,
wisely considering the whole matter, first made his Objections, to which,
receiving satisfactory answers, he communicated the business to the most
eminent Personages of both Kingdoms; and in March last, writ, If the Stock to
carry on this honest design could be raised, the grant would be obtained, and
prove grateful to both Kingdoms: Upon this Encouragement, one of the Proposers
hasted into England, attended most of the Persons of Quality of Ireland then
here, to receive their sense also in the thing, to which they all consented;
afterward he discoursed the matter with the Factors of Blackwell-Hall, as the
likeliest men to know the sense of the Cloathing-men of England, and he
satisfied their Objections, partly by discourse, but more by the following
Letter,

To Mr. Langworth, and the Factors and Cloathiers of Blackwell-Hall.
There being a design on foot, for the joint good both of England and Ireland,
wherein Persons of your Trade would be nearly concerned; I* thought fit to
communicate it to you, and to give you the offer of partaking in it: But,
yesterday you all seemed I know not how to resent it, desiring me to draw up
the state of the thing, and you would further consider it; which in as few
words as I can comprehend it, stands thus:

It has bin this long time the great outcry and general complaint here, that
many thousands are ruined, and undone, by the decay of Woollen Manufactures,
which was said to be occasioned partly, by the Importation of French Wares; but
mostly, by the Transportations of English and Irish Wool into France and
Holland; to remedy which Evils, though many things have bin thought on, nothing
was hitherto found effectual.

The People of Ireland on the other hand complain, that the Wooll-buyers
combine so to under-value their Wool, that they are ^ecessitated to study all
ways to make the most of it; especially since that, by the Act against
Importation of their Cattle into England, their Wool is increased. Now, to
Accomodate both Kingdoms, there is an honest and fair design laid, for the
buying up all the Wool of Ireland, that shall not there be Manufactur'd, and
for its Transportation into England only. I then told you, This could no
otherwise be effected, than by erecting a Company of Staplers, who should be
obliged to buy up Annually, all the Wool of Ireland, at certain rates,
according to its goodness, which should be, when controverted, determined by
indifferent sworn Persons, sufficiently skillful in that Commodity; and you all
unanimously agreed that it was mightily for the advantage of England to have
all the Irish Wool Imported into England, and that, no doubt, 'twould yearly
be Manufactur'd here, and would yield at least the same price, if not better,
than in several years preceding the late Dutch War; and that if the Irish and
English Wool were secured from French and Dutch hands, it would raise our
Clothes a sixt^ part, from 10 s. to 12 s. But you fancied it would be
ungrateful to the People of Ireland to restrain them to certain Prices, or
Buyers; (I much question whether you aimed at that Peoples advantage in this
supposition.) You also allowed, it would be hugely prejudicial to the People
and Trade of England, to have all the Irish Wool Manufactur'd in Ireland, for
that their advance in this would be your loss, since Provisions being cheaper
there, and they having that Commodity at easier rates than you can thence in
England; there being three shillings charge on every Stone, besides the hazard
and risque of the Sea, which together with the Interest of money laid out, will
considerably add to the enhancement of the price; insomuch, that upon the
whole, it may be concluded, should Cloathiers from England, France, and
Holland, Transplant themselves into Ireland, they would be able to work up the
Wool, at least six shillings a Stone cheaper than it can be wrought in
England. Then, Ireland in respect both of S^ituation and Harbors, being as
convenient for Trade, as any Kingdom in Europe, they would soon engross That of
Woollen Manufactury, Spanish Wool being thither Importable, as well as into
England Duty-free: And it is not to be doubted, but that this was the design of
the several Parliaments of Ireland, in prohibiting, even into England, the
Exportation of Wool, and in Imposing for Customs, six pence per yard on Old
Drapery, 2 d. on New, 4 d. on Chamlets, 6 d. on Mohairs and Farendines, 8 d.
per pair on Worsted Stockens, and 4 d. on Woollen, Manufactur'd in England,
while in the mean time, they left the Exportations of all sorts of their own
woollen Manufactures, so low rated, that their design may plainly be perceived
to have bin, what I have intimated: And considering, that at present England is
not by at least a 10th. sufficiently Peopled, (and that is another reason of
its Poverty) This would in time draw the Trading-part of this Nation, into that
Country, to the further weakening and impoverishing of This, which probably
cannot more practically be prevented, than by thoroughly pursuing the present
Project^, which I perceived you were all very desirous should be executed in
the main, yet thought it hard to impose rates on the Wool of Ireland, which I
guess you imagined would occasion its rise on the People of England; which
apprehension will quickly vanish, if you consider, that from your own
concessions of the Clothes being raised a sixt^ part, it clearly follows, that
granting the Company should raise the Wool a sixt^ part higher than now it is,
(which really is not intended,) yet would it still remain equally cheap, to the
Cloathiers, as before; for, this is the same case with that of Customs on
Merchandise, which is not a charge on the Merchant, but on the Consumptioners
only; and a penny or two pence on a yard is so far from being a prejudice, that
it is a real advantage to the Kingdom in general, since more hands being to be
employed, several thousands of Families, who are now Starving, will not only
live by this Trade, but get much more than they spend, which is the only
enriching of a People. By this means also, in a little time, the English
Artists who are gone abroad, will be necessitated to return, and with them
bring, like Decoy's, (but to better purpose) a multitude of Protestant
Foreigners, and with Them, all their Riches, which will chiefly fall into the
hands of the Cloathing-men of this Nation, (though it will abundantly enrich
all other sorts of people) they being allowed no other liberty, than as
Journey-men and Servants to work under them, at least till by intermixed
marriages they are imbodied with, and become one people with the English, which
a very few years will bring to pass. And this will further show a way for
another, or the same Company, by an Addition of Stock to buy up all the Wool
of England, which may easily be done, by proposing handsome and equal rates
between Buyers and Sellers, for all the Wool, for a certain number of years;
which will remove all pretensions for sending it abroad; and though something
dearer than ordinary be given, there can be no loss, since it is demonstrable,
that what is given in the Wool, is got in the Cloth. And for an encouragement
to such a brave undertaking, it is to be considered, that Clothing is
necessary, and that all the Wool of Europe is somewhere or other yearly
Manufactur'd, none burnt, or thrown away as useless; and that most of the Wool
of Europe is made useful by the mixtures of English or Irish; and that if these
can be secured in England, this Country must then consequently get into all the
Clothing Trade of the World, they being the only People that will have to
spare beyond their own consumption; though His Majesty should be graciously
pleased by his own example to discourage, (which it is hoped He will ever
continue to do for the good of His Subjects) all other sorts of Garments but
what shall be made of Cloth or Woollen Stuffs, in which no doubt all People
may be clad as richly, and as conveniently according to the seasons of the
year, as in any other sort whatever.

But to return to the present design of Irish Wool: It Is not to be supposed
what you seemed chiefliest to desire, that the Laws of that Kingdom should be
altered in granting Liberty of Transporting Wool out of Ireland into England
duty-free; since thereby, His Majesty would not only suffer in the diminution
of his Irish Revenue, but the same inconvenience of carrying it elsewhere, and
at an easier rate to the Transporter would still remain. Nor is it to be
imagined, that his Majesty will erect such a Company as you seem to desire,
granting to them only the sole liberty of Exporting Wool, without obliging
them to give a certain and constant price, which would be a very great hardship
to His Subjects of Ireland, and would tend only to the giving the Company an
opportunity of making their own Markets on the People of England and Ireland.
And if you imagine the price will be raised here, though that be already
answered, you may prevent that by joining in this Society, or by resolving to
give certain rates for such a number of years for all the Wool, good and bad.

That the erecting such a Company is no Monopoly, but a real advantage to both
Kingdoms, will appear from the following considerations: And first, You are to
understand, that there are several Statutes made in Ireland, which wholly
forbid the Exportation of Wool into any Kingdom what ever. Now these
Undertakers will give constant Rates to all the Woollsellers of Ireland for
their several sorts of Wool, leaving them to their liberty, to take, or refuse
those Rates as they shall find their greater advantage; provided the King
Licenses no others to Transport any Wool but these Undertakers only, during
the Term; which Grant, cannot be judged an Monopoly, since they do not design
the Wooll-sellers should be obliged to sell (they having still the liberty the
Laws leave them to Manufacture it at home) but if they will sell, they bind
themselves to give greater rates then have been given; and since a Monopoly is
a restraint of liberty of Trade without Law, the License is a taking off the
restraint laid on by Law, as to such Persons to whom the Grant is made, which
is in favor of Trade, and to an act of favor all people are not intitul'd,
and therefore may be given to one and not another, without injustice or injury:
For His Majesty is not obliged to give License to any Person contrary to an act
of Parliament, but by His Prerogative may dispense with that act, that
dispensation being for the good of His Subjects, and He may chose whom He
thinks fit to distribute His favors to.

In this Trade there will be little or no hazard; sor, no bad debts need be
made, the Wool being to be delivered before any money paid for it, and the
Transportations into England may be made before the latter end of August or
sooner, and all go in three Fleets, according to the number of Ports designed,
which makes the risque of the Sea little or none in time of Peace; and in War
His Majesty may order a sufficient Convoy for that short Voyage, without any
prejudice to His other Affairs: Then Wool being a Staple and necessary
Commodity, can never fail to sell within the compass of the year.

This will be a great advantage to the People of Ireland, and to the Trade of
England, whose greatest wealth the Woollen Manufacture would be, if restored to
what it has bin, or improved to what it may be.

The People of Irelands advantage will be in this, that they shall have a
certain Market for their Wool, as soon as it is shorn, and ready money as soon
as they deliver it; whereas they now sell commonly at six or nine months, and
are forced to take Shop-goods at unreasonable rates for payment; and shall have
as good pri^es for it in ready money, as they had before the late Dutch War,
when they gave time, or took goods.

The People and Trade of England will be advantaged in this, that all the
Exported Wool of Ireland will certainly be carried into England, none into
Foreign parts, which for private advantage is many times now Transported into
France and Holland, to the unspeakable prejudice of England; whereby the
Foreign Manufactures will be discouraged, and those of England flourish, and
the East-land Trade; That with Turkey, Spain, Portugal, and Muscovy will be
regained; and in time both the French and Dutch instead of Selling to Us, will
be forced to Buy from Us; it being indisputably certain that French Wool is
too course, and Spanish Wool too fine, without a mixture of English or Irish
with each of these (for they will not mix with one another) to effect any thing
considerable in the Trade of Woollen Manufacture: And of how great advantage
and Glory this will be to the Crown of England is easy to guess, since 'twill
fill the Kingdom both with Artists and Riches.

Ireland will be under no necessity of endeavoring to raise the Manufacture at
home, (which was the design of the Acts Prohibiting the Exportation of Wool)
while they have a constant reasonable price at a certain published rate, and
ready money paid for their Wool.

Now, from what I have here Writ, you will easily with me make this Conclusion;
that, if this Company should raise the price of Wool, yet the Cloathiers
cannot reasonably complain, but rather the Merchant-Transporters, who buy the
Cloth so much the dearer; nor yet they, since they sell it abroad accordingly;
so that ultimately the profit tends to England, and the disadvantage (if there
be any) to other Countries; it being evident, that the cheapness or dearness of
Wool depends, not only on the Consumption at home, but on the Trade abroad of
our Woollen Manufactures; which we shall vend at our own Rates, if France and
Holland, (our Rivals in Trade) be disabl'd; which cannot otherwise come to pass,
than by a due prosecution of this design, which tends to the vast advantage of
the Trading People, both Merchants and Handycrafts-men of this Nation; and
consequently, is not only a Particular, but a very General good, and so
intended by the Proposer.

London, 15th. May. 1674. T. S.


What power the Reason of this Letter had upon the Persons to whom writ, is
plain by this Certificate, to which they offered, besides their own hands to
have thousands more added.

These are to Certify all whom it may concern, That Mr. T. S. has
communicated to Us of Blackwell-Hall, a Proposal, for the buying up in Company
all the Wool of Ireland that shall not there be Manufactur'd, and for its
Transportation into England only; that, We have considered the whole design,
and the reason^ for it, and are fully satisfied that this Country will not be
over glutted by the whole Importation of Irish Wool, which by increasing the
Manufactury of England, will in a little time raise the price of English Wool,
and diminish the Woollen Manufacturies of France and Holland, from which
Countries that this Company intends to hinder the Importations of Irish Wool is
evident from this: That we, whose Interest it is to do so, resolve to be
Members thereof; the constituting of which Company is the only practicable way
to debar them from Irish Wool, and not improbably in a little time from
English also, and consequently to lessen their Trade in that Commodity, which
is now kept up by the mixtures of English and Irish Wool, without which their
own will be very insignificant: That, while the Trade of Wool is managed by
single Merchants, (the Transportations into Foreign Countries not being
restrainable) the price of Wool in England and Ireland will rather fall then
rise; That, the Manufactury of England will work up all the Wool of England
and Ireland to better advantages, than a part of both, while the remainder is
Transported into France and Holland; and that the Erecting of this Company
tends to the advantage, not only of this particular Society, nor of the
Clothiers, but of the whole Kingdom in general; the truth of all which We give
under our hands from Blackwell-Hall.

London, this 30th. of May; 1674. Subscribed, H. C. I. L. I. C. M. W. W. W. etc.


Having these Reasons to persuade himself, he had undertaken nothing but what
would be pleasing and profitable to both Kingdoms, he procured a Petition with
this Proposal (as to the main) to be delivered to His Majesty, which received a
favorable report from the two greatest Ministers of State, to whom it was
referred; hereupon there was in Order to the passing of Letters Patents for the
erecting this Company, a Letter framed to be sent from His Majesty to His
Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in which, (among other things,)
there was direction for putting a present stop to the Wool Licenses.

When the thing was brought to this fair Issue, the Proposer (with all others
that I could hear of) apprehended, there wanted nothing to the perfecting of
his design; but gathering Their Subscriptions, who had before promised to be of
the Company for the raising of the Stock; in Order to this, he went to the
Change, where he met one of these Promisers, transformed into a great Opposer
of the whole design. He was very loud and clamorous, and though he changed none
from their Opinion of the thing, he frighted some from engaging in what he
pretended would be opposed. How he came to be altered I will not determine,
(though some do pretty probably assign his change to a fuller consideration of
his private interest) but, give you the mighty Objections which he made by the
mouth of another, with their Answers to 'um.

It was Objected all in a breath, that this was a French design in the bottom,
whatever the pretenses were to the contrary, and by I know not what new
Logic, this Objection was grounded on the giving the King 10000. l. a year,
which by a better consequence, is an insinuation, that His Majesty is a Party
in the plot, and could be persuaded by a trifle to connive at least, to the
undoing of His two Kingdoms.

That it was a Monopoly, and would engross the Exchange between England and
Ireland, and in time all other Trades of Ireland; and that this Company could
with more security carry the Wool into France and Holland, than single
Merchants, and therefore it would be a greater prejudice to erect this Company,
than to leave the Exportation at large as now.

(1.) To the first Objection the Proposer Answered, that this was so far from
being a French design, that directly or indirectly, never any French man was
either spoken to, or concerned cern'd in it; he also affirmed, he set this
business on foot, not to serve any person or party whatever; but was prompted
to it, chiefly by the consideration of its being a public good, and then that
it might be so regulated as it would prove a particular advantage to any that
should engage in it; and had it been a French design, it had been unreasonable
to believe it would have been proposed to the Cloathiers of England; to whom it
was all along intended to have been communicated, and was so, when once it was
known grantable, that They might advance the whole, or the biggest part of the
Stock to carry it on.

(2.) That it was not a Monopoly, he proved sufficiently in his Letter to them
of Blackwell-Hall; to which he added, that nothing can be a Monopoly, but the
engrossing into one or few hands a Trade or Commodity by Law left free to all
men; and since only Wool of all the Commodities of Ireland is prohibited by
Law to be thence Exported, even into England, this Grant is so far from being a
Monopoly, that it is (if rightly considered) the greatest advantage imaginable
to the Interest of England; since if His Majesty thought fit altogether to
refuse License, (which none can deny, but He may do) 'twould prove greatly
prejudicial to this Kingdom; and then, if it be further considered, that by
this Grant, there is no more intended than instead of a 100 (supposing that the
number of Merchants) taking Licenses singly, they should be obliged to take
them joined in a Company as one man; and no man being excluded this Society,
there can be no Prejudice nor Monopoly* But if this Company should engross the
Exchange, which they can no otherwise do, than by giving and taking Bills at
very reasonable rates; this moderating the Exchange, would prevent money being
carried out of either Kingdom in Specie; which would be of great advantage, not
only to this Company, but to others also; since the unreasonable height of
Exchange is found very injurious to Trade.

And as for this Companies Monopolizing in time all other Trades of that
Kingdom, This may be, I hope, satisfactorily said, that there is no Commodity
in Ireland, except Wool, the Trade of which can legally be confined to a
Company; besides, this Company aims at nothing else but the Trade of Wool,
which will certainly be work enough for them to manage.

The next Objection was, that the Transportation of Wool would not be more
restrainable in Society, than while the trade remains in the hands of single
Merchants; which would be fully Answered by any Person that considers, that if
there be but one Exporter, such a fraud is easier discovered, than when there
are perhaps 200 to commit it: But this Objection will fall, if it appear that
it will be this Companies Interest (whether it consists of Cloathiers or
others) to bring all the Wool into England only; in order to this, let the
Reader consider what follows, and is transcribed almost word for word out of a
little piece (which within these three days came to my hands) called The
Interest of England in the improvement of the Trade of Wool, etc. writ by a
Cloathier, whose words at large are here inserted as being more likely to gain
belief.

But so it is (says my Author) That for some years past, the diligence of
Foreigners to enrich themselves upon us, has so far exceeded our care to
preserve our selves, that not only, Holland, Flanders, and Zealand have long
sucked the sweetness of our Trade; but Fiance is likewise learning to be too
hard for us, as is manifest by the great quantities of Wool that of late years
have been Transported from England and Ireland thither; how injurious it must
be to us, will appear unquestionable, if we consider that every Pack of Wool
sent to* France does prevent us, not only of the Manufacture thereof, but of
two packs more beside it self; it being combing and combed Wool for the most
part that is Exported thither, the French having no Woolls of their own, but
such as are very course, and are not able to make Cloth or fine Stuffs,
without the conjunction of ours therewith; there being none to my best
information in all the World fit for that purpose, but ours only, except in
North-Holland, and that a small quantity of fine worsted Woll, all other being
likewise course, but Spanish Wool, and that much too fine, especially for
Worsted, Stuffs, and not in any wise fit for Combing; so that without Engl sh
or Irish Woolls there can be no quantity of fine Worsted Stuffs, nor a middle
sort of Cloth made in the whole World. Neither will any VVoll be all mixed
together, but English and Spanish (and that for Cloth only) because the Spanish
is with the English of one nature, only a little finer; and in proportion the
same may be of the Spanish and Irish Wool; wherefore the exportation of English
or Irish Wools into France, must of necessity be greatly prejudicial to this
Nation, not only in the Quantity sent over, but also in the advantage which is
hereby given to them to manufacture a double proportion of their own Wool
(which otherwise would be little worth) into such Commodities, as spoil us of
the advantages of our proper Trades, not only thither, but also into other
Parts in these three Respects.

1. The Combed of the English and Irish Wool makes Wooff for the warps of the
French Wool (or rather of the Turkey Sheep) and so takes up, it may be, as much
as the quantity above specified to every pack of our Wool, without which they
can only with their own Wool make Ruggs, and at the best, Cloth for Seamen
and the meanest Pesants.

2. Their Combing or pinions (viz.) the short Wool that is Combed out of the
Worsted serves for their Linen Warp to make some of their Druggets, because
their Linen being fine spun, and colored, is not discernable to all Persons
to be what we call Linseywoollsey.

3. The finest short English Wool is mixed with the lowest of Spanish Wool
for some of their best Druggets, that is woven upon Worsted Chanies, and also
for a middle sort of Broad Cloth, about 10 or 12 s. per. yard. This is the
cause, I judge, that short Spauish Wool is so scarce in England.

Now if we consider these things together, the damage of Exporting one pack
from England to France at about 10 or 12 l. Sterling. preventing the Mauufacturing
of two packs more, which would be worth 100. l. Englands loss in the whole can
be little less than 160. l. it being generally combing Wool (as before hinted)
that is Exported to France, which makes Worsted Stuffs, and Stockins; and
besides the advantage given them by one pack of rough Wool, its obvious to all
Manufactors, that a pack of Worsted or Combed Wool worth 20. l. at 12 score to
the pack, which is 20 d. per pound, and make it more easy to every ordinary
capacity; that in Stockens a^ pound, of fine Wool would make at least two pair
of Hose worth 5. s. a pair, that is 10. s. for a pound of Wool; or reckon
thus, to ordinary Hose three pair to a pound of Wool, at 3. s. 4 d. per pair,
comes to the same sum, and 12 score pound of Wool making a pack, and a pack of
Wool making 480. pair of Hose, accordingly the pack makes 120. l. without any
respect to the advantage given them in rough Wool. Moreover considering the
Customs of the product, when Imported, it would double that sum, so that the
Exportation of one pack of English or Irish Wool is 200. l. damage to the
King and Country in general; the consequence of which will be the spoiling our
Trade with France in woollen Manufactures, which (since the great Importation
of our Woolls thither) appears from the great Impost put upon the Same there;
and will in time capacitate the French and Dutch to under-sell our English
Merchants in Foreign parts, and possibly in our own Countries; so that the
advantage we give them, besides in the mixtures of our W^olls, which theirs is
such, that whereas their Wool of it self is not worth 4 l. per pack, being
mixed with ours, becoms so fit for Worsted Stuffs, as that it comes to be worth
no less than 12 l. per pack: So that all these considered, it becomes obvious
to every Eye, that the E(...)ortations of Woolls from England and Ireland is of
a dangerous and destructive Nature to the very being of the Trade of this
Kingdom.

Another necessary consequence of carrying Wool into France and Holland, will
be to bring the price of Wool to be 6 d. per pound, as it was 300 years ago,
when the Cloth then made in Flanders of our Wool at 6 d. per pound was sold
here in England at 10 s. per yard; when at this day Cloth made in England of
Woll at 12. d. per pound, will hardly yield 7 s. per yard, which is above 30
per cent worse to the English Trade now, than it was to the Flemings formerly,
which is solely occasioned by the French and Dutch, being able by much to under
work, and consequently to under-sell us; whereas if the Wool was not Exported
beyond Sea to those places, there to be Manufactur'd, they must of necessity
buy our Woollen Manufacture, because they have not Wool enough of their own to
supply their occasions, and that also they would want those advantages of
improving by our Woolls the French and short Spanish Wool, and their fine spun
Linnens. The difference of keeping our Wool at home, and sending it abroad
appears hence, experience testifies, that when the Wool was all used at home,
or very little Exported, the Wool was 18 d. per pound, and when all, or the
greatest part was Exported, it was at 6. p.

Much more very pertinent to this Design, may be gathered out of that
discourse, as in the Preface; he tells of a Design proposed of allowing liberty
to Export Wool out of Ireland into Foreign Countries, adding 2 d. or 3 d. per
pound Custom; the disadvantage of which Act he there shows; as also that a Lord
in the Committee for Wool, affirmed he was offered 100000 l. Sterling. to get an
Act passed for the Transportation of Wool, which with what goes before,
sufficiently testifies the great advantage the French gain, and we lose by
their Manufacturing our Wool; to which I will add, that there being at least
10000. packs yearly Transported from England and Ireland, if not a great deal
more, (of which we may allow the one half, if not more to Ireland) by this
Authors computation, page 12. the Loss to England, in general, can be little
less than Two Millions a year, and to the King in particular, 200000 l. which
would otherwise be advanced in his Customs; which would easily prove true to
any considerative Person that observes in these 10000 packs, there can be no
less at the lowest Computation than 150000 Stone, 16 pound to the Stone, and 12
score pound to the pack, and that working up every Stone, is worth in very
labor 50 s. which makes loss to the Tradesmen in Wages only, 375000 l. and
since the French work up Wool much cheaper than we can, and also gain the
advantage of making a double quantity of their own Wool useful by ours, they
can afford to give greater rates for Wool than we do, and yet by at least two
thirds under-sell us; the consequence of which will be the lowering the price
of Wool both in England and Ireland, and beating us out of the Trade by our
own weapons: Whereas, if we keep the Wool from them, we should then sell in
Cloth the quantities of Wool, and two thirds more, which would be of vast
profit to all people of this Country; prevent the Exportation of coin thither
to balance that destructive (as now managed) Trade, increase Shipping and
Navigation, and give full employment to all the poor of the Kingdom (with which
it now swarms) this one Trade of Clothing using as many hands as perhaps all
other Trades of the Nation, 27 persons being ordinarily employed to the working
one Stone of Wool into Cloth.

But at the worst, suppose (which none did ever yet that I could hear of) that
France and Holland could make a shift without our Wool to Cloth their
Natives, we should at least gain the Trade of all other Parts of the World.

Perhaps some men may fancy that France has no need of our Woollen
Manufactures, because of the great Impost that King of late put on our Clothes,
which would soon be a burden to his own people, if the Tables were turned, and
we kept our Wool; seeing then we should sell them our Cloth so much the
dearer, it being indisputable, that if they need our Wool, they will much more
our Cloth; which also will add to us an increase of Artists, because those
Persons abroad wanting the materials for their Trade, will be under a necessity
of learning new Arts, or going where they may be employed in their own (which
is the most likely.)

There is yet one thing not taken notice of, (viz.) The Companies giving His
Majesty 10000 l. a year, which is done as a grateful recognition of His
Majesty's particular favor to this Company, which sum I presume at very
reasonable and moderate exchange would be raised by this Stock, or perhaps
saved out of the very charge of the mannagement of this Trade. And it ought to
be remembered that this is not the tieth of what was granted to be lost by the
Exportations of Wool, which also will at length be paid by Foreigners; for
it is certain, for the first, second, or third year the Wool was never intended
to be sold dearer than it was in England before the late Dutch War, when in
several hands, and after that time, when the French and Dutch stock of Wool is
spent, the raising the price would be no prejudice to the Cloathiers.

Besides this would discourage the French and Dutch by any sinister practices
to endeavor the breaking this grant, since 'twould appear a Loss to the Kings
Revenue, as well as to all the People of England; for by how much the Subjects
are impoverished, by so much is the Princes power weakened; nor is it on any
pretense whatever imaginable, His Majesty would ever be induced to break this
Grant; since the great care He has already taken in securing the Wool within
these Dominions, shows His Gracious Inclinations and readiness to effect it by
any further way that should be proposed. And after a small time He in His
Priucely Wisdom observing the vast benefit He and all His people would reap by
this Act in the great advance of His Costoms and their Riches would by his own
Example encourage the wearing of Woollen Manufacture; and frequently issue forth
His Proclamations for the due executing of all Laws tending thereunto; and
particularly the prohibition of Foreign Manufactures, and the Law for Burying
in Woollen, which sure is practicable, or else had never been made: If the
Clergy be enjoined to Bury none otherwise, it will quickly become Customary.

And now it may be concluded all the Objections are fully Answered: As to the
practicableness of the thing, it is very easy, and the Stock not very great,
which the Cloathiers among themselves may advance, or the greatest part of it;
and They having their votes in the mannagement of it, cannot fear its
miscarriage: though whether They be concerned or not, it is plain it is the
Companies interest to secure the Importation of all Irish Wool into England,
and likewise to prevent the Exportation of English, which may be done either by
buying it all up, or by re-establishing Staple-Towns where only the Wool shall
be sold, and the quantity Registered, with the Buyers and Selles names, by which
it may be traced to the very Manufacture. And besides, that it is the Companies
Interest (which will never lie) not to send any of their Wool abroad, They
will further give Personal security (if required) not to Export any directly or
indirectly into any Country but England, and be content the forfeiture of their
Bonds be to Blackwell-Hall, or the Chamber of London, if it appears the number
of Stones bought, and shipped in Ireland, be not actually landed in England the
danger of the Seas only excepted.

And to this purpose the Magistrates in the several Ports in Ireland may be
ob^ig'd by an Act of Council to take yearly an exact account of all Wool
bought by the Company, and fixing theirs and the Custom-House Seals, it may be
sent into England, and compared with the number of Stones landed there; the
Account of which may also be certified by the chief Magistrate of the City, as
well as chief Officer of the Port; and unless these two Accounts do agree, the
Bonds to be forfeited.

It may be some will say, though the Company should not carry any abroad, yet
others may, since the Wooll-growers have liberty to sell to whom they please:
To which it is answered that it will behove this Company to prevent this by all
imaginable care not only in Ireland but England also, by watching the Ports
abroad and at home: Besides, after the first year, there cannot be a flock of
Sheep in Ireland which they may not know, and by that knowledge, easily find
what becomes of of the Wool; and their private Intelligence at home and abroad
will discover such Artifices, which (as things stand) can never be prevented,
but by this Company, whose advantage it will be to stop all the ways of doing
it.

Now in case any dispute shall arise in distinguishing the several sorts of
Wool, His Majesty may appoint in every Port three indifferent Persons chosen
for Judges and skilful in Wool, whose sentence shall be definitive to both
Buyer and Seller; and this will be no difficult matter when the Wool is
divided into Combing and Clothing, which are easily distinguishable by their
lengths: Now the Combing being of two sorts, of a fine hair, and a course hair,
because the fineness of the one is countervail'd by the length of the other,
there is no difference made in the price proposed; but the Cloathing-Wooll
being of two sorts more unequal, they are consequently differenced in value;
the one sort is of a thick grown, clotty, and fine hair, the other of a thin
grown spurt, or course hair. These three several sorts are to be of a years
growth, Tarry, Yoaky, Matty, Sandy, and extraordinary course excluded: The
qualities of the fell Wool are to be well sorted, well washed, and well dried.

But if the People of Ireland think it troublesome to have their Wool sorted,
as is constantly done in England, when there sold; there may be this course
taken to give them content: It is agreed on all hands that the Wool of
Tipperary is the best of Ireland, and it is generally known whose Wool is the
best of all that County, which being ^ound, sufficient Patterns, may be yearly
taken of that, and sent to the several Ports, which being concluded the
Standard, shall be the measure of all the rest; what equals it to be of the
same sort; that which comes nearer to it, or is further removed in goodness
from it, to be the second and third sort.

And if men imagine these Judges will not do equal Justice, by the same Analogy
of Reason they must conclude so of all Judges, since upon the delivering their
Commissions to them, they must be sworn to be just, and that they may not
forget their Duty, the Oath may yearly be given them before the chief
Magistrates of the City, and not only turned out, but punished on complaint and
conviction.

As for the three Ports designed in Ireland, Dublin, Waterford, and Cork, they
are most conveniently Situated for all the Sheep walks of Ireland, and are
those from whence all the Wool is Shipped now, except what is Transported for
France and Holland, and what is Shipped from one or two Ports very near adjacent
to these, and in the same Line Eastward, only for the greater convenience of a
few particular Merchants dwelling in those Ports. And that none may be
Strangers to the Prises offered, they were 10 s. 8 s. -- 6 d. and 7 s. for the
first, second, and third sort of Wool, in case the Wooll-growers would not
divide their Wool into Combing and Clothing, which Rates were high enough
when this proposal was first set on foot, before the conclusion of the Peace,
when the best was not worth above 7 s. per Stone; and though these rates were
judged sufficient by most of the Persons of Quality of Ireland, lately in
England, and by some of them, too great, as well as by the People of England,
yet it was intended by the Proposers for a full satisfaction to the People of
Ireland, to give them, if they approved not of these, the same rates they
received one year with another for the last 7 or 10 years, by making a
computation of them altogether, and after dividing, to take the Quotient for
the standing price, during the Term; which may be done at the Lent-Assizes,
before the Grand Jury, they there producing sufficient proofs of the prices
yearly received, or before others appointed for this matter. The occasion of
this alteration was, that after the Peace, the Wool for a little while started
to higher Prices, but fell again soon, insomuch that now the best Wool of
Ireland may be bought at 8 s. and 8 s. -- 6 d. as appears by several Letters
from Ireland to Merchants here, and also by Certificates from thence under
several men's hands, which confirm the former; and further add, that Wool will
fall lower, if the Markets in England do not rise, of which it is said here,
there is no probability. And that is likely enough, if it be considered that
the Quantity of Wool is much more in England and Ireland, than it was seven
years ago, and every year likely to increase; and that the Woollen Manufactures
are less, insomuch that great quantities of old Wool in both Kingdoms, even at
this day, remain un-sold. To prevent which inconveniences, both to England and
Ireland, this honest Design was set on foot, which when rightly understood,
will appear to be greatly the advantage of both Kingdoms. And since the several
sorts of Wool are valued at such certain rates in those three Ports of
Ireland, those who live at a greater distance from them, though the carriage of
their Wool stands them in more; yet are equally dealt with, seeing the
inequality is founded on this; that every Commodity of the growth or produce of
that Country, and of every other, is so much the less worth in value, by how
much farther they are from the chief seats of a Kingdom; and they have amends
made by paying proportionably in the Rents of their Lands, as they are nearer
or further from the Metropolis.

It Is possible one sort of men will yet Object against this Design, I mean
those who deal more upon Credit than Stock; to satisfy whom, it may be
answered, if their Credit^ be good singly, it will be much more in Company; and
this will not hinder their making use of their Credit a part, which if in
Ireland will gain them Wool for their proportions of this Stock; if in England
it will procure them money: And sure it is far better to trust these men, if
associated in a Company, who intends to lessen the risk of the Sea, and to make
the hazard less than when single; for then every Creditor is more an Adventurer
than he, or at least as much; for if an accident at Sea or Land breaks him, the
Creditor is a looser, who trusting him, entered into Society, runs very little
or no hazard: But if this satisfy not, they may employ their Credit in some
other Trade, and if they could not, and this do appear a public good, it is
better a few, than all should suffer.

SIR,
THe Zeal which I am convinced you have for the public good, and the love you
bear to the Promoters of it in every instance, has prevailed with me in spite
of my own lazy temper, to give you this long Relation of what has been done in
Order to the Erecting this Wooll-Company. The Design was generously undertaken,
and vigorously prosecuted; but the Proposer, to secure his Reputation (the only
thing I dare say, he would not venture for the Public) after he had Answered
all Objections to the full, excepting this one, that one or two disliked the
Design (though they knew not why) did for the present at least, lay it down,
and upon no other discouragement ceased prosecuting that Letter which I
mentioned before was designed to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; and I believe
will not reassume it, till it receive a general approbation from the people of
Ireland, and encouragement from the Cloathing-men of this Nation; which if they
refuse, it is reasonable to conclude, their out cries against Transportations of
English and Irish Wool are unreasonable; that it is not the Transporting of
Wool into Foreign Countries, which occasions the decay of Woollen
Manufactures here, and consequently that all the Irish Wool which is not
Manufactur'd at home, may be sent abroad, the Trade of England requiring no
more Wool than its own growth; these consequences may be repented of, when the
Evil is become incurable; though it has been often said by wise and knowing
men, that it were Englands advantage to have all the Wool of Ireland Imported
hither, and that of England Manufactur'd within it self, though what was found
Unmerchantable, when in Stuffs and Cloth (of which nothing is to be supposed
will happen) were immediately set on fire, since of the remainder they would
make sufficient profit to compensate that supposed Loss.


SIR,
I Have Writ all I designed, and more; and as I have undertaken this task,
merely to gratify your Curiosity, so I submit what I have done to your
Judgment, to be kept private, or communicated as you shall think fit; for that,
and all, I am, are wholly


Yours,
June, the 10th. 1674.
FINIS.

