AN ACCOUNT Of the late Barbarous Proceedings of the Earl of Tyrconnel Ireland:
With their Killing and Driving some Thousands out of Cork and Lymmerick Stark
Naked in the Cold: Their Besieging Bandon, Taking the Honorable Capt. Boil,
and their Bloody Association to destroy all the Protestants of that Kingdom.
THE Lord Tyrconnel, the late King James's Deputy of the Kingdom of Ireland,
since the said Kings Departure, and Abdication of the Kingdom of England, being
as it seems resolved to keep the Kingdom is a reserve and refuge for his Master
upon occasion, or by a Vigorous seeming Preparation for War, to lay a
seasonable and sure foundation for Tolerable and Advantageous Conditions for
himself, behaved himself with some sort of pretended Conscience and Mercy
toward the p^^^ (...) down that Kingdom, until the News of the Prince of
O^^^ge (...) King, which so enraged him, that he publicly Swore, that he would
^^^^^ged on all the Protestants in that Kingdom. And about the same time
receiving both Arms and Ammunition from France, as also full assurance of the
late King with a good supply of Men and Arms, would arrive there to his and the
papists Assistance in that Kingdom, and then immediately threw of the Disguise
of Justice, pretended in his late Proclamation, and, give public Liberty and
encouragement to hls Soldiers and Officers, to plunder and destroy the
Protestants, as they should think fit. Whereupon the Papists ins most of the
great Towns in Munster assemble, and first striping Men, Women, and Children,
they Drive them out of the Towns, and leave them to the Mercy of the rest about
the Roads. In Cork, they gathered Three Thousand protestants, Men, Women, and
Children, and Robbing them of all their Effects in their Habitations, they
without regard to Modesty, Charity, or Sex, strip them stark naked, and drive
them out of the Town; the Soldiers Slapping and Beating them with Cudgels, and
using most Barbarous and Undecent Actions to the Women. In Lymrick they have
done the same, driving out, and abusing some Hundreds in the Cold, without one
Rag about them.

The Honouroble Captain Boil, by Treachery of some abot him, they have Teken,
and are in close pursuit after the Earl of Inchiqueen the greatest protestant
Champion in Munster: The strong Town of Bandon they have sent Eight Thousand
Men to Besiege: and threaten most horribly to destroy, Man, Woman and Child,
unless they yield upon Summons; and it is remarkable, that one Cartie, an
Officer in Bandon, desiting leave to go out of the Town, the protestants having
Disarmed his Company before, for fear of their Villainy, they freely gave him
leave, and the Villain had scarce got half a mile from the Town, when he meets
with Two protestant English Children, a Boy and a Girl, and alighting, he
Barbarously Murdered, cutting their Throats, and ripping them up. These are
the first so Bloody Attempts, which so nearly resemble their Beginnings in
their last so horrid Rebellion in Forty One, that unless speedy Succor be sent,
(whibh God Almighty grant) we may quickly hear of the utter and Barbarous
Extirpation of all the protestants, besides the hazard of not being able to
recover that Kingdom, without the Expense and Trouble of a long and tedious war.

London, Printed for W. Downing in Bartholomew-Close. 1689.


