AN ACCOUNT Of the Joining of MAJOR GENERAL KIRK's Forces with DUKE SCHOMBERG's
And the taking the TOWN and CASTLE of CARRICKFERGUS: As also an Account of the
IRISH ARMY under K. JAMES: By several Persons lately arrived from Ireland.
Licensed and Entered August the 30 th 1689.

Chester August the Twenty eighth. 1689. SIR,
SINCE my last several Ships are returned from Major General Kirk, who gives
this Account, That Major General Kirk had Joined his Grace the Duke Schomberg
with Fourteen Troops of Horse, three of Dragoons, and Horse for three or four
Troops more; and that the English Forces are Battering Carrickfergus with Eight
Men of War by Sea, and likewise by Land, and it is not doubted but they will
soon be Masters of it.

Major Tiffen, after the great Defeat near Inniskilling, marched toward
Colonel Sarsfield with one Troop of Horse, one of Dragoons, and two Companys of
Foot; but finding him Decampt, and hearing he fled toward Sligo, marched after
him thither; but when he came he found a clear Stage, the Enemy being fled, and
left behind them Fourteen Pieces of Cannon in the Town, of which the said Major
is now in Possession, and is Fortifying of that Place.

Yesterday at Noon sailed from High-Lake the French Regiment of Horse-Guards,
commanded by the Right Honorable Colonel Schomberg, and likewise the Earl of
Devonshire's Regiment of Horse. This day the Duke of Bolton's Regiment of Foot
set Sail from High-Lake, and -- Herbert's Troop goes from hence this day to the
same place. Two Troops of Colonel Villar's Regiment of Horse are come in, and
the rest will follow this day, in order to their imbarking for Ireland with the
first fair Wind. We likewise hear from Dublin, by a Ship come into Beaumaris,
laden with Hides, Tallow, and Leather, wherein were several Passengers, as Mr.
Berton, Servant to Alderman Fletcher of Dublin, Mr. Smith, and Mr. Smallman,
Linnen-Drapers, with Monsieur La Rue, Silk-Man, who gives this Account, That
King James had formed a Camp at Rathmine, on the South side of Dublin, composed
of about 7000 Foot, being all new-raised Men, that they had neither Shirts nor
Shoes, for the most part, and a great Multitude of Women and Children that
followed them; and that King James had given Orders to all the Parish Priests,
to take an Account of all Persons from Sixteen to Sixty, and the place of their
Abode, that they may be listed in that Kings Service; and that upon the News of
Duke Schomberg's landing, the Camp was ordered to march on the North side of
the Town, intending to form an Army to go and fight him; but the Horse that
returned from Derry, as well as the Foot, were miserably Harassed; and a French
Officer that was in the Engagement before Inniskilling, says, That the English
behaved themselves to a Wonder, but he never saw such Cowards as the Irish,
some of them running Sixteen or Eighteen Miles without staying to look behind
them; insomuch that King James was so enraged that he caused a Captain and a
Corporal to be hanged for running away, for Example sake: he also gives Account
of a Ship arrived from France, with a French General and Twenty Officers, with
some Arms, and that they had secured most of the considerable Protestants in
the West, not daring to trust them, and are forming a Camp near Kinsale, as
fearing the Earl of Torington may Land there, being now in despair of the
French Succors; and that they have laid up a great Magazine in Athloane, and
Fortified Gallway for a safe Retreat: But we hope the Victorious and Renowned
General Schomberg will soon cool their Courage, having as we hear taken the
Town and Castle of Carrickfergus by Storm; so that he will be at liberty to
march toward Dublin, having received the English Horse, who already forage up
as far as the Newry and Charlemont. In our next we expect to hear of some
Considerable Action, in the mean time I am your Humble Servant.

POSTCRIPT.
On Monday and Tuesday last sailed out of Highlake Eighty Sail of Ships all
Horse, and Fifty Ships with Foot, Ammunition and Necessaries.

LONDON, Printed for J. Green near Temple Bar. 1689.


