AN ACCOUNT Of the Late Dreadful FIRE AT NORTHAMPTON.

With the Manner how it began, the time it lasted, and the Lamentable
destruction it made: as Follows.

1. St. Mary-Street. 2. The Horse-Market. 3. Kings-head-Lane. 4. Gold-Street.
5. Wool-monger-street. 6. Kings-well-Street. ^. Bridge-Street. 8. Cobs-Lane. 9.
Crosby-Lane. 10. Cow-lane. 11. Rotten-Row. 12. St. Gyle's-Street. 13.
Farm-Lane. 14. Abbington-Street. 15. Cock-Lane. 16. Ditus-Lane. 17. New-Lane.
18. Ship-Street. 19. The Drapery. 20. Shoo-maker-Row. 21. The Butchers-shops
called, The Guts. 22. Mercers-Row. 23. Market-Hill. 24. The Church of All
hollows burnt, and Bells Melted.
Printed for Phillip Brooksby in West-Smith's field, near the Hospital (...)
September* 1675

An Account of the late dreadful FIRE AT Northampton. etc.
THe lamentable and dreadful Fire at Northampton, cannot e're this, but be
noised all over England; but the Pamphlets and Narratives that have been
hitherto published of this Tragical subject are so unfaithful, or at best
imperfect, that I thought my self oblieg'd to undeceive and satisfy the world
with this short and true account therefore.

It began on Monday the 20th. of September, 1675. about Noon, at a poor Woman's
house near Castlehill, on this manner. The Woman fetching a whisp of Straw to
kindle her fire, and going in a Doors with the straw lighted, the sudden
violence of the wind blew it out of her hand, and seizing the roof of her
Cottage, that had no Chamber over head; blew it immediately into a flame;
insomuch, that within half an hours time the fire had diffused it self above a
mile from the place where it first begun, and in five hours space above three
parts in four of that most spacious and beautiful Town reduced to ashes; five
inhabitants likewise were swallowed up in its sudden and merciless flames;
viz. one man, one Woman, and three children, besides many Cattle, Horses, Cows,
Swine, etc.

The names of the principal places, streets, and Lanes that were burned are as
follows: St. Marystreet, the Horse-Market, Kings-head-lane, Gold-street,
Wool-Monger-street, Kings-well-street, part of Bridge-street, Cobs-lane,
Crosby-Lane, Cow-lane, Rotten-Row, St. Gyles's-street, Farm-Lane,
Abbington-street, Cock-Lane, Ditus-Lane, New-Lane, Ship-street, the drapery,
called, The Womans-Market, Shoo-makers-Row, the Butchers shops, called, The
guts, the Market-hill and Cross, Mercers-Row; most of these streets and Lanes
are burned down to the ground, only in some of them here and there a house
standing, and as for the Churches, though there were four in the Town, yet
three of them were placed so in the out-skirts of it that they all escaped
those sacrilegious flames; only the largest and most beautiful of them, viz,
that of All-hollows, standing in the heart of the Town was utterly demollished,
not only the leads, but the very bells melting with the fervency of the heat.
The loss in general has been computed by very knowing persons, and adjudged to
amount to above eight hundred Thousand pound.

This short and faithful relation is able to give satisfaction to all that knew
that ancient and famous Corporation upon which only account I published this
Narrative. As for those that enquire after such calamitous accidents, merely
because they are new, I regard them not, for my design herein, is rather to
incite men to charity, than gratify them in their curiosity; and I intend not
so much the satisfaction of those that are not concerned, as the consolation of
those that were any way sufferers in that dreadful fire, to peruse the
following pages: to which end I entreat them that were made public merely for
their sakes; and as for those that are only fellow sufferers with them; as
Christians, and particularly of the same Nation; it will well become such to
have charitable thoughts of them, and toward them, not to condemn them because
they are punished, but as time and ability shall serve to receive and assist
them according unto their powers.

And for the use that all in general may make of this sad Judgment, it will be
this; namely, That we turn to the Lord in time, and by a holy compliance with
his commands and obedience to his will to divert the wrath of God, who to the
incorrigible and disobedient is like to prove a consuming fire, and will at
last assuredly cast them into everlasting burnings.

For if the sight of the Dreadful flames did amaze the beholders, how may it
put us in mind of the saying of the Apostle Peter, in the 10th. verse of the
third Chapter, and the second Epistle: But the day of the Lord will come as a
Thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, and the Element shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the
works that are therein shall be burned up. Seeing then that all these things
shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, in all Holy
conversation and godliness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day
of God, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Element
shall melt with fervent heat; nevertheless, we according to his promise look
for a new Heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness, for here we
have no continuing City, therefore look for one to come; to set our affections
on things below, we see how suddenly the Lord can sweep them away; it will be
wisdom to hearken to that saying in Scripture. Lay up for your selves treasure
in heaven, where neither moth nor rust can corrupt, nor t^^^ves break through
to steal, for where your treasure is there will your hearts be also, and for an
expedient and counsel to those that have suffered this great loss by Fire, let
them consider these rules following, as the best and surest way to get Riches
in this world, and lay up treasure in heaven.

First, let your first and principle care be to get heaven and the grace of God
that may make you meet to enjoy his Kingdom, and when you do this God will not
only give you Heaven when you Dye, but will add also as much of this World as
he sees to be good for you, Matthew 6. 33. Seek you first the Kingdom of God
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be given (...) you.

Secondly, Embrace ^^y faith, and settle your Love upon Jesus Christ, he
promises to fill there treasures that love him (...) 9. 20. 21.

Thirdly, Repent of your sins and turn to the Lord then, though you be brought
low he will build you up again, Job 27. 23, 24, 25. If thou return to the
Almighty thou shall be built up, thou shall put away iniquity far from thy
Tabernacles, then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the Gold of Opher as the
stones of the Brooks, the Almighty shall be thy defense and thou shall have
plenty of silver.

Fourthly, Walk in the fear of God, and be careful to keep his commandments,
Proverbs 22. 4. By humility and the fear of the Lord are riches, and honor, and
life.

Fifthly, Follow your employments with diligence, there is a blessing of God
goes along with diligence and industry in your calings, but the hand of the
dilligent makes rich.

Sixthly, seek after Knowledge, and manage all your affairs with Wisdom and
discretion, Prove. 24. 3 4. Though wisdom is an House builded, and by
understanding it is established, by knowledge shall the Chamber be filled with
all precious and pleasant riches.

Seventhly, Be faithful and upright in all your dealings, for the upright shall
have good things in possession, the faithful Manshall abound in Blessings,
Psalm 112. 3, 4. Wealth and riches shall be in his House, unto the upright
arises light and darkness.

Fifthly, Shun those vices that bring men to poverty, and hinder their thriving
in the world, such as prodigallity and love of pleasure. He that loves
pleasure shall be a poor man, he that loves wine and oil shall not be rich.

Ninthly, be liberal to the poor, there may be a liberal soul where there is
but a small estate, and the more liberal any man is the more likely he is to be
a Rich man.

Tenthly, and Lastly, Be content with what God gives you, and then though you
have never so little you are a Rich Man, the first of Timothy, the 6th.
Chapter, and 6 and 7 Verses. But godliness with contentment is great gain, for
we brought nothing into this world; and it is certain we can carry nothing out.

FINIS.

