The Amicable Reconciliation of the DISSENTERS TO THE Church of England: BEING
A Model or Draught for the Universal Accommodation in the Case of Religion, and
the Bringing in all Parties to Her Communion.
Humbly presented to the Consideration of Parliament.
Whereas there are several parties of Christians in the Nation, who must and
will ever differ in their Opinions about the Church and Discipline of it, in
the Question which is of Christ's Institution, it is not our Disputes about the
Church as particular (which are rather to be mutually forborne, and every party
left herein to their own Persuasion) but a common-Agreement in what we can
agree, and that is in the Church as National, must heal our Breaches.

The Catholics are for one Universal Organical Church throughout the World,
whereof the Pope is Head according to some, and the Bishops Convened in a
general Council according to others.

That there is a Catholic Church Visible on earth, as well as Invisible,
whereof CHRIST is Head, who was on Earth, and is now Visible in Heaven, is past
doubt also with Protestants: But that this Church is Organical and under the
Government either of a Monarchy by the Pope, or of an Aristocracy by a General
Council, it seems a thing not possible in nature, because neither can any
Ecumenical Council ever be Called, nor any One man be sufficicient to take on
him the Concernments of the whole World.

A Political Church, is a Community of Christians brought into an Order of
Superiority and Inferiority by an Head and Members, organized for the Exercise
of that Government which is proper to it: But the whole Earth is not capable of
any such Order, And Councils therefore which are gathered out of several
Countries, or of Bishops belonging to more Dominions than of one Supreme Power
may be had for mutual Advice and Concord, but not for Government.

A Nation, Empire, or Kingdom, which consists of one Supreme Magistrate and
People, who are generally Christians are capable of such an Ecclesiastical
polity, and a National Church Political in England is to be asserted and
maintained.

The Church of England then is a Political Society of all the Christians in the
Land, united in the King as Head, and organized by the Bishops, for the
executing those Laws or Government which he chooses for their spiritual Good
and the public peace.

There is this difference between a Church National, the Church Catholic, and
Particular Churches: The two latter are of Divine Right and Essential
Consideration, but the former is and can be only of Humane Institution, for it
is manifestly Accidental to the Church of Christ that the chief Magistrate and
the whole People should be Christian.

Distinguish we here of the Government of the Church as Internal belonging to
the Spirit, and External which belongs to Men: And of the External Regiment
thereof, which is either Formal belonging to the Ministers, or Officers of
Christ; or Objective belonging to the Magistrate: the one being only by the
Keys, the other by the Sword. Whether the Community now of Christians in
England may be a counted a National Church in respect to any Formal Government
of it, we leave for dispute to others; let them judge according to the
foregoing Definition of a political Church: But that the main body of the
Nation are, or may be constituted a proper Political Church National in respect
to that External Objective Regiment, which is, or should be exercised by the
Bishops as the proper Organs thereof under the King, is what we hold
reasonable, and would lay as the Foundation Stone of Peace, in the matter of
Religion between all persons in the Kingdom.

Let the Parliament therefore we have, be heartily for the public good and
thriving of England, which must and can be only by an entire Liberty of
Conscience in opposition to the narrow Spirit of any single party or faction,
and when such a Parliament as this shall set themselves about the Business of
Union to purpose, a Bill should be brought in, Entitled, An Act for declaring
the Constitution of our Church of England.

A Parliament is the Representative of the whole Nation and no doubt but by
Consent and Agreement they might (upon the account mentioned) Make a new
Constitution, and much more may they Declare the Constitution of it.

It should be declared then in such a Bill or Act that the Church of England
consists of the King as the Head, or pars Imperans, who is to give Laws
thereto, and all the several Assemblies of Christiaus which he shall tolerate,
as the pars subdita, or Body.

Some Discrimination between the Tolerable and Intolerable is indeed never to
be gain said by any wise and good man; unto whom there is no Liberty can be
desirable, which is not consistent at least with these three things, the
Articles of our Creed, a Good Life, and the Fundamental Government of the
Kingdom.

It is not for any private persons, but a Parliament, to prescribe the terms of
National Communion: But we would have all our Assemblies that are Tolerable, to
be made Legal by such an Act (and thereby parts of the National Church) as well
as the Parochial Congregations.

The Church here therefore must come under a double consideration, as the
Church of Christ, and as the Church of England. Take the Church as the Church
of Christ, and there must be (as we have said at first) endless Controversy
about this point, who are the true Members of it: but take it under the
consideration as National, and there will be none at all, for those must be
Members whom the Head by a Law does allow to be parts of the Body, and the King
under this notion only is made Head of the Church by the Stature, that is, as
it is called Ecclesia Anglicana.

The Protestant Dissenters of all sorts, as well as the Conformists, will
acknowledge the King to be Supreme coercive Governor over all Persons, and in
all Causes, Ecclesiastical and Civil, throughout his Dominions; And will not
those who are Roman Catholics do the like? Did they not do so in Henry the
Eight's time, when they were generally such? Again, the Dissenters of all
sorts, even the Congregationalists of every Sect, are ready to submit to any
power legally derived from the King, and upon such an account will admit of a
superintendency of the Bishops, as Ecclesiastical Magistrates under him, when
they cannot own any Authority that they have over other Ministers from Jesus
Christ; and will not Papists also be subject to all Authority that is exercised
legally in his Name, howsoever they may question the spiritual Title of the
English Clergy and their succession?

We would have the Bishops then ( qua Bishops, as distinct in Office from
Priests) declared no other than the King's Officers whose power is but
Objectively Ecclesiastical, and to act Circa Sacra only, by Virtue of his
Authority and Commission.

As Jehoshaphat did commit the Charge incumbent upon him as Supreme Magistrate,
in regard to all Matters of the Lord, unto the care of Amariah, being Chief
Priest, and in regard to the King's Matters unto Zebadiah, being as the Chief
Justice of the Realm: so should the Diocesan Bishop be in our Ecclesiastical,
as the Judges are in Civil Matters the Substitutes altogether of His Majesty,
and execute his Jurisdiction.

This is indeed a State point which was thoroughly canvased by Henry the Eight,
whose Divines did agree on two Orders alone, Priest and Deacon, to be of Divine
Appointment, and that the Superiority of a Bishop over a Presbyter, (...) of
one Bishop over another, was but by the Positive ^aws of Men only, as appears
in that Authentic Book then put out, entitled, The Necessary Erudition: And
consequently, that the Bishop could not have, or exert any Jurisdiction over
the Subject unless warranted and derived from the King without danger of a
Praemunire; which made Bonner (with others) hold his Bishopric by Commission.

Upon this ground, if it should please His Majesty to choose some persons of the
Dissenters to this Office, authorizing them to it no otherwise, than by a like
Commission (which they should also hold, with the Judges, Quam diu se been
g^sserint): As none of them could scruple then the acceptance, so must a Union
from that day forward commence in England; especially if he would not leave
filling up the Vacancies that fall, with such, till they in some measure equal
the Conformists.

We are sensible unto what Distress the Ministers of a Particular Congregation
of all sorts may be brought in the exercise of Discipline over some potent,
turbulent, and refractory Members; and what relief he might find in such an
external Ecclesiastical Officer as this: We are sensible how many
inconveniences of Congregational Episcopacy may by this means only be salved.

Their work in general should be to supervise the Churches of all parties in
their Diocesses, that they walk according to their own principles, in due
order, agreeable to the Gospel, and the peace of one another. And more
particularly in the observance of all Laws and limitations, rules or Canons,
which the King as Supreme Head, shall by advice of a Convocation, or the
consent of his three Estates in Parliament, make on purpose, and impose upon
them, with respect both to the public emolument, and the safety of his own
Person, Dignity, and Dominions.

For example, suppose this to be one Canon or Injunction, That no Novic^, but
such as are Grave Men only among the Sects, be admitted to be Teachers.
Another, this, That the doors be kept open in all Conventicles for any that
will to come in and hear, that no Sedition be there hatched or bro^ched. There
are such and many the like ^^positions may be sound, very fit to be laid on
some persons, not needful for others, and it is Time, and the Trial, and
Experience which must be the Mother to bring them forth, and cultivate them
after, to their best advantage.

To the making such Canons, we humbly motion a third Clerk for the Convocation,
to be added to the two in every Diocese, and chose out of the Dissenters with
indifferent respect to all sorts of them, that mutual satisfaction and concord
may thereby be prosecuted with unanimity of heart and good will throughout all
the Churches: And the two Provinces of Canterbury and York should Unite in this
Convocation for the making them one National Church, and not two Provincial
ones in a diverse Assembly.

By this means shall one Organ more be added to this great political Society
for deriving an influence from the Head to these parts of the Body as well as
others, which now seem neglected, and to have no care taken of them.

The more especial business of such an equally Modell^d Convocation should be
the revising the book of Canons, for the reversing the main body of them,
having been fitted to that narrow scantling which is unworthy the Church of
England, and for the leaving only those, and making new (as we have exemplified
in one or two for instance sake even now) which do, and will suit to that
larger Constitution thereof intended by this Paper.

And having now said thus much for Explanation of this Design, we must say some
little also in favor of it.

The Design of such an Accommodation as this, shall advance not lessen the
outward power and honor of the Bishop, extending it over those who before had
no conscientious regard for their Function: while yet it would ease them of the
tremendous burden of such a Cura animarum they take on them otherwise, as must
be of impossible performance.

This Design (which is supposed to find us in our Divisions, and not to make
any) shall by little and little (with God's blessing on it) cool Animosities,
and enkindle Charity and Holiness among all parties, which now is so much
wanting, while those that are Catholics, and those that are Protestants, and
much more those that are Conformists, and those that are Nonconformists, do
agree in the substance of one Christianity, having the same Scriptures, the
same Articles of Faith in the three Creeds, and the same rule of Manners in the
Decalogue, There is one Body, one Spirit, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism.
They cannot indeed have both Communion in the same External Worship, but they
can have it in the Internal Adoration of the same blessed Trinity, and in One
Hope of our calling unto eternal Life through Christ Jesus. They must Separate
into several Congregations, but there shall be no Schism in the Body by this
means for all that.

For as while the Supreme Power allows only the Parochial Meetings, as
established by Law, it has bin accounted Schism to go to Separate Assemblys:
So if the Scene be altered, and these Separate Congregations be also made
Legal, this Schism, or men's being called Schismatics, in that regard, must
venish, and be at an end. Indeed these diverse Congregations will Accuse one
another as guilty of Sin and Schism before God, for each separating from the
others Communion, and threaten his Judgment: but so long as there is no
separating from the Church whereof the King is Head, while he tolerates the
Meetings of both, and makes them parts of it as National, there shall be no
prosecution of Law against any, but all quiet, as Fellow Members upon that
account.

Only, as to the Roman Catholics, it is not indeed for them to imagine that a
Protestant King and Parliament should allow of their Mass in Pubblick, as they
do of the Service Book. This were not to tolerate the Papists, but to set up
Popery whereas the Determining what is to be permitted to one Party, and what
to another, so as no Detriment may be brought to the Church or State, and no
Sin or Guilt upon the Nation by that permission, is a nice thing, and the
business of this Parliament.

There is one Motion farther should be added, and that is for another Bill also
to be brought in to take away Pluralities, (which is the Pest of our present
Conforming Clergy) I mean both of Livings and Dignities impartially, to this
end, that the King may have wherewithal to engage those he receives into the
Church thus enlarged, and consequently restores to their Labors, by this
Accommodation; for that is a thing will make the favor indeed fignificant to
such persons.

I will conclude with one Argument for what I have proposed. There is no power
given upon earth for any man to command that which he in his Conscience does
judge to be Sin. Non datur potestas ad malum. But to conform in all things to
the present Church according to Law, is Sin in the judgment of Dissenters,
Catholics, and others; and the Late King was a Dissenter of one sort himself.
The King therefore that was so lately, could not really put the Catholics upon
Conformity, and if he would appear equal to all his People, he could not put
any other Dissenters on it neither, for the same Cause. That which the Law
requires was both in his Conscience and in theirs, a thing prohibited of God.
He could not therefore put the Laws in Execution being against God. And if He
could not do it acting only but as an honest Man that abides by his Principles:
we have no reason to apprehend that so good a King and Queen as we have now,
should be ever brought to do it, Maugre all the Enticements of the Church of
England, or Frowns of the Church of Rome.

FINIS.
London, Printed for R. Hayhurst in Little-Britain. 1689.


