AN ACCOUNT Of the Manner, BEHAVIOR AND EXECUTION OF Mary Aubry, Who was Burnt
to Ashes, in Leicester Fields, On Friday the 2d Day of March, 1687. For the
Barbarous and Inhumane Murder, Committed on the Body of Dennis Aubry, Her
Husband, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, on the 27th of January
last.
And the same Day, Daniel Sconley was Executed at Tyburn.
THe late surprising Murder of Dennis Aubry, the person whose Body was found
in Parkers-Lane, his Arms, Legs, etc. in the Savoy House of Office, and his
Head in another, near Exeter Exchange; upon strict inquiry, being known to be
done, and committed by Mary Aubry his Wife, a French Woman; she upon her
Examination having confessed the Fact, viz. That she bereived him of Life, by
strangling him with a Cord, etc. and Cut him in Pieces, for the more private
and convenient disposal of him, thereby to prevent discovery, she was thereupon
Committed to Prison, where not without some Regret, which appeared by her upon
Committed to Prison, where not without some Regret, which appeared by her much
dejected Countenance and Behavior: She continued till the Sessions, Holden for
the City of London and County of Middlesex, etc. Began at the Sessions House in
the Old B^^y, whether being brought, in order to be Tried for that Barbarous
Murt^^r (...) was Read, wherein she stood charged, for Murdering her said
(...), by Strangling, etc. on the 27th of January, Anno, 1687. In the Parish of
St. M^^tins in the Fields; and having Notice at large, of what was contained
therein, by her Interpreter; and being demanded whether she was Guilty or not
of the Fact, as laid in the said Indictment: She pleaded Guilty to the Felony,
Murder, and Petry Treason; yet, the Court was so favorable to tell her, that
she might, seeing it was a Case that ^^ndered her Dead in Law by her pleasing
Guilty, ^^^act that P^e^, and put her self upon the Country for her Trial, if
she thought it (...) or convenient; but she still persisting to plead Guilty,
her Confession was Recorded* And in the close of the Sessions, she was brought
to receive Sentance of Death, as in that Case the Law requires, which was
accordingly pronounced by the Court, viz. That she she said Mary A^bry, should
be carried from thence, to the place from whence she came, and thence to be
drawn to the place of Execution, and there to be burnt with Fire till she be
Dead.

Sentance being past, she was reconveyed to the County Goal of Newgate, there
to attend the time of the said Sentance being put in Execution, appearing much
afflicted under the sense of so great a Crime, affecting for the most part
retiredness and avoiding as much as in her lay, the concourse or company of
such, especially, whom she conceived came only out of curiosity to see her, and
so continued to indulge her self rather in Melancholiness than any thing that
was apparent to the contrary, both before and after she was sensible the
Warrant was signed for her Execution.

On Friday the 2d of March, the Day appointed for her being Burnt, etc. about
Ten in the Morning of the said Day, the Sheriffs Officers came to demand her in
order to carry her to Leicester Fields, the place where she suffered. When
being put into the Sledg, she was with a Guard of Sheriffs Men, drawn to
Le^cester Fields, where a Stake was set up toward the North side of the
Square, and the Wood, etc. accordingly prepared to perform the Execution, when
about half an hour past Ten, she arrived to the place appointed, appearing very
Penitent, often listing up her Hands and Eyes to Heaven, seeming to express
much sorrow for the Crime that had been the occasion of this her shameful End,
and then prayed to her self; and after that, held some Discourse or Conference
with a certain Person there atending when being taken out of the Slead, about
half an hour after her arrival she again having Expresied much Sorrow in her
manner of Carriage and Gesture as was Evident to the Spectators, she was set
upon a stool prepared for that purpose; and a Rope being fastened through a
Hole of the Post, or Stake, and the Noose of it put over her Neck; the stool
being taken away, she hung there for near the space of a quarter of an Hour, in
which time, the Bavins and Faggots where Piled about her, and at the Expiration
thereof, Fire set to them, which consumed her in about half an hour more to
Ashes, etc.

About three hours before this Execution, one Daniel Stonley; who was condem^
the last sessions, for Robing Anthony Shackliffe a Brewer, of a considerable
su^^ Money, was carried to Tyburn, and there Executed.

This may be Printed,

R P
March the 2d 1687.
LONDON; Printed by D Mallet, next Door to the sign of the Star^ between Fleet
Bridge and Bridewell Bridge.


