REFLECTIONS On that DISCOURSE Which a Master of Arts (once) of the University
of Cambridg, Calls RATIONAL, Presented in Print to a Person of Honor, 1676.
CONCERNING Transubstantiation.

By one of no Arts, but downright Honesty. At the instance of an Honorable
Person.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

Imprimatur,

Nihil in hoc libello reperio doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus
contrarium,

Jul. 10, 1676. G. Jane.

The four Bulrush-pillars, so confidently Erected for the support of his whole
Building, are, 1. The Possibility of it, to Gods Power. 2. Sayings of the
Fathers, sounding that way. 3. Oral Tradition supposed for it. 4. Miracles
supposed for it.


The first of these we deny not; only we are a little confident there is
neither sufficient evidence that it is so, nor any need it should be so, (page
4).

As to the second, judicat Lector, many of his proofs (granting them genuine
and true) make nothing against us; others must be tried by Vincentius's rule:
All are reduceable to a sound sense, in St. Augustine's or Origen's way (page,
5, etc).

The third is a mere Chymera (page 6).

The fourth, often illusive, frequently false, never to be trusted to (Deuteronomy.
13.1, 2. Matt. 13.22), if they run contrary to the written word; or have not
its concurrence (page 8).

To each of these somewhat, though not following him into every distinct
Paragraph.

Romani addictus jurare in Verba Magistri,
THis Master of Arts (as he would have us know) resolves, first, to lay down
his Position in the most ample (not to say, prodigious) Terms; and then to try
his skill in the Defense of it.

My Sentiments (says he) concerning the Adorable Eucharist, is, That it is
neither less nor more than the Sacred Body and Blood of God; neither less nor
more than whole-Christ, God and man, Soul, Body and Divinity: though for the
love and service of Sinners, vested under the vile Accidents and appearances of
Common Bread, and Ordinary Wine.

Concerning which mystery, his first Assertion must be, That it is possible to
the Omnipotent Power of God.

1. And (I must confess) this show of an Argument went far with me, whilst I
was born in hand, and did think (for even I also had Espoused certain
mis-beliefs, during my Minority, by the prevalency of Eudcation) That the vile
Protestants had denied the Lord God to be Almighty, upon this very account; but
it ceast (by the Divine Goodness) to be so with me, when I could not but
discern, and at length was fully convinced, 1. That the true intent, purpose,
and meaning of our Savior, did not at all oblige us to think of
Transubstantiation. 2. That there is no necessity, import, or use for it (no
service, as our Author phrases it) in the Christian Church.


And I shall heartily declare (leaving the philosophical impossibility of
Transubstantiation to be demonstrated by some other hand) what has given me
entire satisfaction as to this great Point.

I perceive by Christ's own words, (recorded Joh. 6.53.) that I am under an
absolute necessity of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood; And therefore,
having (in the first place) considered of how great concern it is, to arrive at
the true meaning of them, I do humbly supplicate the Divine Majesty, That he
will give me (ever) to think comprehend, speak of, and go about that great
Mystery so, as may be best pleasing to him, and most expedient for my foul.

His own Paraphrase on what he had said, cannot deceive me, I dare believe
(since he so told his inquisitive Disciples, Verse. 63.) That the life of them
is wrapped up in a Spiritual acception. And since, he declares (where he terms
himself the Bread of Life, Verse. 35.), That whosoever comes to him, (which is the
peculiar act of Faith, Joh. 1.12,) shall never hunger; since he attributes most
clearly (in pursuit still of the same Metaphor) the quenching of thirst, to
believing; what need we, how can we doubt any more of the matter? He takes off
their amazement, and gives stop to their murmurs, ( Verse. 61.) not by telling
them, That though they were to see him ascend up where he was before, yet they
were ere long to have him corporally present (in the form of Bread) on ten
thousand (distant) Altars at once; nay in the very jaws of every Person (how
wicked soever) that comes but to eat there: He does not, I say, make his return
at this rate, but instructs them how to Spiritualize the whole business, Verse.
62, 63. Neither would there be any thing difficult or obscure in the words of
Institution afterward: For, (besides, that he had here pre-instructed them),
There was almost nothing among the Jews (which had Type or significancy in it)
but was expressed in this very manner: Circumcision, the Paschal-Lamb, Manna,
the Rock, were all sufficiently known to carry the names of those things they
did but adumbrate.

There is one Scripture, ( Joh 6.) He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
has eternal life abiding in him, and I will raise him up at the last day.

Hence has the memorable Usher framed this Syllogism, I think irrefragable.

The Body and Blood of Christ is received unto Life, by all that do receive it,
and by none unto Condemnation:

But, that which is (outwardly) delivered in the Sacrament, is not received by
all unto Life; but by many unto Condemnation; Ergo,

Therefore, that which is outwardly taken in this Sacrament, is not really the
Body and Blood of Christ.

II. This Spiritual manducation (and none other) was the true sense of the
Primitive Church.

I prove it by Saint Augustine, in his 26th Tract he has these words; The
Sacrament of this thing ( viz. of our eating the Flesh of Christ) is taken from
the Lords Table, by some unto Life, by some unto Destruction: But the thing it
self (whereof it is a Sacrament) is received by every man (that does receive
it) unto Life; and by none unto Destruction. Prosper (from him) tells us, Qui
discordat a Christo nec carnem ejus manducat, nec Sanguinem bibit. More plainly
yet, St. Augustine again, (on Psalm. 97.) With the most holy Sacrament, not the
Flesh which was Crucified, is carnally eaten; but the virtues of that Flesh are
really eaten by the Soul, in such manner as the Soul can eat; that is,
Spiritually, by her affections, and other immanent real acts, of internal
Operations.

We Will own (and that without any prejudice to our cause), That many of the
Fathers did choose, and were delighted to imitate our Saviors way of Locution
(even through long discourses); yet it is evident we ought to understand them,
as Origin (after he had played the Rhetorician, in this sort) concludes (on
Matthew. 15.) Et haec quidem, de typico symbolicoque Corpore.

Augustine (Quest. 13. in Levit.) says, Seven Ears of Corn were seven years,
and the Blood is called the Soul after the manner of Sacraments: And what think
you, must there not needs be a Figure in that speech of Christ, when
(instituting the latter part of this Sacrament) he pronounced, This Cup is the
New Testament? Luke 22.20.

If the Master of Arts wll but bring along with him one Note out of St.
Vincentius (without which all the rest signify but little) we will join issue
with him. It Is this;

Neither says he (in that little Book (I do not quote the page, because the
whole is but small) are all ways, and all kinds (he means of Innovations) to be
impugned after this manner, (...) the ^^ruch's ^^adition
but such only as are new, and lately sprung; whilst by the straitness of time
they be hindered from falsifying the rules of the ancient Faith; and before
(their poison spreading) they attempt to corrupt the writings of the Elders.

Oh, my Friend, are we arrived there? Nay, then we shall do well enough; the
world is pretty well advertised (by several hands) what your Church of Rome has
done in that kind; and I hope there are some instances in my Triple-Crown.

III. We have left (yet) one thing behind, which though it be Vox and praeteria
Nihil, is thought able (in the hands of this Master of Arts) to strike us all
dumb, I mean Oral Tradition: But, pray Sir, was not that the same, whereby the
Law of God was become of none effect (and so declared by himself, Matthew. 15.)
in our Saviors time?

He that considers the Parable ( Matthew. 13.24.) will not wonder that the Lord
of the Field should ask, Whence are those Tares? And when I read the Eleventh
to the Romans, at Verse. 22, I cannot hinder my self from concluding it very
possible, that that Church (also) may be cut off.

Surely many Circumstances that co-operated to the debauching of the
Jewish-worship, have passed likewise over the Romish: Inundation of Barbarians,
Ignorance, Ambition, have had several runs, and long reigns too: ask Platina,
If this Calumny was invented by Protestants.

I must confess, 'twas less abhorrent to my reason when you pinned all upon the
single infallibility of the Chair at Rome, (by virtue of a promise, if any such
could have been produced) than to let all hang (now) on so wavering a pin as
Oral Tradition. The most think (I hope) Dr. Tillotson has pretty well beaten
you off from that shred of a shelter. And would you but impartially peruse the
late Bishop Cousin his History of your Transubstantiation, you would not (sure)
talk so vainly of Bakers bread, and the like Flams. We own such a real presence
(even Calvin himself does so) of the Body and Blood of Christ, to every due
receiver; as either the Scripture or true Primitive Fathers do require; without
needing any of those Philosophical Disquisitions, which your notion (as to this
great point) must engage all Mankind unto, if they be not mere Animals.

For to tell us, that all your good Catholics hold firmly the thing, though
they dispute the manner of Transubstantiation, (when the whole stands upon no
sure foot, either of Divine Revelation, or sufficiently madeout testimony, and
is altogether unaccountable at the Bar of Reason) will not (sure) make any
Proselytes.

When I find ( Heb. 7.27.) that our High priest needs not daily to offer up
Sacrifice; for this he did once, when he offered up himself; I wonder in what
shape the necessity of a daily true and proper Sacrifice appeared to get
possession of so many men's Phancies, especially if the last verse of the next
Chapter, and its coherence might be considered.

IV. Now Sir, I must acknowledge your learned Harang concerning miracles, is
very Seraphical and highly surprizeing: give me leave (to serve you) by adding
thereto a few remarques, the Collection whereof (out of a huge Volume) was a
whole tedious winters work unto me, but diverted my Company, sometimes as we
sat over our Coal fire in the Country.

Be it known unto all men (therefore) by these presents, That a couple of great
Romish Doctors, (whether they were Masters of Arts, or no, I know not (
Claudius de rota, and Jacobus de Voragine, printed at Lions, Anno 1519, to be
read to the people on Holy Days, and to heighten their zeal, (as the prefixed
Epistle declares), and for the direction of Parish Priests; A golden Legend,
wherein there are plenty of such Stories as (here) follow.

Fol. 100. latter page.
1. A certain Woman, deprived of the comfort of her Husband and having one only
Son, whom she loved dearly: This Son happened to be taken by his Enemies, and
fast bound in prison; which when the Mother came to know, she wept beyond all
expression: But having an huge Devotion toward the blessed Virgin, she plied
her with Prayers for his deliverance: At last, seeing that that would not do,
she goes all alone into the Church, where there was a graven Image of the
Virgin; and our Savior in her arms: This disconsolate widow placing her self
just before the Image, speaks to it in these words, O blessed Virgin, Thus long
have I supplicated thee for my sons freedom, but without effect; thou have had
no pity on me, a poor Mother; I have implored thine assistance and patronage
for him; but without any fruit. Therefore now, as my Son is taken from me, so
I Will teke thy Son from thee, and put him in safe Custody, as a pledge for mine.
This said, she snatched away the Child which the Virgin held cudling in her
arms; away she hyes home with it, laps it up in pure Linen, puts it in a
Chest, and locks it very (yea, very) securely; rejoicing (now) that she had got
so good a Pledge for her Son. She watches it very diligently; and behold, the
night following, the blessed Virgin appears to the young man in prison, throws
open the Door, knocks off his Fetters; bids him go out, and tell his Mother,
That since she had got her Son again, she must restore to her likewise her own.
The released Captive does so; there was (then) joy enough; They took the Image
of the Child, go (both of them) to the Church, put it where they found it; the
Woman saying, Lady, I thank thee, that thou have returned my only Son to me:
And lo, here is now thine again; Forasmuch, as I do own the receipt of mine.

Fol. 151.
2. There was (at another time) a Thief that had committed many Robberies: But
yet this Thief had great Devotion to the blessed Virgin; and saluted her (I
cannot English the word in the Original otherwise, for it is crebrius
salutavit) very often. At an unluc^y season, this Youngster plays one of his
prancks, is apprehended, arraigned, and adjudged to die by the Rope; but when
he was thrown off the Ladder, immediately the Virgin ( horresco referens) was
not only at his elbow; but for three whole days seemed (that is, was seen by
him, and I know not whether by others too) so to support him, as he felt no
harm.

Those that hanged him (passing by, and seeing him alive, with cheerfulness in
his looks) did imagine the Fatal-cord had not been right noos'd; were about to
have dispatched him with their swords; but blessd Mary (so the Book phrases it)
opposed her own hands to the blows, and they could not hurt him. Knowing then,
and hearing him relate, That the Virgin was so much his friend; they took him
down, dismissed him: And he betaking himself to a Monastery, spent the rest of
his days in the service of the Mother of God; that is (as I humbly conceive) in
repeating Ave-Marias's.

This is fully enough, as to temporal deliverances. But observe next, matters
of an higher frame; and if your faith cannot get up to them, you will find enough
to wounder at.

3. I do not cite the page, not having the Book by me: But I am sure it is there.

There was (once) a good old Priest in France, near an arm of the Sea, who
never failed to sing the Canonical hours of the Virgin Mary, very duly: But so
it happened, that he had crossed the water to a certain Town; and there laid
with another man's Wife. As he came back (over this mouth of the River Sein),
and had no body in the Boat with him, He began to Chant the foresaid hours; and
just as he entered upon the Invitatory (Ave Maria gratia plena) he was in the
midst of the Flood; when an huge Troop of Devils threw him and his little Ship
together headlong into the Deep. But on the third day after the Mother of Jesus
(and in her Company a great many Angels) came to the place where those Devils
were tormenting him, she asked them, why they so unjustly afflicted the Soul of
her Servant? they made answer, We ought of right to have him, for we took him
in our employment; nay, says she, but if they ought to have him whose work he
was about, Give me him, for he was singing my Mattens when you slew him;
therefore you (who never did so much for me) are more guilty. Hearing this,
those foul Fiends sneaked away. She restored his Soul to his Body, took him by
the arm, made the waters stand as a wall on both sides to guard him, brought
him (delivered thus from a double death) safe to shore. He falls down, embraces
her knees, beseeching her to tell him what he should do for her who had
delivered him from the jaws of the Lion, and the pit of Hell: She gently
desired him, That he would not commit adultery any more, lest a worse thing
happen unto him; and said further, which is the up-shot and design of the
Story) I entreat one thing more of thee, that thou will (for ever) with
devotion keep the feast of my Conception on the 6th of the Ides of December,
and preach it up, that all may do so.

How will they ever look this blessed Mother of our Lord in the face, hat have
said such wild things to her, and of her?

Fol. 124. latter page.
4. Hearken to a strange Story, which our Author says he had from a famous
Doctor.

There was a Woman who (her Husband being dead) fell into despair, with
foresight of poverty: to her the Devil appeared; telling her, If she would do
his will, he would make her rich enough; she consents: and he enjoins her,
First. That she should draw all Ecclesiastical Persons that came to her house
(for we may suppose her an Hostess) into Fornication. Secondly, That she should
seem to take in poor people on the daytime, and then at night turn them out.
Thirdly, That she should hinder Prayers in the Church, by chatting or scolding.
Fourthly, That she should never confess. At last, She comes to die; her Son (a
good well-meaning young man) would have her to Confession: But she (telling him
what she had done) cries out, she could not confess, neither would it do her
any good: But after he had wept pitifully a great while, and promised he would
do Penance for her; at length she became compunct, and sent away this Son of
hers for a Priest: But seeing that the Devil (before he had got back) had
rushed upon her, and she through fear and horror was dead; he (confessing in
her stead, and having done seven years Penance for her) saw his Mother come
again, and render him abundance of thanks, for she was thereby (here lies the
marrow of the matter) out of Purgatory.

These are pretty, mild, benevolent Treatments, and may work right on soft
gentle Spirits; but there are too, rough stubborn hearts which must be broken:
listen therefore to a pleasant Tale.

Fol. 143.
5. (For the honor of St. Nicholas) This Saints Letany (or rather his Legend)
had not been received in the Church, called Sancta-Cruce; The Brothers all
solicit their Prior, that they might sing it; he (a Puritanical old man)
would not consent, saying, he liked not Novelties. The Friars were (still) very
urgent with him, so that at last he told them roundly, that he would never have
any new (yea, jocular) Songs in his Church, desiring them to be content. You
must know (though) that when St. Nicholas day drew near, and many of those
Brothers sung their Mattens all in grief (their Daybreak Mattens it must be
understood, for they were gone to Bed soon after, as the Book holds forth), in
comes St. Nicholas, looks grim on the poor Prior, drags him from his Bed by the
hair of the head, and thumping it soundly against the Pavement of the
Dormitory, He begins this Antephony: O Pastor Bone, etc. at every stop or pause
through the whole, giving him a sound Lash upon the bare -- (with Rods he had
brought with him for the very nonce) doubling them in order, and singing in a
slow manner, till he came at the very end. And now when all the rest were
roused by the Outcries of the Prior, they found him half dead, and drew him
into his Couch again. At last he came to himself, and only said, Go your ways,
ever hereaster be sure to sing the new History of St. Nicholas.

Fol. 38, the latter page.
6. There is one so quaint, so fine, and well contrived, that I cannot pass
without it, (though I step a great way back to retrieve it), and it runs thus:

A Soldier of great rank, gave over that Trade, and put himself into a
Monastry; the Prior and Brothers were out of Countenance, to have a man of so
much repute in any inferior employments; but it seems none might come to the
preferment of being one of them (I guess this might be in, or about the ninth
Age) unless he were Book-learned; so they set one to teach him to read: he
could never reach further than Ave-Maria, all England (yet it was (I think) in
Spain, or rather in the Indies, before their discovery) could not make him
advance beyond those two words: but them he cons to some purpose, walking,
eating, or whatever he was about, he repeated them: And lo! when he dyed, there
grew upon his grave a delicate white Lilly, and every Leaf had Ave-Maria upon
it in Golden Letters; the whole Covent were in a steer upon this miracle; and
having opened his resting place or Tomb, found that the root of the Flower was
in his very mouth, thence they concluded how highly his Devotion was accounted
of by God. The same place gives us the History of another Military-man; who
having a Castle near a road, robbed all that came near him without any
compassion; yet this man, whatever his business was, would not leave the Virgin
Mary unsaluted in the morning. It happened that an holy Man of God was passing
by, is seized upon by these Troopers: He requires them to carry him before
their Captain, for he had a great secret to impart to him. Come before him, he
begs of him that he would cause all his retinue to be called together, and he
would preach to them the word of God. It Is done forthwith; but the Holy Man
told them, there was not all, they said all were there; still he insisted on it,
and bid them go to the pole diligently; at last, one cries out, the Groom of
the Chamber is wanting; he is searched for, sound, and brought in, hangs back,
makes terrible ugly faces, and cannot be forced to look that way the Priest
stood: who going to him, Adjures him to tell truly who he was, and upon whose
errand he came thither: Out, alas, exclaims the Groom; Now I am adjured, all
must out: Truly I am no man, but a Devil; here I have been (sent by Beelzebub
our Prince) to watch this Soldier these forty long years; and if ever I could
have found a day whereon he had not said the Salutation, he had been ours, and
hurtied to hell with all his sins about him; but he never left of that armor
of Proof. The Captain at this was hugely amazed, cast himself at the Holy Man's
feet, and as may be hoped mended. The Fiend was packt away too with this
injuction: I Command thee, Devil, to depart, confining thee to such a place;
and be sure thou never hurtest any that does invoke the Glorious Mother of God.

Fol. 87.
7. Another man with a sword, having wasted all his plentiful estate profusely,
had yet a Wife singularly addicted and devoted to the blessed Virgin. A time
drawing near wherein he had used to express large bounty, but finding too he
could not do so still, for very shame he withdrew into a solitary place to
bewail his Condition; where behold, an huge terrible Horse, with one on his
back no less so, came toward him; the Rider asked, why so sad? well, he told
him; whereto the Devil (for 'twas no other) replied, do what I Will Command thee,
and thou shall have wealth at will. That bargain was soon struck; and the very
good Wife too, given to Satan, made the Condition; Houses, Lands, and all fine
things are soon re-purchased; but at last the promised time comes The man calls
his Wife, bids her make ready to take along journey with him, she trembling,
and suspecting some ill, yet not daring to disobey; Commends her self most
devoutly to the Virgin, and so mounts on Horseback behind her Husband. After
they had rid a good way, they came close by a Church; she leaps off, and
enters, he stays for her without; but whilst she prayed fervently to the
Virgin, she fell suddenly fast asleep: And lo, that glorious Virgin (in the
habit and likeness of the Wife) came off from the Altar, gets up behind the
man, and away they went; when they came within sight of the place where the
Devil stood, greedily expecting them; the Fiend fell a quaking, and having
said, Did not thou engage to bring thy Wife to me, whom I meant here to have
been avenged of for all the harm she has done me; and thou have brought the
Mother of God, who will punish me, and send me down to Hell. At this the
Soldiers courage failed, he was not able to utter one word; but the blessed
Mary did, saying, Thou wicked spirit, how dare thou offer to think of hurting
one of my servants, thou shall not skape for this; get thee to Hell, etc. The
Devil presently sneaked away, howling; the man (being instructed by her) got
his yet-sleeping Wife by the hand, wakes her, joggs merrily home, and lived (I
cannot tell how long) well together.

And now (if this be true) who that can but say Ave Maria, before he breaks his
fast, need care how he spends the day? hot Adulteries, Thefts, Robberies,
Compacts with Satan, etc. all are brought easily off; not only the blessed
Virgin, but Saint Barbary, (Fol. 155) have been able to secure their Votaries
from dying without Confession and priestly absolution: and we see here, that
they may either have it done effectually upon themselves, or by others in their
stead after their departure, (as in Story 4). Nay, one may have a fair pull to
be brought out of Purgatory or Hell without much harm, (as in Story 3).

This is such a way of making Christ's yoke easy, and his burden light, as he
(doubtless) never thought of; it may be indeed the product of Oral Tradition.

We will have but one more, Fol. 79. latter side.

A little before the world was blessed with the preaching-Order of Saint
Dominick, the blessed Mother was seen (by a certain Monk) on her knees before
Christ, importuning him for the sparance of Mankind: He denied her often, yet
still she interceded; then he thus bespeaks her, O Mother! what can I do more,
or what ought I more to do? I sent Patriarchs, little or no amendment followed;
I sent Apostles, Doctors, Martyrs, still no better; but because it is not lawful
to deny you, I Will send Preachers of my own, meaning the Dominicans; yet another
relates after this manner:

Dominic himself, whilst he was at Rome, saw in a Vision Christ ready with
three Darts to destroy the World: But his Mother comes to him with these words,
Good Son, temper your anger; I have in store a faithful strenuous Champion,
lets see what he can do, and I will add a Coadjutor to him full as worthy: To
this Christ replies, I have accepted your suit; but (pray) what man is this?
Then she pointed out St. Dominic; yes, says he, this is a man indeed: next St.
Francis was showed, and got the same applause; so the establishment of their
Orders were decreed (for no body durst oppose it after so miraculous a Vision)
and what work they have made in the world, let all men judge, or at least we
shall know at the last day.

These are a few out of many thousands, wherein nothing but prodigious folly,
lightness, superstition; nay, Phanatacism (truly so called)can be discerned,
generally used even till that day, as the Printer tells us, having finished that
happy work, Anno 1519.

And here I do call upon the late Author of the Catholic Naked Truth, to tell
us, how he will (with all his flanting Rhetoric) bring off his so highly
celebrated Church from the allowed (publicly countenanced) practice of most
gross Superstition, Idolatry, and Sin; these are not untrue slanders invented
by Protestants, nor single conceits of some whimsical, distempered,
inconsiderate Man (the usual way he takes to daub over the greatest spots in
her face) but the common known mode of those times. Again, he knows well enough
how familiar it has been with them to grant (for money) Licenses of
Concubination; and what was, (for ought I know) is yet the common use of those
Indulgences, which he represents as so holy, so innocent, so justifiable.
Irrationally, whilst he denies the imputation of Christ's merits to truly
penitent Converts; allowing the imputation of the treasure of the-Church (in
Saints merits) by the Pope, to all that have but confessed to a Priest, with
some semblance of Attrition.

Let him receive one Note (and make the best he can of it) in reference to his
so much talked of Oral Tradition: The present Jews seem to be as fond of, and
as careful in that fine thing as ever they were; and we cannot suppose they are
less unwilling then we, every man to deceive his Child; yet, is it not
notorious, what strange and incredible notions they have admitted into their
full belief.

To conclude, I do not think (as this Gentleman well, and with much Art
observes) it probable, that a pack of men could all in a night build an house,
and the next day make all the nation believe it was brought to that place by
Angels, out of a far Country; yet it is (methinks) possible, that (in an Age
wholly given to place their Religion in adoring and adorning Images, in
founding and enriching Monastries) a combined company of men, all of that
frame, might pitch upon such a convenient spot as Loretto, where was a
venerable old Edifice standing, and with ease enough might persuade the people
(who were taught ever and anon to gape after such news from Heaven) that some
Anchorite, Hermit or Monk, had (now) a Revelation, (and with it a Command) to
assure the world, This ancient happy structure had traveled on the backs of
Ministering Spirits (a Century or two before) even as far, and by what Stages
themselves should think fit. He cannot be ignorant how many famous Foundations
have been laid upon the account of such Celestial discoveries; if he be, let
him but peruse that Volume out of which I took the foregoing relations, and he
will find abundance of such a nature, as must needs stop the mouth of his
Credulity, be it as wide and as voracious as it will.

I have read that trim Book wherein the Jesuit Turcillin sweats so much to
prove this weighty point (touching Loretto), and I did it once in the company
of an honest wise man (of Romes Religion) but I dare appeal even to himself,
whether what we found there, gave not occasion for him to run off, and me to
keep my ground.

Implicit Faith ('it is true) involves all, may take in any thing; but he that
finds in that Elaborate Piece, what may create a rational belief (I am sure
there is no Scripture evidence, nor Revelation of that kind for it) must use
better spectacles (or rather magnifying glasses) then ever I coould find out;
and both my Age and other obligations require, that I should make the best
Quest I am any way able. My last reflection (upon what I find in this Authors
41 page) shall be, to take heed how we follow a Multitude.

It was Diana, the Ephesians and all the world were once said (confidently
enough) to Worship.

That we may apply the four or six last pages to our present enquiry, (the
Infallibility of Oral Tradition backed with miracles) Let us suppose, in
reference to the third story, that the French Priest had stood in a Corner,
(when he was a pregnant forth-putting youth) and heard his Father say, If any
Person had a particular Devotion to the blessed Virgin, St. Bridget, Jerome, or
any other Saint, and (committing the care and conduct of his life to their
guidance) was careful (daily) to perform to them, or for their sake, (some
singular Act of Piety (such as saying over so many Aves, Pater-Nosters, or the
like) He might be sure not to fail in his last and great conern; he should not
miss of, before his death, time to Confess, and receive Priestly Absolution: If
he had overheard his grave Parent farther whisper, That in respect of a
married estate in the Clergy (for we will imagine it to be since St. Dunstan's
days) Concubination or Adultery were but Peccadillio's, (a notion that the
frame of this and other Legends were very likely to produce) how could he choose
but give reins to his appetite upon this account; and think he was as good a
Christian as the Ages before had required a man to be? And the succeeding Age,
probably the Ninth, would not see any reason, but to go on in the same path, as
we may conjecture they did, from a considerate view of the hundred Grievances,
by the Germans presented to the Popes Legate a few years after, the publication
of those illustrious Novels.

FINIS.

