Annus Sophiae Jubilaeus.

The Sophick CONSTITUTION: OR, THE Evil Customs of the World Reformed.

A DIALOGUE, Between a Philadept and a Citizen; CONCERNING The Possibility of
the Sophick Transmutation; The Probability that there are Adepts in the World;
And, in that Case, the Duties of Adepts and other Men to each other, and the
Advantages that would accrue from the Observation of those Duties.

To which is added, A Summary of some Conferences with an Artist, etc.

-- Lest I come, and smite the Earth with a Curse.
The crooked Paths shall be made straight.
Ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your Lusts.
Why, even of your selves, judge ye not what is right?
London: Printed for A. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms Inn in Warwick Lane, 1700.

Advertisement.
THese Papers were ready for the Press, in the beginning of this Year, One
Thousand Seven Hundred; that is the Reason they are entitled Annus Jubilaeus.
It is probable some will ask me, Where is the Cui bono of this Dialogue? You
say expressly you are no Adept, and consequently you cannot design, hereby, to
lay the Foundation of a Negotiation: Do you write then for the Adepts sake, in
case there be such Men; or is your aim to persuade them to communicate
themselves to you, though often you appear not to be fully persuaded, your self,
that there is such a Thing as the Philosophers Stone; or perhaps, believing it
to be a mere Imagination, do you only seek to instruct the World, to propose
what you fancy might be Reformed to further the Happiness of Mankind, and do
you essay hereby to put Men upon doing Acts of Love and Charity toward one
another? I answer, There is something of all this; these Questions touch the
several ends I have, at several times, proposed to my self in this Writing:
Howbeit my chiefest desire is, that it be not useless to my Brethren, the
promoting of whose Felicity I shall have the advantage to have endeavored,
whatever the success of it may be, the generality of Men being partial and
selfish, and captivated by their Passions.

The Heads of the Regulations to be considered of, in case Adepts were invited
by a Prince and State.
I. Touching Adepts. II. Touching Religion. III. Touching Government. IV.
Touching Subsidies, and Provisions for the security of the Society. V. Touching
the Governors Duty of taking an equal care of all the Subjects in general. VI.
Touching Law and Physic. VII. Touching Punishments. VIII. Touching Learning
and Education. IX. Touching the way and manner of providing for the Poor. X.
Touching Order and Policy in Cities, Buildings and Commerce; Touching the
improving the State and Riches of the Society, preventing unnecessary Expenses
and Vanities, and Reforming all evil Customs.
Annus Sophiae Jubilaeus. The Sophick CONSTITUTION: OR, The Evil Customs of the
World Reformed. A DIALOGUE, Between a Philadept and a Citizen.
Citizen. GOod morrow to ye, Phil. What News from the Adepts?


Philadept. A good morning to you, Sir: You would be much surprised still, I
find, if, after all, I showed you in Adept.


Cit. I confess, you would do more than I expect.


Phil. But why should you think that impossible?


Cit. And why should you even think it credible that there is such an Art, as
that pretended one of the Transmutation of Metals?


Phil. The Principles of it seem to be rational.


Cit. How, I pray thee? Why may not I as well trasmute Marble or Alablaster
into Silver, as Brass or Copper into Gold?


Phil. The difference is very great. All Metals are of the same kind, and
differ only in some accidental Qualities, which being removed they become
equally pure, having all a metallic Mercury, Salt and Sulphur, some only being
more crude than others, or having contracted some external Impurities in the
diverse Matrixes of the Earth: So that Transmuting of Metals is not such a
wonder as at first we are apt to imagine; it is not changing a Nature into
another Nature; it is only separating Impurities and Digesting, and then the
crude is concocted, and the impure is as the most pure.


Cit. But which way must the Impurities of Metals be purged, and their
Crudities digested; or how do you know, after all, that this will cause a
perfect Transmutation?


Phil. If the Crudities be digested and the Impurities purged, there can remain
but a perfect metallic Sulphur, Salt and Mercury; more than which there cannot
be in any perfect metallic Subject whatsoever, only there may be several
degrees of Purification and Concoction: But the way how to effect that, is
secret, and is that which must be sought out; Philosophers say it is altogether
to be done with one thing, that is, Fire, as you may see in their Writings, to
which therefore I refer you.


Cit. Thank ye heartily, Phil. I design not to break my Head with their
caballistical Cant, their unintelligible, and senseless Fustion. I had rather
make an honest Fellow of thee, and persuade you to rail at all Chemists, and
burn their Books. For, notwithstanding the plausible Story of purifying and
concocting, the Transmutation of Metals is (for ought I see) an imaginary
thing, and most credibly, nothing like it was ever known: Conclude therefore an
Adept's an Ass.


Phil. An Adept is one that can change base Metals into the most perfect Silver
and Gold. He cannot be an Ass, that does this. And why should you think it
improbable, that there should be some Men that can do it, seeing you grant that
the Principles of the Art are plausible? It is more likely that if it be
possible to be done, some Men before now, through God's Blessing, have found it
out. You see daily by experience, that Soap and Water cleanse a foul Cloth, and
that Ink dies it through and through: The Water of the Adepts is Fire; and
Fire is their Soap, and their Tincture. If all these Reasons will not move you,
I Will tell you that some Men have been known to have done extraordinary Cures. I
my self have known some that could draw Gold out of Silver, and Silver out of
Lead. Now if these extraordinary things may be performed, why should the other
be more impossible?


Cit. They cannot be thought impossible by you, if you have actually known some
Adept.


Phil. I never saw, my self, any Man, that I know of, who could transmute the
base into perfect Metals: But I doubt not there are some that are living, who
in all probability have.


Cit. If there were such Men indeed as Adepts, how could it come to pass that
we were acquainted with none of them?


Phil. If Adepts had been publicly known, they would have been in danger,
through the wickedness of Men. But had not Men rendered themselves incapable of
the Communication of Adepts, how happy would the World have been?


Cit. I don't fully understand what you would expect from Adepts, but I Would fain hear
what you think Men obliged to do, to qualify themselves for the Communication
of the Sophi. Would you have us, full of good Nature and Credulity, expose our
selves to the Cheats of every Alchymist, and as soon as any one sets up for a
Philosopher, receive him into our Houses, and allow him no small share of our
Estates?


Phil. There is scarce any Person more undeserving, or more to be despised and
abhorred, than a Cheat in general, and particularly in Chemistry, where
Mountains of Gold are promised, when the Impostor is sensible he has no reason
to hope any thing from the Hermetick Philosophy, but what he can get from other
Men by his Lying and Impudence, and his vast Promises which himself sees no
ground for. On the other hand, there are no Persons that deserve more to be
esteemed and every ways to be respected, than those whom God has chosen to
impart to them the highest Secrets of Nature. They are the Adepti, the Elect,
those who have obtained the most singular Favor, whom God takes for His
particular Servants and Friends, and whom He entrusts with the greatest Riches
and Health, and with the Tree of Life it self, that is, the use of it durante
beneplacito, 'till he think fit to translate them to a better Place, to which
they aspire. Betwixt those two sorts of Men there are others of whom there may
be some good, and somebad, though not so good or so bad as either of the former;
they are those who profess to study the Writings of the Adeptists, but not to
be certain of the Art, are willing to search after it to the best of their
Power, but have not all the Conveniences necessary to that end, and therefore
desire the help and assistance of those that are able to give it. These may be
termed the Mercenary Candidates of Alchimy, to distinguish them from those that
seek the Art by themselves and at their own Charge. Now these three sorts of
Chemists deserve to be treated very differently.


Cit. What should be done, do you think, to the Impostors?


Phil. They ought to be severely punished by the Laws, as Cheats and Robbers.


Cit. And how are they to be known from other Pretenders?


Phil. They must be tried by their Works, as other Malefactors. I have heard of
one who frequented a Bookseller's Shop, where some Chemical Books were sold. A
certain Person coming to buy one of those Books, the Impostor fixes his Eyes
upon him, and looks as if he were in an ecstasy; presently after follows him,
tells him, he has found him to be the Man to whom he might discover himself,
assures him that by infallible Experience, he is certain of being Master of the
Art; in short, after some interviews, makes proposal of borrowing Money for the
Work, but in fine was discovered to have made the same Addresses ^o other Men,
to have drawn considerable Sums from them, from thence forth to have come at
them no more, and to have spent the Money, not in an Elaboratory, but in lewd
Houses, and with lewd Companions. Hanging is not too severe a Punishment for
such Wretches.


Cit. What Treatment deserve your Mercenary Artists?


Phil. If it be uncertain whether they be honest Men, or Deceivers, Men cannot
be too wary, lest they be imposed upon by them; there cannot be too much
Circumspection used in this Case. However, they ought not to be affronted or
injured, in the mean time, as long as it is not evident that they have base
Designs; for that were the highest unjustice, and would be to run the hazard of
wronging innocent Persons, and Persons perhaps most particularly acceptable to
God. When it appears that they are wicked Men, who have no other design than to
deceive others, their Addresses ought to be rejected with Scorn and just Anger,
and other Men ought to be warned from them. But if it be credible that they
mean well, and that they are not unqualified for the Art, those that have some
faith in it, and can, without hurting themselves, venture something toward the
obtaining of it, may do as they find themselves disposed. It is possible that
the Money may be well bestowed.


Cit. But how shall it be known, who are those that do not mean well, or those
that are qualified for the Art?


Phil. They may be known by their Works, by their Proposals, and by their
Skill. Any Man that has a Genius this way, may guess whether the Pretenders
have a Taste of the Art, and are likely to make any Progress and Discoveries in
it. Deceivers run upon Whimsies, work out of kind, upon unlikely Subjects, and
offer Violence to Reason and Nature, and to the Writings of generally approved
Authors. Then their very Addresses and Propositions are unphilosophical. They
do not care whom they deal with, so they can but get by them. And if you do but
give them good Wages for the present, they make no Conditions about the
management of the Elixir, in case it should be attained unto; they leave that
at your disposal, they make you wholly Master of it, they yield to you all
their Pretentions as to that, you may make them what share, and you may make
what use of it you please. But true Men, who really think they have some Skill,
and who sincerely fear God, are most nice as to this point. So they but settle
this as it ought to be, they are satisfied, and will not be so exact and
interessed as to the other Conditions.


Cit. In the Essay concerning Adepts, which you showed me, 50 l. a year Wages
is proposed, and 30 l. for Board; which is a pretty sophical Sum.


Phil. That Is a Proposal for noble Persons, as it is there said, ( P. 48.) but
such Wages are Arbitrary, and as for the reckoning of 30 l. for Board, that was
to put Things to the utmost, and it was also in part occasioned from the
accounting of a Domestick's Salary, by a Person of Quality, giving 15 l. Wages,
and reckoning the Board 30 l. a year. Howbeit, well qualified Artists will not
desire unreasonable Terms: I have heard of one who offered to some Persons (for
whom he had a great esteem) to make this Agreement, to accept of 60 l. a year,
in all, for Board and Pension, and lay down an Employment of 120 l. per Annum,
to give himself wholly to that Work. Proferred kindness was not accepted of,
yet the like Offers possibly will not always be to be had. But that is off of
the business. To return; It is certain that to accomplish this Art, as Geber
observed, some Charges are necessary, especially for a good setting up, to have
Things convenient; and it is indispensibly necessary to have a Workman very
strong and healthful of Body: Now it is possible that he that has exactly the
Theory, has not sufficiently these outward Necessaries, without which, though he
do what he can, he will not be able to obtain the desired end; wherefore an
Artist may need Assistance. But Artists who have some hopes, and see some
probability of Success, in time, (though then they want Means to make necessary
Trials) will be very careful whom they deal with, and upon what Conditions, as
touching the use and management of the Elixir, in case it should ever be got.
They will not leave it in their Partner's Power to abuse so great a Treasure;
and to the Signing of Covenants, they will require the Confirmation of the most
sacred Oaths.


Cit. Some Gentlemen would not like so many Stipulations; or else would laugh
at them, when made.


Phil. The more's the pity. Such Persons should not be dealt with. Skilful
Artists, if they fear God, will make a conscience of having any thing to do
with them. And certainly to observe the Cautions that are necessary, the furest
way is that it be so ordered, that those whom a skilful Artist covenants with,
may know and see nothing of what shall be done, they being only, by Agreement
and Oath, to have a certain Portion of transmuted Metal, in case of Success.


Cit. What is the last thing, by which those may be known, who are qualified
for the Philosopher's work?


Phil. A good Life and Conversation. Philosophers cannot be expected to be
absolutely free from all failings, no more than the best Men; but they must be
free from all evil Habits, else the Blessing of God can never be thought to
attend them, and without God's special Grace it is in vain to hope for Success
in this Art.


Cit. You Would give a great Idea of it. What to think of the matter, I don't well
know. But to follow the thread of our Discourse, what Treatment do you esteem
is due to Adepts?


Phil. There are diverse sorts of Adepts, and diverse sorts of Men whom Adepts
may have to do with.


Cit. Hold; these Distinctions will carry you far, and, I presume, to little
purpose, unless you resolve one Question: Pray, how shall these Adepts be
certainly known? By what you have given me to understand, they will not be so
complaisant as to teach one presently their Art; nay, it is great odds if they
will have so much confidence in a Man, as to trust him with a little of their
Powder. Must we then believe 'em upon their word?


Phil. I would have satisfied you on that Point in due time; and what I was
saying was necessary in order to that, as you shall see. In general, Adepts
will not at all communicate themselves unless it be to Men of known probity,
and on whose Fidelity and Discretion they may rely: But to convince them of
what they are, they will not scruple to let them see something of that which
they can do; to make Projection before them, --


Cit. Thank ye, Phil. As for their showing the Projection, I would not give
them a Button for that. Don't I know that your false Crucibles with double
bottoms, your hollow Coals, your iron Rods with Gold at the end of 'em, your
golden Lead, and the like, will make red Precipitate pass for the Stone, and
Impostors for Adepts?


Phil. Not if you choose your Lead, make use of your own Coals, provide the
Crucibles and all the Utensils your self, and make the Projection with your own
Hands, the Adept too being at a distance: But if he be under restraint from
communicating the Powder, he may put into another Body's Hands the Gold made by
the Powder, which all Goldsmiths will know from the Natural, it being much
finer; and he may produce an imperfect kind of Gold, white or red, which is
exactly of the Nature of other Gold, (save that it will not so easily melt,)
and which none but true Adepts can make: And if he be an Adept of the higher
rank, he may work wonderful Cures in a very little time. For, as I said, there
are several sorts of Adepts, some knowing more than others, and some really
knowing all the parts of the Art, but not having actually wrought all as yet
with their Hands, though having done enough to be termed Sophi.


Cit. Well; and what are the several kinds of Men, that Adepts may communicate
themselves to? Rich or Poor, those of the Commonality or Nobility, such as are
in Power, or that have no Power?


Phil. None of these several ranks of Men are excluded from the possibility of
having the Communication of Adepts. Now if you will give me leave to put the
Question to you, What Treatment do you, your self, think should be due from
these several Persons to the Adeptists?


Cit. I don't well know what are the Obligations of other Men to the Sophi; but
to speak sincerely, I am apt to believe that most People would make it their
only business to get what they could out of them?


Phil. O World! wretched, wicked World! when will you cease to make good Men
miserable, and to be the Authors of your own misery? Keep your selves private
still, my Reverend Fathers, and most Honored Friends! The Hour's not yet come.
Propter Peccata, tardantur munera grata.


Cit. But yet, I pray you, what do you think requisite?


Phil. That Men would religiously consider of it, put themselves in the Adepts
room, and deal toward them, as they would that other Men should deal toward
themselves, if themselves were Adepts. They should consider that Adepts are
Persons dear to God, His particular Favorites; That they are the Men of God,
and Men after God's own Heart, that seek not their own Glory, and that have no
esteem, for the Vanities of this World, but whose chief aim and desire is the
Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind: That therefore they ought to be
respected, loved, and assisted; That they ought to be looked upon as the
Ambassadors, and Commissioners of God; That their Person is sacred; That then
they ought to be protected and desended by all that know them, and that their
Endeavors for the good of Men ought to be furthered and encouraged. The Poor
should be glad to do them what Service they could, to be of some use to promote
the Happiness of the World. The Rich should make an Offering of their Power and
Riches to the Glory of God, and esteem that their greatest Happiness.


Cit. But should Adepts do nothing for their Friends and Benefactors?


Phil. We may speak of that, by and by: Adepts know their Duty, and will not be
wanting on their part.


Cit. However, we should be glad to know what they judge to be their part. But
now I think of it, there is one doubt I would have resolved. You have intimated
that rich Men should assist Adepts with their Riches; but how can Adepts stand
in need of such an Assistance, if it be true that they have the Art to make as
much Gold as they please?


Phil. They may be Adepts, and not have brought yet their Powder to that
Multiplication, which is necessary to make great quantities of Gold. And it is
not enough to have Gold, it must be changed for current Coin: Now rich Men may
do that, getting it minted for the Adept, and if they fear and love God, they
ought to do it. And when they are convinced that a Person, whom they know, is
an Adept, but has not brought yet the Stone to its Perfection, they ought to
offer him all the Assistance and Protection they are capable of, even their own
Houses, and Estates, and to be themselves their Agents, and their Guards; and
all this for the sake of God.


Cit. I Would make my Conditions first, I think, and would not stand to a Chemist
his Courtesy. For every Penny I Would have a Pound.


Phil. Then you would do all for your self, and nothing for God; and the Adept
might be recalled, before he had so much as provided for the necessary
Subsistence of his Friends, or done any public Good.


Cit. But how should I know an Embrio-Adept, or an Infant-Sophi, that has not
Gold enough yet for his own occasions?


Phil. By the same signs that I have told you Adepts may be known in general.
For if he be a true Infant-Adept, as you call him, he may do, at least, in some
small measure, what other Adepts do; for he cannot at all be denominated an
Adeptist, that cannot produce pure Gold made by Alchimy, and the imperfect Gold
I have spoken of before; and in some time, he may be able to work some Cures.


Cit. Then I would live for ever, if I knew an Adeptist.


Phil. You must desire to live for ever in Heaven. That Is the only Seat of
perfect, undisturbed, and lasting Happiness. God will have all wise Men
withdraw their Affections from this World, and fit themselves for a better
Place. It is appointed for all Men once to die. Adepts will not destroy the
Order of Nature. And if any resisted the Sentence, God, in anger, would force
them to submit to it, against their Wills, and would for ever drive them out of
Paradise, and exclude them from his Rest.


Cit. What advantage then should one reap, by being an Adept?


Phil. The advantage of doing Good, or at least of endeavoring it, and being
an example to the World.


Cit. For my part, if I were an Adept, and could make as much Gold as I
pleased, I Would do good to my self in the first place, and then to my Friends.


Phil. That were not unlawful, but we must imitate God, and do good to all.


Cit. Before I thought of any Body else, to tell you the Truth, I Would do my own
Business.


Phil. And what would you do for your self?


Cit. I should consider of that. But what do you think, your self, that other
Men would do?


Phil. Many would do foolish Things, and Things disagreeable to God. But,
alas, remember you not the weighty Question put by our Savior: What shall it
profit a Man, if he gain () the whole World, and lose his own Soul?


Cit. But could I not, without losing my Soul, go, for instance, to a Prince,
in case I were an Adept, and propose to him to give him a share of my
Treasures, if he would make me Partner with him, of his Dignity?


Phil. No Adept would ever do that. Adepts in being the Friends of God, are
above all Human Glory, and it would be a sin in them, who know the full extent
and obligations of Virtue, to accept of worldly Honor: It is their
indispensible Duty, to refuse every thing that is accompanied with Vanity and
Pride, Pomp and Ostentation, and that seems, in the least, to trample under
foot our fellow Creatures, as if we were of an other Make than they. If Adepts
forgot themselves, God would punish them.


Cit. But suppose I were originally poor, and now had the Art to make Gold,
could not I, at least, address my self to some rich Man to exchange a great
quantity of my Gold, without danger, and at little loss, and put my self in a
Capacity of enriching my Family, and making a good Figure in the World?


Phil. Adepts will not make a Figure in the World. If an Adept left a Hundred a
Year, with a good Calling, to every one of his Children, he would reckon to
have made a most plentiful Provision for his Family.


Cit. A Calling! what; should my Children learn a Trade?


Phil. Adepts will not bring up their Children to do nothing.


Cit. What need my Children work? If I were an Adept, could not I leave 'em the
Art?


Phil. The Art must not be communicated, for love or kindred, but purely for
vertue-sake: He that is indubitably qualified for it, let him have it, under
the philosophical Seal; but it must not be communicated to many.


Cit. How should I know, who is qualified for the Art?


Phil. If he be a virtuous, religious, conscientious Person, that fears and
loves God, that habitually lives well, that delights to do good, that has a
Christian Affection for his fellow Creatures, that despises Luxury and Vanity,
that abhors Injustice and all manner of Vice, that loves Temperance, Mediocrity
and Simplicity of Life, that is zealous for the Glory of God and the Good of
Men, that seeks not worldly Honor, that can keep a Secret, and that will bind
himself by the most sacred and solemn Oaths not to make an ill use of the
Elixir; he is well qualified.


Cit. Alas; where shall such a one be found?


Phil. 'Till he be found, and be certainly known to be such, the Art must not
be revealed. There is no going hastily, and then repenting, in a Business of
this Nature. The Adept must be able to give a good account of his Trust to
Almighty God, or else be for ever reprobated: If he lightly, and for any
reasons whatsoever, discover the Art to an unworthy Friend, that shall make a
bad use of it, he must answer for all the miscarriages of his wicked Disciple,
who possibly may make the greatest part of Men miserable, through his Avarice,
Ambition and Haughtiness, and oppress religious and conscientious Persons. It
would be even difficult enough to find a rich Man so virtuous, whom an Adept
could trust for the Dealings he should have with him.


Cit. Why so? If you or I knew an Adept, could not we go to some rich Man, of
good Repute, to make Terms with him, obtain particularly a solemn Promise of
his Protection, and require the most religious Confirmations to the said Terms?
And could not the Adept afterward, treat safely in Person?


Phil. These things are easy in the Speculation: All the difficulty is when
they come to be put in Practice. Not but that there may be some rich Men that
are good and virtuous, and capable to keep a Secret, if Adepts knew them.


Cit. But must nothing be ventured? You know the Proverb. Would it be better
for Adepts always to lie close, and live by themselves, like Owls? Would it not
be more noble and generous for them, to help an illustrious and heroic, a
magnanimous, virtuous and charitable Prince, the Father of his People, the
Deliverer of Nations, the Refuge of the Distressed, the Restorer of Religion,
the Defender of Liberty? --


Phil. Ah, Sir, would to God, he were, in his infinite Bounty, pleased, if
there are Adepts in the World, to send some of them to this great and good
Prince! But these Deliberations must come from God, and not from Men.


Cit. Why, Phil. God will not be against good Purposes, that tend to his Glory,
and the good of Men. What other end is it credible that such a Prince can
propose to himself?


Phil. It is true: And I heartily wish that if there are such Men as Adepts,
they would seriously consider of it. But I believe God's Providence must be
concerned herein, in a most particular manner; and if the best Man came,
without it, to enjoy any of the Advantages of the Elixir, God might confound
the best Designs, and give the Men over to diverse Temptations and Miseries.


Cit. Come, Phil. you say you fear God, and really wish the Happiness of the
World, and the general good of Mankind: If it be so, and if you were an Adept,
should not you take hold of all Opportunities to do good?


Phil. These things do not concern us; and Adepts, no doubt, understand them
better than we.


Cit. For my part, I can scarce be brought to believe firmly that there are
Adepts, for these two Reasons: First, Because it is said, That if there are
Adepts, they must be good Men, and surely good Men would not live in the World
without doing good according to their Capacity. Secondly, It is not likely that
Men that could make Gold should constantly lie hid, and thereby deny themselves
all the Comforts of Life. I might add, that we see no Monuments of this
Gold-making Trade; for, first or last, we should have had some demonstration of
it, and we should see Gold more plentiful than it is.


Phil. What you say you might add to your two Reasons, may be comprised in and
answered with the first. It is Men's Faults, and not the Adepts, if Adepts
cannot communicate themselves with full safety, and assurance that they shall
be always Masters of their Liberty and Elixir, shall do no more with it than
they please, and shall put it to no other use than such as they like. And this
very thing answers your second Reason; for shall Adeps, for the Pleasures of
this Life, run the hazard of doing more than they can answer to God? Alas,
Adepts care little for the Enjoyments of this World, though they be subject to
Passions like other Men. They have other Comforts than those the World can
give. Being, as it were, under the Cross in most parts of the Earth, they are
wholly intent on a better State. Besides, they approve best of simplicity of
Life. An Adept will not have rich Cloths, Furniture and Equipage, nor will
accept of Titles, or Honor; those Things, and Philosophy are inconsistent: He
looks upon all Men as being equal and Brethren, and upon himself as no better
than others; he would not have others respect him, more than he would respect
them: As for Titles and Dignities, he looks upon them, as Things very
dangerous, and not easily reconcilable with Christian Humility; he would have
all Men go plain, even plainer than the Quakers, and Thou one another without
vain Appellation, and not use the vanity of Salutes, nor desire the vain honor
of being saluted, and be thereby distinguished from poor Men, who by that means
are humbled and afflicted, seeing themselves abased and despised. It were well,
if there was not such respect of Persons; and if those that are in Office, and
have some Degrees and Dignities above others, were content to be well served
and obeyed. That would be more Christian-like, and it is certain it would be
sufficient. The Subordination is very well preserved among the Turks, and among
the Quakers, who use no Ceremonies.


Cit. You amaze me!


Phil. Look ye; it is very credible that this is the Sense of the Adepts.


Cit. How comes it to pass, then, that you conform not to it?


Phil. I am not in Circumstances to do so, depending of other Men that would
not approve of it. I believe something may be done for Peace-sake, the chief
Essentials of Religion being retained in general, and the great Duties of
Justice, Moderation and Charity, being witnessed unto, and professed.


Cit. You are one of the anointed and inspired! I warrant, you don't allow the
use of the Sacraments!


Phil. Yea, and believe their necessity too. I am no Quaker. But I love that
which is good, wherever I find it; and would force no Body to do any thing
against his Conscience.


Cit. Do you believe it unlawful to make War?


Phil. Not when it is for the Defense and Security of a People.


Cit. Do you think it a sin to govern Men?


Phil. Far from that, I esteem it the highest Virtue to do it well.


Cit. Why then, would you not accept of some Government, if it were lawfully
offered you? What! If the Kings of Sweeden and Poland, for instance, were
willing to associate you to them, or if some Republic would put her self under
your Protection, and make you their Sovereign, would you refuse them if you
were an Adept?


Phil. An Adept, as I said before, must refuse all vain Glory, all worldly
Honor, all Pomp and Ostentation.


Cit. But he should take hold of fair Opportunities of doing universal good. He
might, if you will, refuse all personal Honor, all Ceremonies, and pompous
Attendance, keep himself as private as he could desire, and see none but those
he had Business with, and whom he would send for; never eat in Public, nor
with any Company, if he did not like it, much less with any manner of Pomp,
wave all pompous Style, and be distinguished only by some modest Title, as The
Commissary General, or the like, be called barely by his own name, answer to no
Body that did not Thou him, nor admit any that pulled off the Hat in his
Presence, not suffer his Hand to be kissed, nor the knee to be bowed before
him, and stipulate that he might be as plain as he would, Thou every Body, and
use no Ceremonies: All this might be granted, and then why should he not accept
a part in the Government?


Phil. This were possible, perhaps, if Adepts would accept of Power, as it is
credible they would never do; They are not like other Men; They are not
ambitious; They wonder that Princes should fight to enlarge their
Sovereignties; They look upon Governing as a trouble, and trouble is not
naturally desired; They esteem therefore that none can be willing to take it
upon them, except Men would be governed well, and suffer all ill Customs to be
reformed.


Cit. I don't know how far this Reformation should go, nor consequently how far
it would be acceptable to the Governed. I thought an Adept would have had
nothing to think of, but to make Endowments for Hospitals, Schools and
Colleges, and the like. However, there might be this Expedient to make all
well, in case an Adept, and a Nation should grow weary of one another; the
Adept might be quietly and peaceably discharged, and return to a private Life,
and let the Nation govern it self as it would. For my part, were I a
Sophi-Emperor, I would busy my self only to do what good might easily be done,
and I Would take all innocent Pleasure. I would make Provision for the Poor, the
Lame, the Blind, for Children, Widows and old People; and to recreate my self
after Business; I would have the finest Walks, and Gardens in the Universe; I
should also delight in seeing Soldiers disciplined, and in having a great
number of Guards, the choicest Men in the World.


Phil. An Adept would think it unworthy of him to provide himself Guards. If he
keep himself private, he need none. If he governed, as you suppose, his People
might look to him, if they thought him worth their guarding: If any mischance
happened him, they would be the most punished, and the greatest losers.


Cit. You Would have all People be exact in their Morals; but what if they did not
do their Duty?


Phil. They should answer it to God.


Cit. True; but I Would do what I could, that they should answer it also to the
Laws. For a great many Men are moved only by present Rewards or Punishments.


Phil. There Is nothing indeed more to be desired, than that all just and
rational Laws were the Measure of Men's Actions.


Cit. They ought certainly to be so. Pray, then, suppose you were an Adept, and
were invited, as I said, to some share of Government, what Customs would you
reform, what Laws would you desire to be enacted, what Conditions would you
have?


Phil. That would require a mature Consideration.


Cit. But what do you now think?


Phil. To tell you all that should come in my Thoughts, concerning what might
possibly be reformed in the World, would carry us too far. I should not have
done in an hour.


Cit. I Will hear you patiently.


Phil. The Task you lay upon me is considerable; but I will not undertake to
perform it with any regularity and exactness, nor will you expect it, speaking
of this in Conversation, and as an Amusement. Indeed, I think there can be no
Castles in the Air more agreeable than this. It were well if Thoughts of this
nature were sometime entertained: What good a Man would do, if he had Power. By
this means all ill Customs might be discovered, examined, and in time remedied.
For it cannot but be the desire of every well minded Man, to rectify to the
best of his power that which appears to him to be amiss. There are many things
which are evidently so; The Perniciousness of some is not altogether so
conspicuous to every one; Some are of the greatest consequence; And some though
not so material, yet have their bad influences: And some Practices are
neglected, which in a high measure, and others which in a lower degree would be
conducive to Men's Happiness, here and hereafter. I shall not treat of these
Things, but hint some of them, as they shall present themselves to my Thoughts.

If I was then an Adept, and were to negotiate with a Prince and Country, as
you have put the case, I would first of all have these Matters taken into
Deliberation.

First, Touching Adepts. It should be considered that Adepts, if there are such
Men, are the Servants of God, and dear to Him, seeing they are Men who seek the
Kingdom and Glory of God in the first place; and denying worldly Lusts, live
religiously and virtuously, and are zealous of good Works, and particularly of
doing good, looking for the glorious coming of God our Savior. Therefore it
should be in the first place regulated, and provision made that all Adepts,
when known, should be protected, and maintained in their full Liberty, as other
Men would desire to be, if they were Adepts: Otherwise, it were both the
greatest Injustice, and the highest Presumption that Men can be guilty of; for
thereby Men should not only injure and oppress the Innocent, (whom God will
avenge, for right Dear in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his Saints, and
of them God says, who touches them touches the Apple of my Eye;) but in
persecuting Adepts, they should also be found to fight against God, for Adepts
seek only the Glory and Kingdom of God. Woe be therefore to the wicked Persons,
who are guilty of so great an Impiety, if they do not timely repent! May God
suddenly change their Hearts, and make the Way plain before his Servants and
Ministers, that they be not always rejected, but may be at last received; that
Righteousness and Equity may flourish in the World! I would not have Adepts be
only permitted to traffic of their Gold for their Occasions, and the Relief of
the Poor, but I would also (if it was thought good) have them to be admitted to
the share of Government that were offered, that is, if they approved of it. Was
I a Sophi, I would not meddle with the Public Administration of Affairs; and
it is highly probable Adepts would not neither, if they might. But what were
chiefly to be desired for Adepts, is that their Persons were declared sacred,
next to the Person of the Prince, and that they might have so much Power (by
the Public Acts and Protection of the Prince and Nation,) as to live freely,
and without danger, and to be absolutely free to give their assistance, or to
deny it, as the Acts of the Nation they lived in, displeased or pleased them,
and, in their Opinion, tended effectually to the Glory of God and the Good of
Mankind. I would therefore have a strong House to be built, in fashion like a
College, in the middle of the Metropolis, and this College accommodated with
necessary Furniture and Attendants. The Attendants should be sworn; and the
Government should publish a solemn Declaration, engaging themselves, by the
most sacred Protestations, to guard and protect in full Liberty the Adepts that
should repair to the said House, admit them to a share of Authority (that were
limited) if they would accept of it; and if they would not, to make, however,
that College a sure Refuge to them, to permit them to have what Servants or
Attendants they pleased, and to take of them their Gold at the ordinary rate at
which that Metal is sold, providing them whatsoever they would have at the
Market or current Price, exacting nothing extraordinary from them for all this,
being content with what Gratifications they would voluntarily make to the
Public; in short, leaving them their entire Liberty, and guarding and
protecting them against all danger. Such a Preparation being made for the
Reception of the Adepts, a Declaration like that I have mentioned, but more
particularized, solemn and full, would certainly invite them, if there are any
such Men in the World. (Then would come to pass, what one of them foretells of
himself and his Brethren: -- I do not write these things, says he, out of a
vain Conception, but I see them in the Spirit. When we Adepts shall return from
the four Corners of the Earth, nor shall we fear any Snares that are laid
against our Lives, but we shall give thanks unto the Lord our God. -- And now
glorious things are declared of the City of God. -- The New Jerusalem shall
abound with Gold in the Streets, and the Gates thereof shall be made of entire
Stones, and most precious Ones; and the Tree of Life, in the midst of Paradise,
shall give Leaves for the healing of the Nations. -- These things will
accompany our so long expected and suddenly approaching Redemption. O Blessed
the Governor and State to whom they shall come!) Now if there came never so
many, I would associate them to me if I were an Adept, and had Power; for there
were no reason I should have more Authority than they: Contrariwise, they being
my Elders in Philosophy, should have the preference of Seniority, and I would
undoubtedly yield it them, only all should have equal Privileges, and equal
Votes in determining of public Benefits, etc.

Secondly, Touching Religion. Supposing I had to do with Protestants, I would
have the Protestant Principles exactly considered and followed, that Scriptural
and Comprehensive Terms of Union being agreed unto, there might be Love and
Peace among those that walk by the same Rule; there being no Edification, where
there is no Charity, and where Partiality, Animosity and Contention is
preferred before the Simplicity of the Gospel; it being also a shame to hold
Principles in the Theory, and visibly to contradict them in the Practice; this,
in fine, being the cause of all the Confusion among Protestants, and being such
a Scandal as infinitely prejudiceth those from without against the Reformation,
and even against Christianity in general. The common Principles of Religion
should be chiefly insisted on, and all Men should be carefully taught them, and
obliged to live according to 'em. No body should be forced in Matters that are
controverted; for all Religion is taken away, if it be performed contrary to
the inward Persuasion: Liberty of Conscience should therefore universally be
allowed to all that are Religious, and sollicitous to worship God after that
manner which they sincerely believe to be most agreeable to his Will. But, on
the other hand, no Person, should be suffered to live irreligiously, and
without God in the World; for that is even contrary to the common Light of
Nature, and right Reason. All, in every Parish, should declare, before the
Officers of the National Church, what Persuasion they are of, and what Sect
they will adhere to. If any did not belong to any Sect that is known in the
Country where he lives, he should be examined to see if he is sincerely of his
Profession, with knowledge of the cause, and if he can give an Account and
Reason of his Faith; then he should be instructed in the Principles of the
Protestant Religion, and made to understand them, and to be able to judge of
them, and should be exhorted to Unity; in fine, if he persisted in his
Superstition, it should be considered, First, Whether no part of his Worship
were contrary to the Duties of a peaceable Subject; for if it were so, he
should be kept under restraint, otherwise he should enjoy his Liberty;
Secondly, it should be considered whether he be a religious and sincere Man,
that abstains from the public Worship, through tenderness and scruples of
Conscience, and not out of Libertinism; for if a Libertine and an irreligious
Person, he should be fined and corrected, noted with Infamy, and declared
incapable of any Trust, 'till a known and lasting Repentance; if a pious and
conscientious Man, he should be tolerated, though never so erroneous in his
Speculations. Those that adhered to some Sect, of which there were some
Congregation within or near the Parish, should be obliged to learn their
Principles well, and particularly the common Principles of Religion, to be able
to give a good account of them; they should be obliged to fix upon some
Congregation of which they should be Members, to frequent constantly the
public Worship in the said Congregation; and the Officers of that
Congregation, should be bound to give an account of those Persons to the
Parish-Officers of the National Church, that if they gave not attendance to, or
behaved not themselves well in their Congregation, they might be accordingly
punished. Those that are Members of the National Church, should be obliged to
frequent it constantly. No Parish should be larger, than to be able to contain
all the Parishioners in the Church with ease; and the Church should lie the
most convenient, in the middle of the Parish. There should be public Worship
in every Church, constantly, four times a day, every day of the Year; and every
Parishioner should be present to the public Worship twice a day constantly,
otherwise he should, first, be subject to the Church Censures, and should be
admonished openly in the Church, and, sinally, if he repented not, after
warning, he should be sined, by the Civil Power, as a scandalous and obnoxious
Person. It were a shame for Christians to plead Occupations, to excuse them
from worshipping God publicly one half hour twice a day, or to offer any Plea,
for not using a short Prayer in their Families, particularly when they receive
God's Creatures, when Jews and Turks, when in their own Countries, would blush
to show so little Devotion. But it is, yet, a greater and more burning shame,
that among Christians there should be millions of Men that are ignorant of the
first Elements of Christianity, and are not taught to give one Reason why they
should be of the Christian Religion. I would therefore that Protestants should
be constantly Catechized, publicly, or privately, all the year round, 'till
they were thirty years of Age, or knew their Religion well, and were able to
give a good account of it, not by Rote, but by Reason and Discourse. Custom
would make it easy to them. There should be several sorts of Catechisms
printed and used, not only for the youngest Children, but some also for more
aged Persons, where the Prooss of Natural Religion, of the Resurrection of
Christ, and the Truth of Christianity were clearly taught. And they should have
Discourses read to them in an exact order upon all the Duties of Religion, and
all the parts of Virtue, upon the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the Decalogue,
the 5th, 6th, and 7th Chapters of St. Matthew, 1 Cor. 13, etc. Preachers
generally preach upon arbitrary Subjects, without Order or Regularity; so that
a Preacher shall have lived ten years in a Parish, without having explained to
his Auditors one half of their Duties, commonly contenting himself to exhort
them to Obedience, in general, in every Discourse; whereas they should
understand well every Command which they ought to obey, and should have
represented to them the several Considerations and Motives to Obedience
necessary as to every particular. I would therefore that the Book of the whole
Duty of Man, and the best Books that should be printed from time to time upon
all the Parts of Religion, should be read in an exact Order, one after another,
in every Church, every Lord's Day in the Afternoon: And then, as for the
morning Exercise, it might be left to the Parish-Minister to choose what Subject
he would enlarge upon. There are several Points which are not, ordinarily,
treated at all, as not being easy to be touched upon, or not very necessary to
be taken notice of, concerning which nevertheless an infinite number of People
want both to be informed and admonished of their Duty; as the Duty of
Resignation, the Disposition of being ready to suffer for Religion, and several
Branches of Justice, Humility and Charity, that generally are not regarded; the
beginnings and lesser Acts of Impurity, against which scarce general Warnings
and Admonitions are ever given, as if Purity and Continence in the least Acts
contrary to Chastity were not necessary to qualify Men for Heaven; the
heathenish Superstition of observing lucky or unlucky Seasons and Days, of
being awed by Omens, as the spilling of Salt, the crossing of a Hare, the
flight of some Birds, using Charms for Cures, etc. I would have these Things to
be taken notice of and rectified. It is certain, that those that have the cure
of Souls, do not give sufficient Instructions and Exhortations to their People,
nor ordinarily can well do it, because they have too many committed to their
Charge. A Minister should not only know all his Parishioners by their Names and
Sirnames, but should be personally and intimately acquainted with them, should
be informed of all their Dispositions and Inclinations, and should not only
visit them, as their Guide, when they are Sick, but chiefly and most frequently
when they are in Health, to prepare them for a good Death and a happy Eternity.
It is not enough to give some general Exhortations, in public, in a formal
Discourse that cannot be comprehended by the three quarters of the Multitude:
Familiar Dialogues and Conversations, in Meekness and with Gravity, are
incomparably more home; because generals are applied to every one's Case, and
every one's Difficulties are resolved. I would therefore that all
Parish-Ministers were accountable, to their Superintendants or Bishops, whether
they had a particular Conference, concerning Religion, of one hour at least,
every Month, with every one of their Parishioners without Exception. These
religious Conferences should be in the room of the primitive Confessions in the
ancient Church. There should be no day without some of them. And every day, at
a certain time, all the Catechumens in the Parish should repair to the Church,
to be instructed during two hours, and should not only be asked their Catechism
by Rote, but should be taught to give some answer of themselves upon every
Subject. There are few Ministers that spend the quarter of their time in the
discharge of their Duty: But I Would make no Agreement, as that you have supposed,
or Ministers should have all their time taken up in the Offices belonging to
their Charge, and should not pass in the World for an unprofitable Burden, and
a Company of useless Men. You Will say, Can Men live without Diversion? They must
find Diversion in their Employment. Shall Ministers preach to the Men of this
World, that they must be assiduous as well as faithful in their Vocations, and
shall they themselves be careless in their high Calling, and do the Work of God
negligently? They may have the Diversion of sometimes writing popular
Discourses, then reading excellent Authors, then visiting their Parishioners
and conferring with them, then instructing the Catechumens, afterward they may
take the Recreation of a Walk, of reading News and diverting themselves in
their own Familiy, familiarly conversing with their Friends, and instructing
their Servants, and their Children. But on pain of being suspended and deposed,
they should not be permitted to spend their time in Gaming, or Fishing,
Fowling, Hunting, or any Employment besides that of watching to their Flock.
The Reformation of Manners depends, in a very great measure, on the good
Example and assiduous Instructions of those whose Office it is to teach the
People; and if they lose their Savor, wherewith should the whole Lump be
seasoned? It is therefore of the highest consequence to insist upon this, and
indispensably require effectual Provision to be made that Ministers acquit
themselves exactly and fully of their Duty. All the Ministers should send every
Year to their Diocesan an account of the Texts they have preached upon, and a
Discourse, at the least, of the bigness of a Sermon, upon some Theological
Subject; and the Discourses which the Bishop should judge fittest, should be
printed. A certain number of Parishes should be associated, throughout the
Nation, to erect a Lecture, upon some weekday, in the biggest Town within the
Circuit, and all the Ministers of the said Parishes should be obliged to meet
there, that day, not only to be present at the Lecture-Sermon in the Morning,
but also to confer together, during three hours at least, in the Church, in the
Afternoon, to propose Difficulties, to render an account of their Behavior,
and of the state of their Flock to one another, and to perform Theological
Exercises, quoting all the Texts of Scripture in the original Languages, that
they might be all obliged to continual study, and not permitted to leave off
the reading of Theology as soon as they have some Preferment, as many too
ordinarily do. It is not one Minister in a hundred, that ever studieth to
understand the Bible, as he studied a Classical Author, or that so much as ever
reads it through with some Commentaries and Annotations; though it be his
Profession to explain the Bible, and though it be granted on all hands by
Protestants, that the Word of God explains it self, one place by another, that
the purest Theology is to be drawn from thence, and that it is therefore the
most necessary study. But to put a necessity on all Ministers to understand the
Bible, they should be obliged to explain two whole Chapters of it every
Lord's Day Morning, and two other Chapters in the Afternoon, the one Chapter
being always the first Lesson of the Service, in the Old Testament, and the
other, the second Lesson in the New: The Lesson should first be read
altogether, and then briefly explained, one Verse after another. Custom would
render this very easy. But if some could not perform it themselves, there
should be such Explications of all the Verses of the Bible printed, and they
should be permitted to choose those which they liked, and to read them, making
what alterations they found necessary, if in any place they judged they
understood the Text better than the Explicator in that occasion. By this means
no Minister could be excused from explaining all the Word of God to his People.
But you will say, Must there be no Prayers, and how will a Minister be able to do
all this, and then preach? I answer, Many Expedients may be found out for that.
All Men may be taught to read well; there is scarce a Parish now but where
there are some that can do it: They should be obliged, by the Church Censures,
to take Deacons Orders, and to serve the Church, gratis, in those Things which
they were capable of, and which should be no hindrance to them from their
Business, it requiring no extraordinary Learning or Application, and they being
in conscience bound to be always present to the Divine Service; wherefore they
might read in the Assembly most of the printed Books that were read, and the
Common Prayers. The Ministers on whom Study, Writing, and Teaching were
incumbent, should be spared in all the Occasions that others might supply their
room in; and as I said, they should have no greater number of Parishioners,
than they could take a due care of; and therefore the extent of Parishes should
be limited. It will be objected, that then there must be a greater number of
Ministers, and consequently a greater Provision made for them. I answer, There
might be many ways found to maintain them, without being burdened thereby; but
there would be no difficulty in that, if there were Adepts, and if they had
Power. I shall only observe that I would have the fifth part of the Revenue of
Ministers laid up every Year by the Public, for the use of those of their
Widows and Children that might want it. I may now speak somewhat of Churches,
and the manner of using them. I would have Galleries to be in every Church, to
place all the Women there by themselves, separately from Men; and the Galleries
should be closed all over with Glass-windows that should be sixed, from the
Forefront ^f the Galleries to the Roof of the Church, to hinder the immodest
and irreligious Custom of Men and Women gazing upon one another during Divine
Service. No Body should bow and cringe, and make ridiculous and vain Postures
to one another in Churches, under pain of Ecclesiastical Censures. No Carpets,
nor other signs of Vanity and Respect of Persons should be suffered in the
Church. For what do thou mean, O vain Person; do thou shame and insult
upon them, that have not like thee, even in the immediate Presence and under
the Eyes of God? In particular, there should be no burying, and consequently no
Grave-Stones, Inscriptions, nor Escutcheons in Churches; and there should be no
manner of Pictures, or carved Work there. The Vestibulum and Chancel of ever
Church should be extraordinary small, for when they are otherwise there is a
superfluity, and they render the Church dangerously cold in Wintertime;
whereas it ought to be made as commodious as possible, that the Parishioners
may conveniently remain in it three or four hours in the Morning, and as much
in the Afternoon every Lord's Day; for if People have Devotion, will Worship
God, and be instructed as they ought to be, they can allot no less time: It is
but rising two hours sooner; and what is this to rising constantly in the
night, or spending whole nights and days in God's Public Service, as the
Primitive Christians thought not too much to do? Sometimes in the Time of
Divine Service, while a Psalm is sung, some of the Officers of the Church
should observe, whether all the Parishioners were present. Expressions of the
Psalms, which contain Imprecations according to the ordinary Versions, should
be translated in the future Tense; and Christian Hymns should be composed, in
Imitation of those of David. There should be a Communion in every Church every
first Lord's Day of the Month; in order to the reunion of scrupulous Persons,
it might be received standing; but as soon as received, the Communicant should
kneel down by the Communion Table, to make his thanksgiving Prayer to God, and
then he should retire; but that the Communicant's Devotion should not be
disturbed, there should be a Way to go from every Seat to the Communion Table,
and another Way to return back, to avoid the confusion of meeting and justling
one another. When there should be public and solemn Fasts, as Good-Fryday,
etc. if any one did eat publicly before the Even, he should be put to death.
And when days of Thanksgiving, at any time should be ordained, it should be
Imprisonment for a Month, with a Fine at least of Twenty Pounds, for any one to
be drunk on that day. In short, we should be truly Religious, and should not
mock God, if we would have him to bless us. I shall conclude this large Head
with an Order that has a little relation to Religion, though it be not most
essential: I would have the old heathenish names of Days and Months to be
changed into some, that were more Christian-like.

Thirdly, Touching Government. It should be the easiest that were possible, the
safest and most glorious for the Governors, and the Governed. It should be
such, that all might live in Concord and love, and without Jealousy. I would
not therefore accept of Arbitrary Power, if it were offered. The Law,
interpreted by the Judges and the Representatives of the People, should be the
supreme Rule. For let a Prince be never so just and good, yet if he will have
no boundaries, and if his Will be the Law, his Subjects will ever mistrust him,
there will never be that mutual Affection, that Unanimity, and that
Satisfaction of Mind on which the common Tranquillity and Happiness depends. It
is then most advantageous to Princes, as well as to the Subjects, that the
People have their share of the Power, especially in making of Laws, ordering
the Subsidies, and directing them to the best uses for the Government, etc. And
all this I would have to be made, by Law, the Rights and Privileges of a
venerable Senate, composed partly of the Nobles of the Land, and partly of a
certain number of the most Expert, the most Judicious, and the most Virtuous
among the People, chosen and nominated by the People themselves. And to this I
would have further Power, and Privileges yet added; namely, that this venerable
Senate not only should meet when ever its majority thought best to meet; but,
Secondly, That it should have its share also in nominating to Offices, and
Places of Trust, that there might be less occasions, then, of Jealousy;
Thirdly, That the People should swear Fidelity and Obedience to the Senators,
as well as to the Prince and the Associated Adepts; and, Fourthly, That as the
Senators should swear Fidelity to the Prince and the Adepts, the Prince and the
Adepts should also swear Fidelity to the Senators, and that if any one of these
three Parties, the Prince, the Adepts, and and the Senate did fail or mistake
in any Point promised, and comprehended in the said Oaths, the Party thus
failing on its part, should be judged by the other two, accompanied and
assisted of the Arbitrators and Umpires, that is, all the Judges of the Land,
and of twenty of the generally reputed the best, the most just and most
virtuous Men in the Nation, who should be chosen by all the Parties and Judges
jointly, and should have a-like Votes with them: Thus Matters should be quietly
and peaceably adjusted, when any Differences should arise. I should think these
Regulations necessary, not only for the Satisfaction and Assurance of the
People, but also for the Advantage and Security of the Prince and the Adepts.
For the Adepts sharing, then, with the Prince, of the Power and Privileges
which he before enjoyed alone, it would be presumed that they would supply him
with the Sums without Limitation, that he might have occasion for; and for that
Reason the People might grow Jealous both of the Prince and the Adepts, which
would undoubtedly be of a dangerous consequence, and possibly in time render
the whole Nation miserable: But all these Mischiess should be prevented by the
expedient I have mentioned. Some, not regarding that all this is founded upon a
Supposition, will perhaps ask; what King would thus part with his Privileges to
a Company of Philosophers, and to his People; would not that be unworty of a
Prince; would it not be injurious to his Memory; and would it not make him the
less great, for the present, and his Estate less glorious? I answer then, This
would be infallibly the way to render his State easy and agreeable; to cause
him to be infinitely beloved and honored of all People; to transmit his Name
with admiration to Poestrity; and which is the best, to make him the Friend of
God, to assure to him an everlasting Kingdom, and to crown him with Felicity to
everlasting Ages. He should for ever be called the Father of the People; the
Angels should extol his Praises in Heaven; they should carry the blessed News
to the holy Inhabitants above; they should name him the Foster-Father of the
Church, the Restorer of Liberty and Christianity, the Lover of the Saints, the
Protector of his Brethren, the Benefactor of Men. O blessed Prince; whom his
Subjects, whom all Men, whom the Saints and Angels, whom God himself would
delight to praise and love, and combine to make him Happy! Thus for ever
blessed, would such a Prince be. Those that preferred any Considerations before
this, might enjoy their Choice; they should not be envied by others. The Prince
that should offer a share of his Power to the Adepts, would never repent it,
though it be probable they would not accept it, farther than to have and enjoy
their Liberty without danger, as was said under the first Head. You wonder
perhaps that I always call him Prince, they whom you mentioned being Kings. But
it is not derogatory to a King, to call him Prince in speaking of him. And I
confess, I would rather choose to term him Prince or Emperor, if I were to
negotiate as we have supposed, because I should not know whether Adepts would
not then have the Name of King and the Title of Majesty to be consecrated to
God: I would therefore in such a Case have that to be referred to them, if it
were so liked, and would not otherwise negotiate. This illustrious Prince, the
Adepts and Senate should concur in encouraging and rewarding Virtue, and
discountenancing and punishing Vice. Instead of other Military Orders, should
be instituted the Order of the Holy Bible. The Arms of the Adepts, to be
affixed to their Colledge-Gate, should be a Lamb crowned, placed over all, in
the midst of the Kingdom's Arms, if it were so agreed; the Coat supported by
two Angels. The Senate should have its Coat of Arms likewise. No Senator should
be capable of that Office, that were legally proved to be a swearer, an
irreligious Person, or the like. The Senators that should have made any Feasts,
or given any Bribes, to be elected, should be expelled out of the Senate,
severely sined, and imprisoned. It should be made the highest Crime, for a
Senator, and for a Judge, to take any Bribes; but they should be well provided
for, and Senators should have a considerable yearly Pension of the State. No
Senator should ever be armed, but should wear a Robe to distinguish him, and
make him known: It should be a capital Crime for Senators, to bring any Arms in
the Senate House; but they should have public Guards, of their nominating. The
constant study of the Government should be to make their own People happy, and
to endeavor to make their Neighbors so too, not by fighting them, but by
giving them good Counsel; and they should send virtuous and learned Men all the
World over, to preach to the Poor and Ignorant (not Controversies, but) the
most indisputable Points of Christianity.

Fourthly, Touching Subsidies, and the Provisions for the Security of the
Society. It were not just that a People should do nothing for the Public
Security and Prosperity: Adepts would never concur with such unreasonable
Desires; neither would they make it so palpably evident to the World, that the
Nation was supported with their Gold. They would not deny their Supplies, when
they were necessary; but they would let the People provide for ordinary
Occasions; therefore there should be always a Tax imposed, if it were but a
Penny in the Pound, and an equal Poll, according to every one's Ability, though
it were never so little: And not only so, but to leave the World uncertain,
whether the Associated Adepts had the Art of making Gold, or were only wise
Politicians, who knew how to persuade the rich People in the Nation to entrust
them with great Sums, to be employed for the best advantage of the Public,
they should have an Office, before the Entrance of their College, where some
of their most trusty Officers should be continually attending, to receive what
well disposed Persons would voluntarily commit to their management for the
Occasions of the Government, whether in coined Money, Ingots of Metal, Pearls,
and Jewels, or Letters of Exchange; and this should be called, the
Free-gift-Office, or the like. Moreover, they might have Officers, that should
Traffic in the Indies. As for the Security of the Society, that should consist
(under God's Protection) in a numerous and well equipped Fleet, in a well
disciplined Militia, and a few Land-Soldiers. The Names of the Militia-Men
should be Registered in Public Rolls, to oblige the same Men to serve
constantly, after they had voluntarily enrolled themselves. They should
constantly be exercised, one day every Week, in every Parish; should have two
Shillings every time, with a necessary Provision of Powder, and the Adepts
should bear all the Charge: But those of them that should be convicted to be
habitual Swearers, Drunkards, etc. should be severely punished. The Armies,
both upon Land and Sea, should be Nurseries of Piety and Virtue; every Soldier
should be obliged to have a well conditioned Bible and Prayer Book, and should
constantly assist, every day, twice, to the Public Devotion and reading of
God's Word. Seamen in time of Peace, and Soldiers in Corpse de Guard, and when
they were not actually taken up with Military Duty, should not be permitted to
Game and Play, but should be taught their Catechism, if they knew it not;
should hear Divine Service; and in fine, should be obliged to read or Work.
They might be taught also, Writing, Navigation, Mathematics, and other
Sciences useful to them. They should be most ordinarily occupied in Fencing and
Shooting at a Mark. Sometime, they might be employed in mending the Highways,
and in other Works for the Benefit of the Public.

Fifthly, Touching the Governors Duty of taking an equal Care of all the
Subjects in general. The Govemours should not only take care that those of whom
they receive large Supplies, and who have a great deal to give, should fare
well and subsist comfortably; but if they would be the Fathers of their Country
in general, and not the Fathers of the Rich only, they should have the same
Concernment for all the People. They should therefore study ways and means that
the Multitude might live, by their Honesty and Industry, more generously and
easily than they now do, being debased, by their ill Fortune, and their Spirits
and their Vivacity almost depressed to the dullness, or changed into the
ferocity of Brutes. Every Man, therefore, to be tolerably well, should be
enabled to get eighteen Pence a day, at least, all the Year round, throughout
the Nation; every Woman, a Shilling; and every Child, from seven Years to
fifteen, three Pence, four Pence, six Pence. There should be some peculiar Arts
and Works, as the most neat and easy, which should be, by Law, reserved for
Families that have had Estates, and are, without their fault, fallen to decay,
for Children whose Fathers, and for Widows whose Husbands had Employments worth
fifty or three score Pounds a Year, or upwards, and are now become Poor, by the
loss of the Head of the afflicted and desolate Family. These Works should have
such a Price set upon them by the Law, that every one might get two Shillings
or half a Crown a day: And other Persons, besides those mentioned in the Law,
that should take upon them to make those Works contrary to the legal
Prohibitions, should be made Slaves, and employed in the hardest Drudgeries for
the Public: If any brought over the like Manufactures from Foreign Countries,
and those that partaked with them therein, should be punished in the same
manner without remission. By this means there would be some equality, (more at
least, than is ordinary in this wicked and unjust World,) every one being able
to live comfortably, and conveniently according to his Condition. It will be
objected, that if every Workman may get at least eighteen Pence a day, there
will scarce enough be found that will do the hardest Works, or that will ever be
Servants. I answer, Those that do the hardest Works must have three Pence, four
Pence, six Pence a day, allowed them by the Law, more than others, and then
they must be obliged, by the Law and the Church Censures, to take those Wages,
and to follow those Employments: A Mason must be obliged to bring up his eldest
Son a Mason, and if this dies before he have a Son, his next Brother must
learn and profess the Trade, or fine sufficiently to provide another Apprentice
in his room; and thus for all other Trades: In case of necessity, the Public
might order the Justices to press as they saw occasion, and dispose of the
Children of Workmen and Tradesmen within their Circuit, to what Callings and
Professions were most wanted: Besides, many condemned Malefactors might be made
Slaves, and their Legs being chained, obliged to work for the Public. As for
Servants: No ordinary Man's Children should be permitted to marry before they
were thirty or five and twenty Years old; nor should be allowed by the Law, to
live in their Father's House after they were fifteen Years old, excepting one
Child, in every House, to serve his Parents, if they wanted it; nor should any
of them be suffered to work for themselves, from fifteen to thirty Years, but
should be obliged during that time to be in Service. Thus a due Order, as to
this case, might be easily preserved. There is nothing that Governors ought
more to study, than to maintain among their People a just equality as much as
possible. Without Justice there can be no Charity, and without that excellent
Virtue, no true Christianity. How few Nations then are Christian, though they be
called by that sacred Name! Most pretended Christians seek to do God Service,
in things far from those he has commanded; and they pass by Judgment and Mercy.
They strain at a Gnat, the vile Gnostics; they lay the stress on nice
Speculations, doting about Questions, and Strifes of Words; they glory in that
they judge they have hit on a more certain Explication of those Obscurities
than other Men, and they cry to the Humble and Virtuous, stand off, odicus
Wretch, I am holier than thou. What! though the Camel be swallowed? Though thou
wallowest in Superfluities, or desire so to do, and see thy fellow creature
want the Comforts and Necessaries of Life, and thou say he ought to have no
Justice? Though thou killest or starvest the Innocent, the Meek, the Just, the
Pious, the conscientious Person? Though thou hazardest to sight against God, and
rashly opposest his Kingdom? O Babylon, Babylon! How criminal and deceitful?
How many live in the midst of thee, and say they are the Citizens of Jerusalem?
I leave them to God, and shall only add, That it might be limited how much
Lands any Man could possess; that those that had too large a share, should
distribute part of them to some of their Family and Kindred, and should sell
some part to the Adepts, for the use of the Public.

Sixthly, Touching Law and Physic. All abuses, in them should be reformed. The
Government should give set Stipends to Lawyers and Physicians; Law and Physic
should cost nothing to the People; and if Physicians and Lawyers were convicted
of having taken any Gifts, they should be punished, as those that take Bribery.
A certain mumber of Physicians and Lawyers should be maintained within a
Circuit, and there should be Superintendents in the Nation, to have Inspection
over them. The same Person should practice Physic and Surgery, and the
Medicines should be prepared at the sick Man's, or at the next charitable
House, those of his own Family buying the Drugs themselves at the Drugsters, or
at Warehouses set up for that purpose by charitable Christians among the Rich,
or by the Adepts. Thus Physicians should not be permitted to make a Mystery of
their Art, for none should administer any Physic, of which all the Ingredients
were not declared, except it were, absolutely, gratis. Therefore they should
teach their Art, to as many as would learn it, for the Relief of Mankind: They
should, themselves, prepare the Medicines, together with some of the sick Man's
Friends, Neighbors or Servants, and a Servant or Apprentice of the
Physician's, that should assist them. All Law should be expressed in a vulgar
Language, and in vulgar and intelligible Terms. The Subjects should not be
obliged to go far, nor to be at any Charges for Justice. Every Man, the wronged
Party's next Neighbors, or any dwelling in the same Street with the Plaintiff,
should be obliged to do the Office of Bailifs, and upon refusal or neglect,
should be considerably sined. Lawyers that should give a false Advice, should
be answerable for it. Most Lawyers should decide in most Cases; and at a
certain distance of some Miles, there should be a Judge Resident. A Judge that
should have given an apparently and visibly wrong Judgment, or that should have
denied Justice, should be severely punished; and it should be easy, and of no
charge to obtain a Sentence against him, and redress from the wrong sustained
by his unjustice. On the other hand, the Judge should severely punish the Party
that should appear before him in a visibly and palpably wrong Case, when it
were credible he saw what was right, and maliciously and contentiously refused
to do it: This Enormity should be punished by Fine, Imprisonment, and corporal
Punishment; otherwise there would be no end of contentious Suits, and a Judge
could never rest. No Person having Right of his side, should ever be a loser,
or a sufferer in the least; whereas now an innocent Person being falsely
accused, or unjustly brought before the Judges, though after great difficulty his
Innocence at last, through God's Providence, appears, he is yet half undone in
his Estate, and his Accusers, who appear to all the World to be perjured
Villains and Infidels, are let go unpunished, and they shall not be made
Examples nor be hindered from doing the like mischief again, without he pursue
them on fresh score, and make an end of ruining himself. These ways will
inevitably draw God's Wrath upon a Nation, and will undoubtedly be punished
with everlasting Curse, without timely amendment. Thrice blessed are the
People, whose God is the Lord, and who actually observe his Laws!

Seventhly, Touching Punishments. There should be but few Criminals, condemned
to die; Most of them that are ordinarily punished with Death, should be
sentenced to be the Publick's Slaves for their life; their Estates being
consiscated for the uses of the Nation. Those that had stolen any Goods from
any Man, should work for him in Prison, 'till they had restored twofold the
value of that which they had taken. Prisoners that were imprisoned for wicked
Actions, should have their Legs chained, and should be obliged to hard work.
None should be idle, and, much less, suffered to be intemperate in Prisons. The
Prisons should be low Buildings, long and narrow, and full of Grates, that
every one might see the Prisoners work. There should be Prisons for Women,
distinct and separate from those for Men. The Keepers or Goalers, that should
be convicted to be Swearers, Drunkards, Extortioners, etc. should be made
Slaves. Prisons should not be the Debauchers of the miserable, but rather
Schools of Repentance and Virtue. All Strumpets that were cast into Prison,
should not go out from thence 'till they had learned a Trade, and had got the
habit of working and living honestly. All Prisoners should be obliged to assist
at Divine Service constantly four times every day; and the ignorant should be
catechized, and made to learn perfectly their Catechism.

Eighthly, Touching Learning and Education. Seeing that from the Education and
Learning of young Persons and Children, depends in a high measure not only the
happiness of having good and virtuous Citizens and Subjects, (which is the
greatest Felicity that Christian Governors can enjoy upon Earth.) but also the
happiness of the governed themselves, in this Life and the next; I would have
therefore the best Books concerning Education to be sometime read in Churches:
And I would have such Regulations made, that Inspection should be had over
Parents and Masters, to see whether they discharged themselves well of their
Duties toward their Children, Scholars and Servants in that particular. For
Masters are indubitably bound to take care of the Christian Education of their
Servants, as well as Schoolmasters are to answer for that of their Scholars,
and Parents for that of their Sons and Daughters. Masters should therefore
cause their Servants to read some Portion of the Bible every day, and if they
had further time to spare them from their Business, should oblige them to
write, and learn something useful by heart, but should by no means suffer them
to be idle; Idleness being the Mother of Corruption and Debauchery. Masters
that should be convicted of neglect herein, should be fined, disgraced and
declared incapable of any trust, not discharging themselves of their Duty in
their own Families, and thereby showing that they have no Conscience, that they
do not fear God and have no Christian Love or Concernment for their
Fellow Christians, or Fellow Creatures. But if it be the Duty of Masters, to
habituate their Servants to live virtuously and religiously; it is much more
incumbent upon Parents, to train up their Children in the Way they should go.
They should, therefore, in the First place, teach them the Principles of Piety;
Secondly, Not use them to any Pride and Vanity, Delicacy or Esseminacy, but
bring them up in the greatest Plainness, to make them, by use, hardy, and
manly, moderate, and inclined to look upon their Inferiors as Brethren, and
upon all Men as equals in the main; Thirdly, Cause them to learn what it is
necessary Persons of their Condition should know, and especially accustom them
never to be idle, but to love to be always employed in something that may be
useful to themselves, and to the Society. The Clark, in every Parish, or some
other Person, that should be paid by the Adepts, should teach all Children to
read, write, and cast up Accounts, without costing any thing to the Parents.
Above all, Masters should be charged to take care, chiefly, that their Scholars
should not contract vicious Habits, as of Profaneness, Lying, etc. they should
set private Observators over them, to watch to all their Actions; and for every
Immorality, they should be punished more than for any other Fault: These Rules
should be observed in all Schools, great and small. Latin and Greek Schools
should be disposed into as many Rooms and Apartments as Forms or Classes. Every
Classis should have a particular Master, as well as a particular Room, to avoid
confusion: And the School should have a Place in the Church, appropriated for
the Scholars to sit in, in the view of their Masters. All Forms should be
examined twice a Year, not by Persons chosen by the Schoolmasters themselves,
as is ordinary, but by the Bishop of the Diocese, who should take of them an
Oath of examining impartially. If the Examiners found the Masters to have been
negligent in their Office, or that the Scholars had not learned the things that
are to be taught in every Form, the said Masters should be turned out. At every
Examination, there should be Praemia, of some value, appointed for those that
excelled in the knowledge of Religion, and Human Learning, to encourage and
excite Scholars. For the same reason, in every Classis, there should be two
Emperors, Consuls, a set number of Senators, etc. which Places should be
distributed according to every one's merit, as it is practiced by the best
Masters of Education. Besides Languages, some other things should be taught in
Schools, to Children; as Chronology, Geography, Arithmetic, the beginnings of
Rhetoric, and of modern History, in the vulgar Tongue, etc. for they should
read, in Schools, Books written in the Mother Tongue, as well as in Latin,
Greek and Hebrew. In the upper Forms, they should be used to make Speeches or
Declamations, in their own Country-Language, against all Vices, one after
another, (in order) and in the praise of every Virtue, and they should recite
them every first Monday of the Month, all Strangers, that would, being admitted
to hear 'em, the best of those Speeches in the Year being to be printed, and to
win a Praemium; and at every Remove to the University, the best Scholars,
without partiality, should have some Pension allowed them by the Adepts, the
Examiners being upon their Oath. No Scholar, that could not live at his own
charge, should be sent to the University, if he were not extraordinarily
learned, in all the things to be learned at School. They should not be admitted
at the Universities, without a long and strict Examination, in every
particular. There should be public Examiners, maintained for that purpose by
the Adepts. Such strict and rigorous Regulations should be made, that none but
the best Scholars should have the Preferments of the Universities. All those
that should have some Preferment, should print something every Year, more or
less, upon some useful Subject. The Scholars for the first seven Years, should
be publicly examined at every Year's end; and those that should not be found
to be proficient enough in that Year's learning, should be degraded and put
back one Year, half a Year, or 'till they had redeemed the lost Time; and they
should be punished with the Imposition of numerous Exercises. The first Year,
besides the bottom of Rhetoric, and beginnings of Logic, they should chiefly
read all the best Latin and Greek Authors, and modern History, and they should
make Exercises in the vulgar Tongue, as well as in Latin, that their Style
might be corrected, and that they might be taught to express themselves simply
and naturally. They should also be used every day to learn something by heart,
and frequently to recite Discourses, in Public, this, and the six following
Years. The second Year they should go through Logic and Ethics, still reading
the best Latin and Greek Authors, through, with their Professors, and the Bible
in Hebrew. The third Year, they should read Astronomy, Philosophy,
Mathematics, etc. and, still, Latin and Greek Authors. The fourth Year, they
should study some Body of Divinity, Law and Physic, and read the Bible with
Commentators; then they should take their first Degree, if the Examiners, upon
their Oath, found them to be learned in all things which they were to be
taught, by the Orders and Constitutions of the Colleges. The three following
Years constantly, they should have regularly red unto them Divinity, Law, and
Physic, according to their Designs, in the best Method and Order. Then if they
were found by the Examiners to be actually good Proficients, they should take
their second degree; for the first should not entitle any to go into Orders, or
to practice Physic or Law, but the second should be a sufficient Title, to be
qualified for present Preferment, and therefore the Examiners should be at
least as exact and strict in this last Examination as in the precedent, and if
they admitted any Person unworthy, themselves should lose their Places. In
order to a Maintenance of the Scholars, that could not otherwise live so long
in the University, there should be some Provision made, according to their
Degrees, Needs and Merits. Tuitions and Lectures should cost nothing to the
Scholars. Besides the public Lectures and Exercises, there should be
particular Exercises and Lectures, constantly, all the Year, in every College;
and the Professors should be maintained by the Adepts. A cheaper way of living
than is in use with us, should be provided for Scholars at the Universities:
They should not have their Victuals from a Cook and a Butler, who making
advantage of the ignorance and carelessness of Scholars, get an Estate with them
in a few Years. This is to lock up the Key of Knowledge, by making Learning
chargeable, and thereby hindering many from studying who perhaps are most fit
for it. The Board should be fixed at a certain Rate: Ten Pounds a Year for
some, twelve Pounds for others, fifteen Pounds for Bachelors, twenty Pounds for
Fellows. There should be seven Professors to every College: One to read always
to the first Year, another to the second Year, etc. The Scholars should be at
least two hours in the Morning, and two hours in the Afternoon with the
Professors, and two hours after Supper for religious Exercises, when should be
constantly expounded some Chapters of the Greek Testament, both by the
Professors, and the Scholars, Grotius de veritate Religionis Christianae, Dr.
Hammond's Practical Catechism, etc. The Professors should bring up Students of
Divinity in the best Method of making Sermons, should give them Texts to
explain, and should always criticize and correct their Discourses; and they
should teach them to confer with all sorts of Parishioners that may fall under
their care, as the Superstitious, those that are Irreligious, and follow a bad
course of Life, the Dissenters, those that are troubled in Mind, the afflicted,
the sick, and the like that require the Visits and Counsels of Ministers; that
they might be ready for such Occasions. The Degrees should be of no charge at
all to the Scholars, but, instead of that, the Scholars should qualify
themselves well for their Degrees, and truly deserve them by their universal
Learning. Scholars of different Colleges should take their Degrees in
different Months, those only of one College, or at most of two being examined
at the same time; and they should be examined publicly, during seven days, in
their vulgar Tongue some days, and some other days in Latin, that they might be
obliged to know how to express themselves well in both Languages. Every Master
of Arts, (that could not live of his own Estate, and that were actually very
skilful in all the parts of Learning,) as soon as he had taken that Degree,
should be allowed a good Pension by the Adepts 'till he were disposed of to
some Preferment, where he should constantly exercise his Calling. In the
Universities, as well as in inferior Schools, Scholars of all Years and of all
Colleges should have public Places to sit in, in their Church, according to
their Colleges, Years and Seniority; and there should be Observators, of every
College, to mark who came in time, or who were absent. The Punishments in all
Cases, should be the Imposition of large Exercises; and if those were not duly
performed, then should follow public Admonition; and, after a certain number
of Admonitions, Expulsion: But Professors should never take Money of Scholars,
who often, perhaps, care not what they cost their Parents, or what becomes of
their Money. All the Sermons preached before the Universities, should be printed
at the public charge. Necessary Recreation should be allowed; but Idleness and
Libertinism, going out of the College at undue hours, or at any time without
Permission, Drunkenness, Fighting, Swearing should be most severely punished,
and absolutely hindered. Places, in fine, for the bringing up of Persons of
Quality, as our Inns of Court, Academies, etc. should be, likewise, so
regulated, and inspected, that good Hours, Temperance, and all the Duties of
Piety should be exactly observed by all; that those Societies that were
intended for the virtuous Education of young Persons, should not be the
Nurseries of Wickedness, and the Schools of Debauchery and Irreligion.

Ninthly, Touching the way and manner of providing for the Poor. That should
not be by allowing them the liberty of idly spending their Time in begging, but
in providing them some Work, and obliging all that are in health and strength,
to labor for their livelihood; but settling a competent Relief for the poor old
Men and Children, the Widows and the Sick, the Lame and the Blind. As for
Beggars, it is altogether unjust and unchristian to suffer any. For if they be
able to work, but unwilling, it is unjust to let the Society be burdened by
them, who far from being Objects of Charity, deserve severe Punishment, and
want it to be made to do their duty; if they are able and willing to labor for
their living, but have not been brought up in any Calling, or find no
Employment, it is most just for the Public to provide them with, and put them
in a way to live honestly, and not let them continue in Want and Idleness; if
they can do but little, let them but be made to do that little which they are
able; those that have but one Leg, or one Arm, and old Men, and even those that
are blind, may do some easy things, and there is no reason they should not do
what they can; but those that are disabled to work, and those that are sick, it
were most unchristian and barbarous not to maintain them, as we would our
selves think it just to be comforted and maintained, if we were in their case.
It is then, visibly, horridly shameful to have Beggars in a Commonwealth. It
is a sign that there is little Charity and Christianity, little Prudence and
Order, or a great deal of Poverty, and absolute unability to make those
Provisions that are necessary. This does not mean that I would have Beggars to
be hindered from asking Alms, as long as there is no sufficient Provision made
for them. That were the greatest cruelty; it were to keep them, to torment 'em,
by starving them by degrees, under color of relieving them. It is mocking God
and Men, to say we take care of our Poor, when we allow six Pence, a Shilling
or two Shillings, a Week, to them who have nothing else to depend on. Is that
our Charity? Our loving other Men as our selves? Our doing to them, what we
would they should do to us, if we were in the like case? In good truth, should
we think that sufficient, for all the Occasions of Life? Why, then, do we not
do justly? We are used to be unjust and partial in most things; therefore it is
no wonder it is so here: We think nothing too good for us, and any thing good
enough for others. A Merchant, a Nobleman, a rich Cardinal, think abundance of
things necessary to their well-being, without which they would account Life a
perfect misery. But a poor, honest Artizan, that works hard perpetually for
the Society, they think, is well provided for, if he can get six Pence a day
for his maintenance, and that of a Wife and several Children. What should be
done, will ye say? I answer, That something of Christianity may appear, or
something like Charity, such Constitutions should be made, that those whose
living depends upon their labor, might live agreeably and comfortably, as well
as they that possess the Lands, and keep the Purse. Which would effectually be,
if what I have intimated, under the fifth Head, were established; if all
ordinary Trades, that were useful and necessary, were encouraged by the Law, by
alloting them good Wages; if the easiest and neatest Works were extraordinarily
paid, and reserved for poor Persons of distinguished quality, but fallen to
decay; and if a plentiful and sufficient Provision were made for all the Poor.
Then every Body should be happy. The Rich, and those that have Estates should
have the preference, and should be most happy; and yet those that have no
Estates should have no reason to complain of their Lot. Fathers and Mothers
would see all their Children in a way to live, without danger of misery. None
should be miserable, but the breakers of the Laws, and the disturbers of this
blessed Harmony. Then should Righteousness and Peace kiss each other, and Truth
and Equity flourish upon Earth. The Rich should not only enjoy the advantage of
their present Riches, but the satisfaction and tranquillity arising from the
Consideration of having done their Duty, and the comfort of seeing all Men,
their Fellow Creatures, and Fellow Christians, well provided for; they would be
in no fear, that any of theirs should ever want Necessaries, if, through any
misfortune they came to lose their Estates, being sure of an ample Provision
made for their living. The Tradesmen and Artificers would have perpetual cause
to love and praise the Rich, who gave them plenty, and rendered their life
comfortable. Those that were disabled to work, being furnished with all the
Things necessary for them, being ^^^owed twelve Pence a day, or whatsoever were
suitable to their former Condition, their Deserts, and their present
Necessities; the whole Society would partake of the temporal Felicity, promised
to the practice of Godliness and the Observation of the Precepts of the Gospel,
the meanest and poorest Persons being well. Blessed Times! Thrice blessed
State, truly agreeable to the Design of Christianity! Some will object, that
our Savior says, That his Kingdom was not to be of this World, and that there
should be always poor People. I answer, We shall have always Persons whom we
must relieve and take care of; but it does not follow that we ought not to do
it plentifully, in a Christian-manner, and according to Christian-charity: And
though our Savior designed not to Reign and Triumph personally upon Earth, with
the Pomp and outward Glory of the Kings of this World, and expressly declared so
much to them, that they might be satisfied, there was no reason for them to be
jealous of him; yet his meaning was not, that he would not have Men be ruled by
his Laws, the Laws of right Reason and Wisdom; indeed he would force no Body,
but by the Motives of Religion; and these are the Measures that true
Philosophers take. God's Servants represent the Duties of Religion to all Men;
they do not constrain them to observe 'em, but if they will not observe 'em,
they will have nothing to do with them. But you will say, How can a sufficient
Provision be made for the Poor, except Adepts actually do it? I answer,
Something might be done toward the matter, according to Men's present Ability.
Rich Men should not think it below them, to be Overseers for the Poor, and
should not trust the Poor's Money to mean Rogues, who make no conscience of
Sacrilege. A Law might be enacted, to hinder all Parish-Meetings from being at
all expensive; it being a shame, that the Officers should feast at the Poor's
charge, most of whom in the mean time are ready to starve. Means should be
thought of, to render it absolutely impossible for Officers to do any wrong;
the Boxes and Chests, in which they did take the Collections, and receive the
Parishioners Charity, should be of Iron, and carefully locked, like those that
are usually carried about for Prisoners; and they should be obliged to give
their Accounts very frequently: Those that should be convicted of Sacrilege,
should be most exemplarily punished. Then every one would have greater
encouragement to part with his Money, knowing it should be actually put to the
use to which he intended it. Dying Persons might be persuaded to leave Legacies
to Hospitals and Almshouses, and should be exhorted to it, seeing that Charity
covers a multitude of Sins, and that good Works of this kind may therefore be
highly available, though there be no Purgatory after this life. In fine, if some
Shillings in the Pound have been given several Years successively to make War,
it would not be impossible, after some time of Prosperity, to give, for one
Year, one Shilling in the Pound for the Relief of Christ's Members. God, no
doubt, expects that Men should do for him what they are able; otherwise, he
will do nothing for them. All the Laws therefore that may be made by rich
Christians in favor of the poor, he will one day require from them. There are
many things still, which there would be great reason I should insist upon; but
it being high time to draw to a conclusion, I shall crowd together the
Summaries of what might remain further to be enlarged, this short
Representation being but the Chaos of the Sophick Constitution, or of God's
Kingdom among Men. Therefore,

Tenthly, Touching Order and Policy in Cities, Buildings, and Commerce;
Touching the improving the State and Riches of the Society, preventing
unnecessary Expenses and Vanities, and reforming all bad Customs as much as
possible. If the Adepts received large Presents in the Free-gift-Office,
mentioned in the fourth Head, I would have half the Masons and Carpenters in
the Land listed, under condition of good Wages, to the Service of the Public,
and mixed with the rest of the Soldiers, to whom they should teach their
Trades. They should exercise in the Discipline of War one day of the Week, for
the Grandeur and Security of the Nation. The other five work-days should be
spent in building Churches and Hospitals, making Fortifications on the
Frontiers, paving all the Highways as they were paved here by the Romans, and
repairing, and rebuilding Towns and Cities. No Man should be allowed to build a
House, except the Ground were his own, or except he purchased it, that he might
have the greater encouragement to make the House firm and strong, seeing it
should remain to his Family after him; whereas now Houses are built too
slightly. I would have Cities and Towns built square, all the Streets straight,
broad, and equal; so that there should be no Lanes nor Allies, but the Streets
should be alike; all the Houses should have Piazza's as you see at
Covent Garden, and under those Piazza's should be suffered no Sedans or Chairs
to be carried, no Porters to go with their Burdens, no Lackies nor Children to
play to disturb and hinder the By-goers, nor small Retailers there to expose
their Wares, and stop the Passage, or spoil the Simmetry and Convenience of the
Place; wherefore they should be close by the Pillars: Next the Piazza's, in the
Street should be reserved a Walk for the Porters, etc. which Walk should be
paved with broad Stones, and fenced with Posts, at an equal distance, against
Horses, etc. The middle of the Street should be for Horsemen, Carts, and
Coaches: The Streets should be paved with choice, smooth and even Stones, and
every House should be obliged to cleanse every day that part of the Street
before it to the Kennel, under some Penalty: Cross-way, in the middle, and end
of every Street, or about the distance of every hundred Yards, should be built
from the Piazza's of one side of the Street, to the Piazza's of the other side,
a kind of small Bridge, high enough for Coaches to go under; it should be
broad, as the breadth of the Piazza's; it should have fair and large Steps to
go up, like the small Bridges over the Channel by Fleet Street; and it should
be for the convenience of those that go a Foot, to cross the Street, without
being hindered or bespattered by Coaches, and Carts, etc. There should be some
By-streets wholly set apart for Coach-houses and Stables, none of which should
be suffered to be built in the other Streets. If the square Form caused some
intervals between Towns, built by a Riverside, and the River, those Plats of
Ground should be made beautiful Walks for the Public; and if the River ran
through part of the Town, the Houses and Buildings, on both sides the River,
should be all along of the same height, and equally magnificent. The Shops
should not be deep, but long, built lengthway parallel to the Street, that they
might be lightsom, notwithstanding the Piazza's. All Houses should have a
Garden of an equal bigness, belonging to them; that the Air of Towns and Cities
should not be choked, as it is ordinarily. Every one should not have the
liberty to live in the Metropolis that would; but that Privilege should be
administered according to the Governor's Direction: All unnecessary Persons
should be obliged to remove to some other place. Brew-houses, Glass-houses,
Pot-houses, Candle-makers, etc. should be placed at two Miles distance, at
least, from Cities and Towns, by the Riverside. Wood should be burnt every
where, some part of the Year. No Corpse should be buried nearer than half a Mile
of every Town. There should be common Shores, which every House should be
obliged to make use of, to carry off all the Immundicities of the Public. In
most Streets there should be public Houses of Office, which should be kept
clean, those that foul'd them being fined; those should be fined also, that
should make water in the Streets; that undecency not being to be suffered: A
common Sentinel should be set to stand before those Houses, and should be
responsible of keeping them neat. No Persons extraordinary frightful and
deformed, should be suffered to go in the Streets, such Objects striking with
horror the Beholders, and being dangerous to Women big with Child: If those
miserable Persons were not able to maintain themselves, by reason of their
Confinement, they should be taken into some Hospital, built for that purpose.
These and the like Regulations should be made, if I had Power, as you have
supposed; and it may seem indeed strange that most of them have not been made
by most Nations of themselves, before now. It will be asked, which way could a
sufficient Fund be provided, for so much Expense, as the most part of this
would require? I answer, There are several ways, to improve the Riches of the
Society, sufficiently for this: First, By granting public Subsidies and Taxes
to that end: Secondly, By the Rich, that were well disposed, their sending,
freely, Presents, according to their Abilities, to the Government, for those
and the like uses: Thirdly, By dying Men leaving Legacies for the same purpose:
Fourthly, By improving Lands to the best advantage: Fifthly, By obliging all
Persons to exercise some Calling, or Employment useful to the Society: Sixthly,
By hindering all Frauds and Unjustices in Commerce: And Lastly, By preventing
all unnecessary Expenses and Vanities; and then, evil Customs being reformed as
much as possible, God would not fail, on his part, to pour down his Blessings
on a Nation so Piously and Christianly disposed. As for improving Lands, it is
certain that it might be done to a greater advantage for the Public than it
is, if Parks and Commons, and all uncultivated Grounds were cultivated and
husbanded: And, every Body being obliged to concur, to the best of his power,
to further the advantage of the Public, and Laws being made against those,
who, following no Occupation or Employment to that end, were idle and
unprofitable Members; Men would be incomparably richer than they are, and able
to do infinitely more good, and the same Country where the greatest number is
miserable, would maintain plentifully double the Inhabitants. Persons that are
rich, and have no near Relations, should be exhorted to settle, before they
died, their Parks and uncultivated Lands upon the Public. Houses might be
prepared to receive all the Children that Particulars would send, which should
be employed all their life in the Publick's Service. The Unjustices and ill
ways ordinarily practiced in Trading, to the damnifying of the Society, should
be absolutely hindered by wholesome Laws, and Cheating, Swearing, and even
unreasonable overrating in Selling should be punished, remembering that light
Gains, in Commerce, make a heavy Purse. Thus all fit Means should be used to
render every Man Rich, and make him live plentifully and comfortably. All
Children should be brought up so as to be strong and hardy, and to be content
with what is sufficient, and is most fit to make them vigorous in Body and
Mind; for by that means, they shall be Richer, with fifty Pounds a Year, than
they would be with Two Hundred, being brought up Delicately and Effeminately,
thereby making many superfluous Things necessary to their Happiness; wherefore
Parents cannot do worse for their Children, nor do any thing more Unchristian,
than to give them an effeminate Education, because in making many superfluous
Things necessary to them, by Custom, they oblige them to make their Portion too
big, and consequently that of others too little; they use them to despise, and
tread under other Men, and to think highly of themselves, and imagine that so
they fare well themselves, it is no matter for others; and then they reduce
them to the necessity, in case their Estates through any accident fail them,
either to be miserable in the want of their superinduced Necessaries, or to
Damn their Souls to obtain those Things by any Means. But if it be necessary
that Children be used to Temperance and Simplicity, and to a busy and laborious
Life; there is no less necessity, that Men always continue in the same Habit of
Living. For Moderation, Industry, and Charity are always necessary, in order to
present and future Happiness. Men should then, in some Measure, bear one
another's Burdens; concur, in their several Stations, to do the affairs of the
Society, carefully and diligently, according to their several Capacities; and
deny themselves those Things which would be prejudicial to the Felicity of the
whole Body. Therefore all unnecessary Trades should be abolished, and
unnecessary Expenses spared, to be applied to better Purposes. All House
Furniture should be plain. There should be no such thing as Fringe, Lace,
Imbroidery, nor the like; or, else, those that would have them, should be fined
the fourth part of their Revenues. All Playing for Money, by which so much Time
is lost, and so many Families are ruined, should be forbidden under severe
Penalties, and the Money, proved to have been played, should be consiscated for
the use of the Public. Men should be often exhorted against Delicacies, and
excess in Eating and Drinking; for if too much be allotted for this, there will
be too little left for Charity; besides that it is a Shame to make a God of
one's Belly, like Brute-Beasts, which know of no other Pleasures than those of
Sensuality. To abolish the use of Tobacco, Snush, etc. those that were not
already used to them should be forbidden them, under the Penalty of large
Fines. Men should also be forbidden, under the like Penalties, to make
sumptuous Feasts, or to use Treats in Visits; for by that means, Gluttony and
Drunkenness are countenanced and brought into Fashion, and while some Surfeit
with Meat and Drink, others are ready to Perish. You will say, Hospitality is a
Virtue: I answer, it is not a Virtue to provoke one another to excess, nor to
make extraordinary Expenses for the Belly, and thereby put one another out of
Power to give sufficient Wages to Workmen, and relief to the helpless: It is
mocking God and Men, to call Partiality and Unjustice, Drunkenness and Gluttony
a Virtue, or Luxury and Esseminacy no Vice: Invitations and Feastings are
scarce ever without excess: But if he that comes, betwixt Meals, to see thee,
happens then to be Hungry or a Thirst, thou may present to him a piece of
Bread, and a draught of Drink, which will suffice if he want it, but there is
no necessity thou should eat and drink thy self, and needlessly consume what
others may want; wherefore; that such uncharitable and injurious
Good-Fellowships be prevented, they should be punished by the Laws: True
Hospitality should be known to consist in providing for the Destiture and
Afflicted, taking care of Children and Widows, the Lame and the Blind, the
Poor, the Sick, and old Persons, and being always ready to give Meat and Drink
to those that want it. To that end, Temperance and Frugality should be judged
to be indispensibly necessary Virtues; Christians therefore should be always
Frugal and Temperate, and should not spend the superfluities of their Estates
in Feasting and Rioting, as is become so ordinary, instead of employing to the
best Advantage of the Public what they can spare. What more common than to
consume at a Wedding what might sufficiently maintain a Family most part of the
Year; and, for ordinary People, to Spend at a Christening more than they freely
bestow upon the Poor in all their Life? Even at Burials, so much is Spent
vainly and needlessly, as would be very advantageous, if put to good uses:
Thus, unnecessarily creating to themselves so many occasions of Expenses, Men
make themselves poor and unable to do any thing for the Public, they are
always on the Rack for Money, and they, as it were, necessitate themselves to
have recourse to evil Ways, to injure and cozen others, and in fine to pawn and
ruin their Souls, to supply to their super-induced Wants. Many are brought to
Despair by this means; many are thereby affrighted from Marrying, and having
any thing to do with the World, seeing it is so hard a matter to live in it.
For if they keep not up the old expensive Customs; if there be not all the
costly and ridiculous Pomp at the Funerals of every one of the Family that
goes out of the World; if there be not Carnivals at Christnings, as well as at
Weddings; if the Wife have not finer Cloths and Furniture than her Neighbors;
if at every Visit the House be not metamorphosed into an Inn, etc. the Man is
despised and affronted, and must look for no rest: If he will comply to all
this, he is perpetually tormented with care how to find Money as fast as it is
wanted; he is often in danger of being laid up in Prison, and in fine, he dies
with the Affliction of leaving his Family destitute. This is the mischief of
those Expenses, which seem innocent in the Eyes of the World; but they should
be prevented and hindered by the Fathers of the People. It will be objected,
That we read of Saints who have made sumptuous Feasts, and that our Savior
himself assisted at one, in Cana of Galilee. I answer, That infallibly our
Savior approved not of Gluttony and Drunkenness, though he thought good to be
present at that Occasion, to make a Miracle, that his Instructions afterward
might bear a greater weight: He had a regard to the Circumstances of Men; and
their Capacities to receive his Doctrine: The World had its Childhood and
Infancy, during which many things might be winked at, and many allowances made:
But now that the Gospel of Perfection is publicly established, which exhorts
us to sell all, rather than not make a sufficient Provision for them that want
our Assistance; can it be thought licit for any to employ the best part of his
Estate to his Luxury, to eat and drink, and be drunken, not caring what share
others have of the Necessaries and Comforts of Life? That is as little
Christian, as it is for rich Men to spend their abundance in keeping a great
number of Dogs and Horses. If there were no more Horses and Dogs kept than are
absolutely necessary; if it was not only permitted, but enjoined to every one
to destroy all wild Fowls and wild Beasts, as much as possible; there would be
more Corn, more Fruit, more Sheep and Cows; and consequently a better Provision
for the generality of Men. If this be not regarded, where is Christian Charity?
But Men seem to be ignorant both of the Public Interest, and of the Duties of
Charity; for instead of going about to enrich the Public, and contriving to
make every one live easily and plentifully, they take all manner of ways to
render themselves incapable of being helpful to others, indulging a Thousand
unreasonable Appetites, and facrificing all they have to their Pleasure and
Vanity, so that instead of being Rich and able to do much good, they are always
Poor and can scarce supply their own contrived Wants. All those things
therefore which are superfluous, and cause unnecessary Expenses should be
forbidden by express Laws. Even excess in Cloths and Apparel should be
punishable; and those that should bring up their Children and Families in any
Pride or Vanity, should be Fined. Those that would wear Rings or Jewels, long
Wigs, and longer Garments than is necessary; and Women that would have Ribbons,
high Dress, long Trains, and the like, should be Taxed a considerable part of
their Revenues for it. It is the greatest Imprudence and Folly, to put eight
Yards of Cloth, for instance, where Four will do; that which is superfluous,
and consequently needless, might be employed to some good use; what serves only
one Man, might suffice for Two. Would you be free? it is your chief Wish, you
say,
Come on; I Will show thee, Friend, the certain way:
If to no Feasts abroad thou love to go,
Whilst bount'ous God does Bread at home bestow;
If thou the goodness of thy Cloths do prize
By thine own Use, and not by others Eyes;
If (only safe from Weathers) thou can Dwell,
In a small House, but a convenient Shell;
If thou without a Sigh, or Golden Wish,
Can look upon thy Beechen Bowl and Dish:
If in thy Mind such Power and Greatness be,
The Persian King's a Slave compared with Thee.
(Abr. Cowley.)
But some will say, those Excesses should by no means be hindered; for by them,
only, abundance of Artizans get their Livelihood, who should otherwise Starve.
I Answer, the more is the Pity, that in Christian Nations Christians can get
their Livelihood by nothing but Excesses and Vanities: This surely should be
amended by a People that will be called Christian. Ways should be found, that
Artizans might live in following honest Employments, and doing useful Works.
All those that exercise necessary Trades, as I have said, should be enabled to
get, at least, eighteen Pence, or two Shillings a Day; and whereas some Persons
have not been brought up to laborious Callings, but were used to get their
Living easily by the vain Expenses of the Rich, the easiest and neatest Works,
that are useful to the Society, might, as I have observed, be reserved for
them: All the Farms might be abated of a third of their usual Rents, by Law,
that many might profitably follow that way of living; And that Farmers might be
enabled to let Laborers, Workmen and Artizans get enough by them: In fine,
all Men, of all honest Callings, would thus be rich, and live easily and
plentifully, if, at the same time, they were hindered, by Christian and wholesome
Laws, to spend their Money in Vanities and unnecessary Things, and were obliged
to maintain their Families plainly and honestly, and to bring up all their
Children to some useful work, by which means, knowing of no superfluous and
superinduced Necessaries, they should be Masters of their own Happiness,
without slavishly depending on other Men. To object, that the Vanities and
unnecessary Expenses of Men bring in the Revenue of Governors, were
unreasonable, seeing that that might be provided for by better means. If you
say, that that is easy in Commonwealths, where the Charges are not so great;
I answer, that by the Expedients all along mentioned, Princes and Subjects may
live plentifully and happily: And then, supposing that Adepts, or the
Free-gift-Office, were helpful to a Prince, there would be no color left for
that Objection. But if all Men were not to be restrained, by Laws, from
Vanities and unnecessary Expenses, at least, Ministers, Lawyers, Physicians,
Artizans, Soldiers, and ordinary People should. But if those Nations that are
called Christian would be Christian indeed, they should make Christian
Constitutions, and first of all show their good Will thereto, by forbidding at
least mere Vanities, as powdering and plating the Hair, wearing of Silver or
Gold, and the like, expressly spoken against in Scripture. The Teachers of
Humility should not suffer themselves to be called Reverend, Venerable or
Eminent, Fathers nor Rabbi. Were I an Adept, and to negotiate an Agreement, I
would propose this condition, That no Man should be called Lord; for we have
one Lord, who is in Heaven. There must be distinctions among Men, it is
ordinarily said. Let it be so; there may be the same that are now in use,
without giving the Title of Lordship to any Man. A Knight, a Baron, may be
called by these Names, in speaking to them, and that with as much respect, as
was shown to a mighty Monarch, when called only by this appllation, O King,
Dan. 2.4. If I was then to negotiate, I would have it to be expressly allowed by
Law not to use Compliments, and particularly not to pull off the Hat, (seeing
that by these Ceremonies so great a respect of Persons has been had, to the
humbling and mortifying of the Poor, some of whom have the greatest merit, and
deserve the most Respect;) and, especially, to say Thou to any Person, seeing
we say it to God himself. No Christian should wear Liveries, that making too
great a difference between Men, and all Christians professing to be
Fellow Servants to the same Master. Masquerading, and disguising of Men should
be punished. And there should be severe Laws made against all obscenity and
immodesty. All Women should even be obliged to wear Handkerchiefs close to
their Necks, under considerable Penalties. For if we would have a Reformation
in the weighty Matters, the lesser Things should not be neglected. This shall
suffice to show you what Conditions I would require.


Cit. When that Philosopher comes, who is to come in the Spirit of Elias, as
your Chemical Books do promise, probably he will thus reform many Thing.


Phil. So Adepts say; and then, possibly, will be again fulfilled, in this
regard, that Saying, That God chooses the foolish, the weak and base Things of
the World, Things which are despised, and even Things which are not, that no
Flesh should glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, and 29.


Cit. Except God be pleased to intervene, it is to be feared, in the
Disposition the generality of Men are in, neither Elias nor the Adepts would be
welcome to reform the World: Far from it.


Phil. When Men come into the other World, my dearest Friend, they will be
horribly ashamed of that Disposition. To the just Tribunal of God, then, wise
Men will cite them: They will then wish they had never injured Virtue. O God,
thou will protect thy People, and bless thine Inheritance! Thou will send down
Fire from Heaven, and consume thine Enemies! Thou will exemplarily punish those
that molest thy Servants, and hate thy Name!


Cit. As things are now, do you think it actually possible for a Nation
publicly to prepare a House for the Adepts, in case there be such Men?


Phil. Why not? Do we not find several Patents granted here, openly, to the
studiers of this Art, by Henry VI. with the consent of the Parliament, as you
may see in a Book of William Prynn, called, Aurum Reginae, p. 131. etc. Ex.
Rot. Pat. An. 24 H. 6. part 2. m. 14. Ex. Rot. Pat. An. 34 H. 6. m. 7. Per
ipsum Regem, Auctoritate Parliamenti?


Cit. Pray, describe particularly how you would have such a House to be built.


Phil. That must be at another opportunity, if you please: It is now time for
me to take my leave of you.


Cit. If there are Adepts in the World, are you not your self one of them?


Phil. No, I am no Adept, I assure you; though that Question be not to be asked
by a good Man, for if it were to be answered by every Body, an Adept could not
be hid. As for me, I do not so much as work for the Elixir, and hardly deserve
the name of an Artist in the very beginnings of Chemistry. I seek indeed some
lesser Remedies, and would be glad to find Paracelsus and Van- Helmont's
Alkahest, and the way to draw Gold out of Silver, and Silver out of Lead, with
some profit. But whether I shall ever succeed, God only knows. I have heard of
some Men, who pretended to cure most Distempers without the Elixir; and I know
some who assert, That Silver contains much more Gold, and Lead much more Silver
than is ordinarily believed, and that there is a Way to open those Metals, to
make them yield what they contain, without which opening, that which is most
perfect flies away with the imperfect.


Cit. Before we part, pray tell me what you think of the Duties of Adepts to
their Friends and Protectors; for you have not spoken much of that: Don't you
esteem that they are obliged to express sensibly their gratitude to them?


Phil. No doubt of it; and Adepts know that, better than we: We ought to be
willing to leave that wholly to them, and be ready to do them freely all the
Service we can; for, to do them the meanest Services, is a greater honor than
we deserve, especially if we profess our selves to be their Disciples, and
desire to become, one day, Adepts our selves.


Cit. What are the chief Duties of those, who desire to become Adepts, or at
least the particular Friends of Adepts?


Phil. Moderation and Secrecy.


Cit. That Is a little too general.


Phil. Well then, as touching Secrecy, the studiers of the Art should let no
Body, if possible, know that they work, to be sure, not what they work upon;
and then an Adept may hope that they may be able to keep his Counsel.


Cit. But what if they want help, and do design to work with some Partners; or
if they have a Wife and Children, Brothers and Sisters, or some particular
Friends with them?


Phil. If they have such a Family, they must either altogether hide from them
what they design to do, or else they must bind them by the most sacred Oaths
not to be talkative or inquisitive, and if they have some Faith in the Art, to
live modestly and moderately, as the Friends of Artists ought to do, and to
employ to good and virtuous uses, what shall be given them in case of success:
They may express this Covenant fully in all its Branches, and make them of
their Family write and sign it, to oblige them to it, and to put them often in
mind of their Engagement. And after all, they should do everything as secretly
as if none of those Measures had been taken; and in case they happened to
succeed in any thing, they should not presently let any of their Family know so
much, but keep it private as long as possible. For my part, were I in those
Circumstances, and had I such a Family, I would observe all that I have said. I
would oblige my Wife and Children, my Brothers and Sisters, to go plain as the
Quakers, to see no Company but what I liked; to forbear playing at any Game,
Dancing, at least with Persons of different Sexes, etc. I would oblige them to
keep such hours, in the House, as I thought best; to receive no Visits before
two, nor after six of the Clock in the Afternoon, and not to make the Business
of Visits to consist in eating and drinking without need; to accustom
themselves to instruct their Servants exactly in the Christian Religion, and to
take delight in a grave and useful Conversation: I would make them promise,
that, in case I succeeded, and gave them a considerable Sum, they should not
alter this way of living; they should not use any Ostentation; they should not
consume their abundance in keeping a dainty Table; they should not give any
Liveries to any Servant; they should educate their Children, and oblige them to
live after the same way, bringing them up plainly, without any Vanity and
Superfluity, accustoming them to serve others, using them to work and labor,
and causing them to learn some Trade, that they might not altogether depend
upon their Estate, but might be able, in case of necessity, to live of
themselves; they should teach them to fear God, to love other Men as their
Fellow Creatures, and to have always before their Eyes that all Men, in most
respects, are equal, without which there can be no Charity: But in the first
place I would make them oblige themselves, that they should not enquire, nor
seek to know what I did; and in case they happened to perceive and discover the
least thing, or any part of it, that they should ever keep it inviolably
secret: And, in fine, I would make many useless Operations, and work often upon
some wrong Matters, purposedly to blind, and to try them.


Cit. But what if you were to work with some Partners?


Phil. I would not choose, for that, young and undiscreet Persons; nor would do
like some People, who tell every Body what they design to go upon, because they
hope they may be a little helpful to them; these Men, how erroneous soever
their Fancies be, are as much guilty as if they had prostituted and made
public the Elixir; for that which they divulge may be the way to make it, for
ought they know: They should consider how enormous, and of what fatal
consequence is their Guilt, and that they shall be answerable to God for all
the Mischiefs that may ensue: They should not forget how much secrecy Adepts
require. I wish they knew, what I have been told, That an Adept, not long
since, addressing himself to a Person in Town, to whom he showed his Powder,
offered to communicate to him the Secret, on no other condition than that he
should sacredly promise to choose to die rather than reveal to any Body the
least thing concerning it, about which the other making some difficulties, the
Adept left him, and taught him nothing. They might remember what honest and
pious Daulton did.

He said, Lord Jesu, blessed Thou be.
Methinks I have been too long from Thee.
A Science Thou gave me with full great charge,
Which I have kept without outrage.
I found no Man yet apt thereto,
To be mine Heir when I am go:
Wherefore (sweet Lord) now I am fain
To resign this Thy Gift to Thee again.
Norton gives a reason of this Secrecy:

-- This Sience must ever secret be,
The cause whereof is this as ye may see;
If one evil Man had hereof all his Will,
All Christian Peace he might hastily spill;
And with his Pride, he might pull down
Rightful Kings and Princes of Renown:
Wherefore the Sentence of Peril and Jeopardy,
Upon the Teacher rests dreadfully.
Thus we see Sir George Ripley making these Conditions with Edward IV. the
which probably were never agreed unto:

That to your self ye shall keep it full secretly,
And only it use as may be to God's Pleasure, etc.
Thomas Charnock had these Terms offered, and imposed upon him by his Master:

Will you with me to morrow be content,
Faithfully to receive the blessed Sacrament,
Upon this Oath that I shall here you give,
For ne Gold ne Silver, as long as you live,
Neither for love you bear toward your Kin,
Nor yet to no great Man, Preferment to win;
That you disclose the Secret that I shall you teach,
Neither by Writing, nor by no swift Speech.
The like Caution should be used with all Partners in the work, in case any
were taken, and such Counsels and Exhortations, as those of Bloomfield, should
be often given them, to persuade them to Moderation, and confirm them in all
Piety and Virtue.

Be you Holy therefore, Sober, Honest and Meck,
Love God and your Neighbor, to the Poor be not unkind;
Overcome Satan, God's Glory see you seek;
My Son, be gentle to all Men as a Friend;
Fatherless and Widow have always in thy Mind;
The innocent love as Brothers, the wicked eschew;
Let Falsehood and Flattery go, lest thou it rue.
Devoutly serve God, call daily for his Grace,
Worship him in Spirit with Heart contrite and pure,
In no wise let Satan thy Prayers deface:
Look thou be steadfast in Faith, and trust most sure,
Lay up Treasure in Heaven which ever shall endure.
These Words of Isaac Holland, in his Work of Saturn, should also be often
remembered. If God give you this Stone, look diligently to it, that you keep
your self from offending God, that you make not this Stone on Earth to be your
Heaven; govern and rule your self to God's Glory and to the Comfort of poor
People, that God's Praise may be augmented, to the Defense of the Christian
Religion, and to the Relief of poor exiled Christians. I tell you, My Child, if
you use it otherwise, God will leave you here a little while to your own Will,
but afterward he will speedily send a Punishment; either you shall be struck
dead, or die by a Fall, or die some other sudden death, and go Body and Soul to
Hell, and be damned eternally. And in another place, Do not undertake this
Divine Work, if you find your self in deadly Sins, or that your Intent be
otherwise than to God's Glory, and to perform those Things which I taught you
before. I tell you truly, you may see the Work, but I am certain you shall
never accomplish it, (not enjoy it,) God will order it so, one Disaster or
other will happen.

After all, things ought to be so ordered by a skilful Artist, that his
Partners or Fellow-Work-men, if he take any, may know little or nothing of the
Process, and be bound upon Oath never to work separately from him in this Art,
nor to communicate, any manner of ways, to any Person, any thing they shall
discover, or shall think to have discovered of his Process, that is, of his
manner of working, or of the Materials he works upon.


Cit. If there was no such thing as the Philosopher's Stone, as I know not
whether there be, yet I find what you have said in this Conversation so useful,
that I would have you publish it in the form of a Dialogue: But you must
endeavor to express it politely and neatly.


Phil. Those that will not receive profitable Truths, because offered to them,
as it were, in earthen Vessels, are not worthy of the Present, no more than one
that should refuse a bag full of Diamonds, because the Bag were course and
ragged. I will never stand to paint and vernish what in it self is excellent.


Cit. I wish you the opportunity of working, and good success, if there be any
thing in the Hermetick Philosophy: I believe a very good use might be made of
it. Pray, give me the riming, Latin Verses, which you spoke of, the last time
we were together.


Phil. Ille sed qui capiet per hanc rem Honores,
Antiquos Mores mutabit in meliores.
Iste cumque venerit, Regnum reformabit,
Virtutibus and Moribus, and Exemplum dabit,
Sempiternum Regibus; Plebs tunc jubilabit,
Et, mutuo se diligens, lauds Deo dabit.

THE SUMMARY OF SOME CONFERENCES OF A Student in Chemistry WITH AN ARTIST.

Advertisement.
Although, I confess, I do not believe any part of the Hermetick Philosophy to be
infallible, I esteem nevertheless that the following Summary of the
Conversations of two Chemists may be acceptable to diverse, and may perchance be
of some use, though it be given but as a Chemical Fiction; because it makes way
for the Negotiation of Artists, and shows how it may be managed. It is not
impossible that there should be such Men as Adepts; and if there are any, it
were extremely to be wished that they might be persuaded to communicate
themselves, which is here endeavored, and the way made plain for it. If there
be a reality in any Branch of the Hermetick Art, as possibly there may, the
means to attain to the Knowledge thereof is to seek and work for it. It seems
that, at least, some good Remedies may be found, if nothing more. Wherefore if
Persons that are able did join to that end some part of what they can well
spare, it is probable that in time something would be found that might be
useful to the Society, if there be any thing in Chemistry. And if a good
Entertainment was assured to Adepts by Persons of known Probity, surely they
would discover themselves to them, (if there be any such Men in the World,) and
become benesicial to their Fellow Creatures, more than they have been hitherto.
It cannot then be impertinent for a Man to dispose his House, so as that it may
be acceptable to some Adept. That will be of little prejudice, if there are no
Adepts; but if there are such Philosophers as those actually in being, such an
Invitation is likely to have its effect, and the advantage of that would be
unspeakable. That therefore which would cost little, might be of the greatest
benefit in the World, if Faith was publicly promised to Adepts, and a
Preparation made for their Reception. Which being fair and equal might be
crowned with success and obtain the Divine Blessing, whereas the ways of
Violence hitherto designed by Great Men in such cases, are attended with a
curse, and infallibly shall be punished as the greatest Villainies in Hell.

THE Summary of the Conferences.
Artist. I say, it is not only possible to draw Gold out of Silver, and Silver
out of Lead with some Profit, but it is more than probable that it may be done
by the Method which I imagine. As for the possibility of drawing Silver out of
Lead, every common Refiner can testify it, though they do it without any Art, and
therefore lose the greatest part of the Silver; for this Silver, besides that
it is as yet scarce fully perfected and digested, is so intimately united with
its Mother, (Lead) a most volatile Body and most unfixed in the Fire, that it
necessarily flies away with it, except it be somewhat more ripened by an
artificial Preparation and Composition, and the Pores of the Lead be opened, to
facilitate the Separation, before the examen of cupelling or violent melting.
And as for drawing Gold out of Silver, (which, it self, is an immature Sol,)
Roger Bacon tells ye, That the Gold is not brought into it by the Spirits, or
any of the Ingredients with which the Silver is prepared, but every kind of
Silver has (at least) one Ounce of Gold in eight Ounces.


Student. Granting this, yet the chief difficulty still remains, how to prepare
the Silver and Lead a-right, which depends upon Experience; have you ever made
any trial of it?


Art. Some things may be highly credible and in some measure certain, without
an actual Demonstration. Every one has not the convenience and means of making
many Experiments. But I have so strong Reasons to believe I am in the right
Method, that I esteem it worth any Man's while to try it. They that will be at
no pains nor cost, though they can afford it, are not like (nor deserve) ever to
find any thing.


Stud. Will you be pleased to show the Reasons, which you think so credible and
certain?


Art. That cannot be, without divulging the Secret.


Stud. If you entrust me with it, I will assure you it shall go no farther; and
in case I find the opportunity to try it, and your Process prove successful,
you shall have all reasonable share in the Profits: That Is all I can do, and it
seems very fair, seeing your self acknowledge you have no experimental
Demonstration.


Art. I have not told you expressly so much. Time has been that I had Means and
Opportunity to make Chemical Experiments; but if I had made this, I would not
be forward to tell it; I only say, That by my Experiments and Study I find it
credible, that by a certain Method which I imagine, Gold may be drawn out of
Silver, and Silver out of Lead with Prosit. But whether or no I know any thing,
or may absolutely be mistaken, I do not design to divulge what I think should
be kept secret. What assurance have I of your Secrecy; or to what purpose
should I communicate to you any of my Thoughts, if you cannot help me in any
thing, and if you will be at no charge?


Stud. Though I cannot do much my self, yet I might find some Friends that should
be able, and would be willing to be at some cost, in case of a Reality or high
Probability: And as for Secrecy, you may bind me to it by the strongest Ties.


Art. Will you sacredly promise, as you will answer, it to Almighty God, to
keep the Secret inviolable, and to seek to discover no more than I shall think
fit expressly to tell you; will you subscribe to this?


Stud. I will; and I do hereby engage my self, before God, that I will not any
way reveal any thing that you shall tell me concerning Chemistry.


Art. But what Friends are those, whose Ability and Assistance you would make
use of; and what Conditions would you make with them?


Stud. I would address my self to none but Men of known Probity and Piety, and
of sufficient Abilities: And the Conditions I would propose, should, first, be
Secrecy, on their part, and to make the necessary Advances, and I would assure
them a good Interest for their Money.


Art. What do you mean with your Proposal of Secrecy; would you tell 'em every
thing you knew?


Stud. No; but I would require of them not to divulge the Agreement betwixt
them and me, for the Reasons which you may suppose.


Art. How should you know if they were Men of Virtue and Integrity?


Stud. I would address my self to none but those you would approve of, your self.


Art. You should then deal only with such, as instead of taking any Interest
for their Money, would rather make you a Pension, and would be content to bestow
upon the Poor what Profit they might expect: But if at the term of two or three
Years you were not able to re-imburse them, (in case they were to make
considerable Advances,) what should be done?


Stud. They might assure to them what I had in the World. But I would not have
any Dealings but with those that were able and willing to venture something.
There is always hazard and uncertainty in Chemical Affairs, and it cannot be
otherwise, unless so many Experiments had been made as amounted to a
Demonstration; but before that be arrived unto, an ordinary Man is often
beggered, so that he cannot do in this business what he would and what another
may. It is possible (certainly, notwithstanding all the Abuses that have been
made of this Truth,) that one have the right Theory, and yet fail often in
small Circumstances, as all Philosophers say of themselves that they have done,
though they saw plainly they were in the right Path. An extraordinary Courage, a
great deal of Strength, and proportionable Ability in this case is necessary.
For my part, I have for some time studied the Writings of Chemists, but have
found nothing but expense in that Philosophy, and never yet could hear of an
Adept, nor of any that was grown rich by this means.


Art. I confess I have been no luckier than you, as to what concerns Adepts and
the Elixir or Philosophers Stone. But I make no doubt but that we may get a
Competency by drawing Silver out of Lead, and especially Gold out of Silver, if
you can but procure us Money to set us up, to furnish a House and provide other
Necessaries, and keep us and some Servants 'till our Preparations be made and
we begin to have some Profits, which possibly would be in four or five Months
time, or there-abouts. Besides we may probably find out some extraordinary good
Remedies, which in time may be very profitable.


Stud. I wish things may succeed according to your Expectation. But if you were
pleased to give me your Receipt, could not I first of all try it in little; or
if it cannot be done except we have a whole House and many Conveniences for
the purpose, would it be improper to communicate the Secret to some rich Man
that were virtuous and discreet?


Art. Go not so fast; you are much too hasty. You don't yet know any thing of
the Receipt your self; do not talk already of communicating it. I must tell ye,
I never designed to reveal more than the fourth part of it to you, though by the
Conversations we have had together since our acquaintance, and the inquiries I
have made, I have tried and found you to have discretion and the fear of God,
without which you should have been no Friend nor Partner for me; and I will not
discover more than so much to any Man, for fear of the worse, The World is
wicked and unworthy; and Secrets of this nature ought by no means to be
prostituted and published. There are few good and deserving Men; two or three
of those (when they are well known) may be made choice of, to be entrusted,
under the Seal of Secrecy, that one preparing one thing, and another another
Ingredient, it be not even in any one's power to divulge the whole Process. But
if there be any Gains to be made, it were incongruous to make any rich Man
partaker of it; for if he be virtuous, he is more than contented with his
abundance, and if he be not reasonable, it were unphilosophical to deal with
him.


Stud. But virtuous, rich Men might be most able to do much good.


Art. If they be honest, let 'em do what is incumbent on them; let them enable
poor Artists to be beneficial, without seeking to know their Art, which God has
not thought fit to commit to them.


Stud. After all, supposing you certainly had a way to make some Prosits by
Chimistry and mixing and purifying of Metals, what danger or mischief could
there be to communicate the Receipt to several Persons of several Ranks; for if
they were never so bad, yet would they not, think you, keep your Secret for
their own interest; and if they were good Men, would they not do it out of
Conscience and Religion?


Art. You talk like a raw Artist and one of no Experience. If they were rich,
they would not work themselves, but employ others, and so the order of the
World might be destroyed, the Art in a short time being common. If they be good
Men, they may be imprudent and not secret enough; How few good Men but would
leave the Art to their Families, though it ought to be communicated neither for
love nor kindred sake! And if they be wicked, it would be a heinous Sin to
enrich them by Philosophy, and enable them to commit their Riots, and trample
under foot the rest of the World. In fine, that the generality of Men are
unworthy, is reason enough not to divulge such a Secret. How base and unjust
are most Men, who would make no scruple to persecute the Servants and Children
of God; and how profane and impious who would rebel against Heaven and fight
against God, to be, in spite of him, masters of his Secrets! But, I remember,
you have sometime considered these things and mentioned them; How have you
forgotten 'em?


Stud. I Am glad to see you are in the same Mind with me; I have the more Hopes
of your Chemical Speculations, and think you are even qualified for the
Communication of Adepts. But, seeing you will not wholly entrust me with your
Process, before we undertook it in the great, could you not, your self, try it
in little?


Art. It cannot be done in less Time, nor with much less Charge at first,
(because of the Rooms, Utensils and other Conveniences that should be
necessary) than if we made a greater quantity together: And I need no
Experiment to be assured that I am in the right; for I have abundant reason to
be consident of that.


Stud. If I saw such a probability, I would borrow Money at eight per Cent. to
provide all Necessaries.


Art. Do what you will. I desire nothing in hand. Get but those things which it
will be your share to prepare; fit your self to make those Preparations, and
furnish a House, where I may have Lodgings and Entertainment about half a year
after it is ready, that is, as soon as the Profits begin to be perceived, half
of which by Agreement shall belong to me. Let there be a Laboratory, in the
House, peculiar to my self, and a spare Room, well furnished, in case some
Adept in time will please to come to us; for that is my greatest aim and desire.


Stud. It Is strange that no Adept will communicate himself. Could not an Adept
address himself to the chief Pastors, or the States and supreme Governor of a
Land? Surely, the anointing would be respected. Something should be tried, to
do good to the World. However, could not one communicate himself to some honest
private Man, and a virtuous and industrious Artist, such as your self?


Art. Hitherto Men have not courted Adepts, nor been civil to them; far from
that, they seem to have been under Persecution every where, and in danger of
every Body. Therefore we cannot tell what we would do our selves, were we
Adepts: Such a one always runs a hazard, when he discovers himself. By length
of time, being approved virtuous and secret, and just Dispensers of that which
Providence has committed, there may be, perhaps, some hopes. But the generality
of Men look upon Adepts as mean Rogues, which do not deserve the least Regard,
and whose safe living in the Society, is not worth the being provided for.


Stud. The more is the Pity. I do not therefore blame Adepts for being
cautious. But I think there may be over-doing in any thing. What hurt can there
be to reveal something to one that is known to be honest, and is under the
Obligation of Secrecy?


Art. True. But every one will be free, and will take his own Time and the
fittest Opportunity. I am in the same disposition my self. When I see you have
a House ready, and some Conveniences, I shall discover to you more of my
Thoughts. Now I Will tell you, and I don't care if all the World know it, that if
we do any thing, we may work these Materials: Lead, suppose, 12 l. Iron, 1 l.
Red Copper, 2 l. Antimony, 8 l. Silver, 2 Ounces; Gold, 1 Ounce; choice,
River-Sand, 10 l. Sea-Stones, 6 l. Vitriol, 2 l. Marchassites, 4 l. Cinaber, 5
l. adding some other things: Something must be used which has an extraordinary
opening Faculty; the Tincture of many Ingredients must be drawn, which can be
drawn but in little; you must make good Spirit of Wine and Spirit of Vinegar;
you must dry, at a gentle Fire, in a close Vessel, during the space of four and
twenty Hours, something that I shall give you; you must join some Tinctures
according to a due Method and Pondus, and then, following my Directions, I
believe we shall find some Profit, and, it may be, some good Remedies.


Stud. Those Experiments are for the great Men of the World, or those at least
who have a considerable Sum of Money to spare every Year, (two hundred Pounds
perhaps) and can calmly hazard it, and be content if nothing come on it,
generously venturing that for the good of Mankind, resolving to make a good use
of it in case of success, and otherwise being able to sustain the loss, and
actually bearing it like Philosophers.


Art. Great Men have other things to busy their Heads with, and generally
Truth is left destitute and unregarded. It Is to be feared it will always be so.
Howbeit, by the Entertainment which Adepts Friends find, Adepts may judge what
they are to expect: And Wisdom will be justified by her Children, whoever they
be. But those that are experienced, are of opinson that the Art requires no
very great Sum. All that I desire is, that I may have the opportunity to invite
to me, and to entertain and protect some Adept, which I protest, before God and
Men, I would do with most inviolable Fidelity. And I conclude with this
Profession, That I hold it the greatest madness, as well as the greatest
injustice in the World to seek to discover them, to injure them or offer them
any violence, and thereby heap Wrath against the day of Wrath; and I esteem it
infinitely preferable, either never to possess their Medicinal Treasures, or to
obtain the same from them by their good Will, and the divine Grace: In fine, I
am verily apt to believe, that by the Means and upon the Conditions I have
mentioned, some Adept e're it be long will communicate himself, if Men will
publicly premise to protect Adepts, and to maintain them in their full Liberty.


FINIS.

