ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Dr. CALAMY's DISCOURSE IN THE Conformists Cases AGAINST
Dissenters, CONCERNING A Scrupulous Conscience. Wherein the Nature of a
Doubting, Tender Conscience is Considered: Together with the Duty of such as
are possessed of it.

Romans XIV. 23. He that doubts, is damned, if he eats; because he eats not
of faith. LONDON, Printed: And are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms Inn, in Warwick Lane. 1700.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Dr. CALAMY's DISCOURSE IN THE Conformists Cales AGAINST
Dissenters, CONCERNING A Scrupulous Conscience.
IT would contribute (not a little) to the healing of our Breaches, of we could
come to a due Notion:

1. Of a Doubting Tender Conscience.

2. Of the Duty of such as are possessed of it, with reference to their own
Practice.

3. Concerning the Duty of Superiors, with relation to it in their Subjects or
Inferior's Practice.

The Author of a lately-printed Sermon, called A Discourse about a Scrupulous
Conscience, has offered at two of these things:

He has undertaken to tell us what is a Scrupulous Conscience, p. 4, 5. and
again, p. 35. he has given us its Character (as he judges) p. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. He has directed us what to do to get quit of it, and how we ought to
behave our selves under it, p. 18, 19, 20. and to the end of his Discourse. He
has not meddled with the Duty of Superiors, with relation to it, in the
Subjects or Inferiors Practice: That (it may be) is fitter for Chamber-Council,
than to be published upon the House-tops, however he has fairly hinted it in
his Epistle-Dedicatory.

What is a Scrupulous or Doubting Concience.
The Doubting Conscience our Author calls every where a Scrupulous Conscience,
and tells us, p. 5. It is conversant about things in their own Nature
indifferent, and consists in strictly tying up our selves to some things
which God has no where commanded; or in a conscientious abstaining from such
things as are not forbid, nor any ways unlawful. P. 6. It starts, and boggles
where there is no real Evil, or Mischief. He knows not better how to illustrate
it, than by those inaccountable Antipathies that some Men have against some
sorts of Meats or living Creatures, which have no harm in them, yet are so
offensive and dreadful to such Persons, that they fly from them as they would
from a Tiger or Bear: Just thus (he says) some run out of the Church at the
sight of a Surplice, as if they had been scared by the Apparition of a Ghost.
P. 35. he says, When I speak of a Scrupulous Conscience, I suppose the Person
tolerably well persuaded of the Lawfulness of a thing that is to be done; but
yet he does not like nor approve of it, he has some little Reasons and
Exceptions against it; it is not the best and fittest, all things considered.
This is properly a Scruple, and is certainly the Case of all those, who do
sometimes (to save themselves from the Severity of the Laws) join in our
Worship, and communicate with us, which we presume they would never do, did
they judge it absolutely sinful and forbidden by God.

This is what the Author says, to notify to us the thing whereof he speaks,
and of which he afterward affirms.

In the first place, it is worthy of our Enquiry from what Diminution Office
this Term of Scrupulous Conscience (fronting the Book, and so often repeated in
it,) is fetched. The Scripture speaking often of Conscience, (and that in the
Author's Notion of it,) says nothing of a Scrupulous Conscience; but has
brought all Complexions of Conscience under that of a Persuaded Mind, and a
Doubting Mind, Romans 14.5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: v.
23. And he that doubts, is damned, if he eat; because he eats not of faith:
for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. There is not a Word of a Scrupulous
Conscience in the whole Book of God.

By what Authority we first create a thing, and then destroy it, or of what
Significancy to the World any such Employment is, I cannot tell. But I take the
Term to be only a Term of Defamation, for a Doubting Conscience that is tender,
and afraid to provoke a living God, knowing how fearful a thing it is to fall
into his hands, Heb. 10.31. If the Question were put, What a Christian that
doubts of the Lawfulness of a thing in the Worship of God, may or ought to
do; whether he may (according to our Author's Position, p. 25.) take the
Lawfulness of the thing upon Trust from his legal Teachers, concluding himself
no competent Judge of it himself: The Apostle would have resolved the Person
before he ever could have got to the Parsonage-house, Romans 14.23. He that
doubts, is damned, if he eat not; because he eats not of faith. We must not
therefore state the Question about a Doubting Mind, but about a Scrupulous
Conscience, that is a thing hardly to be found in Nature.

Our Author tells us it is conversant about things indifferent, things neither
by God Commanded nor forbidden; such things there are, even in the Worship of
God, if we consider them abstractly from all Circumstances. But those very
things may not be so, but either necessary or sinful, according to their
different Positions, and diversified Circumstances. Now what things are
indifferent, in actu exercito, or clothed with all their Circumstances, for
this or that Person to do or avoid, is no easy thing for a Christian to
determine for himself, much less for another, who knows not his
Circumstances, to determine for him. It is very possible, a thing may be lawful
for another to do, yea it may be necessary, which it may be necessary for me to
avoid, and both upon the same Account, viz. avoiding Sin against God; for, in
this Case, what is one Man's Meat may be another Man's Poison: So that what is
truly indifferent, as to particular Practice, pro hic and nunc, we shall know
at the Day of Judgment, but can no otherwise know it before, than from the
Dictate of our own Consciences; which, if they be fully persuaded, Men may eat;
but if they doubt, they are damned if they eat, (if St. Paul may be believed.)
It was at that time of the Day a thing indifferent for Christians to eat, or
not to eat the Meats prohibited to the Jews; to keep, or not to keep one of
those Holy Days, which, before Christ's Coming, it was necessary for them to
observe. All the Judaical Ceremonies were at that time indifferent; if they had
not, Paul would neither have circumcised Timothy, Acts 16.3. because of the
Jews in those Quarters; nor purified himself and others at Jerusalem, Acts
21.26. and yet declare to the Galatians, chapter 5.2. that if they were
circumcised, Christ should profit them nothing: Yet this great Apostle (the
most undoubted Superior) does not determine, that those that doubted might eat,
nor determine them to eat, or keep the Days, though they doubted; but tells them
plainly, He that doubts, is damned, if he eats, and only persuades those
that did eat, not to despise those that did not, because God had received them,
Romans 14.3. and because they, in not eating, were another's Servants; and, v.
17. the Kingdom of God lay not in these things; yet it so far lay in them, that
if they doubted, they might not do them; and, v. 20. it was evil to eat with
Offense, etc.

For our Author's Illustration, and comparing these Doubts to natural
Antipathies, etc. in some Cases it is proper enough; but admit the Antipathy
inaccountable, yet where it is, it is very hard to deliver our selves from it;
and I doubt not but our Author has so much of a Man in him, as if he knew a
Person (as I have known some) that could not endure a Room where a Cat or a
piece of Cheese were, without continual Sweating, Sickness, and fainting, he
would pity the Person, and command the Cat or the Cheese to be taken out, and
determine it mighty Cruelty for any to impose upon such a Person, that he
should eat no Meat, if no Cheese might be upon the Table; nor sleep in quiet in
any Ruom, where a Cat should not bear him Company. Such Imposers every one
would determine no great Friends to Mankind, nor to have any Compassion for the
Infirmities of Human Nature. Facile, says he in Terence, quum valemus aegrotis
consilium damus: But David's Soul, Psalm. 123.4. was exceedingly filled with the
scornings of those that were at ease, and with the Contempt of the Proud.
Others might speak as they do, if their Souls were in their Souls stead; they
might also heap up Words against them, and shake their Heads at them: But they
hope that they should strengthen them with their mouth, and the moving of their
lips should assuage their grief, Job 26.4, 5. Antipathies are planted by the
God of Nature; no mortal Hand can pluck them out. If these Doubts be as
inaccountable things, yet certainly they ought no more to be called Faction and
Rebellion, Vngovernable Humors and Prejudices; than the Child's forbearing to
eat Cheese, notwithstanding its Mother's Persuasion, Arguments, Entreaties,
ought to be styled Rebellion, or Disobedience to its Mother.

But our Author is wonderfully confident to call Christians Dissents, as to the
Lawfulness of some Ceremonies and Forms to be used in the Worship of God,
inaccountable Antipathies; of which so great Men, as Mr. Cartwright, Dr. Ames,
Mr. Bradshaw, Mr. Calderwood in his Altar Damascenum, Mr. Gillispy, (Men whose
Learning cannot be questioned but by such as themselves are the Enemies of
Learning,) have given so large Accounts, to say nothing of the whole Churches
of Scotland, New England, etc. and Hundreds of particular Persons, that use not
to muffle their Readers with the blind Notions of Sympathies and Antipathies.

He tells us, p. 31. when he speaks of Scrupulous Consciences, he means such as
are tolerably persuaded of the Lawfulness of the things, but yet do not like
nor approve of it as the best, etc. He should have done well to have told us
who these are; for we know none such. Yes, he says, this is certainly the Case
of all those who do sometimes, to save themselves from the Severity of the
Laws, join in Worship and Communion with them, which, he presumes, they would
never do, did they judge it absolutely sinful and forbidden by God.

Some such Persons indeed we know, and are heartily sorry that they meet with
no better Encouragement than Apostate Protestants meet with from the Papists,
who, when they have first debauched them, then make it their Business to expose
them, and ridicule their Religion. But in this Case there is no Apostasy, and
the Ridicule will return with Advantage upon the Exposers uncharitable Heads.

1. Those who do so, do in Heart believe, that the Church of England is no
Idolatrous Church; that God has not said unto it, You are not my People, and
therefore they ought more totally to separate from it, than to have Communion
with it, in any thing which they judge sinful; they therefore imitate our
Savior, who sometimes went to the Temple, and to the Synagogues, and to the
Passover at Easter (though themselves have not the Liberty he had to preach in
the Synagogues and the Temple, which makes them not so constant there as he,)
but had no Communion with them in the Traditional part of their Religion, as
our Author excellently observes, p. 1, 2. Nor did he tie himself to their
Exercise of Religion, but often preached elsewhere, and that not to Four only,
but Four or Five thousand sometimes: So as they do it not merely to save
themselves from the Severity of Laws, but are thus far a Law unto themselves.

2. But for ever to spoil our Adversaries of this pitiful Weapon, and little
Advantage of reproaching their Brethren, we will for once suppose some
Nonconformists went to hear the Prayers, and received the Sacrament in
Parochial Churches, to save their Estates, to serve a Turn, to keep an Office,
(as others express it) shall this conclude that they judge the things
universally lawful, under all Circumstances? Things indeed, morally wicked, may
never be done; things morally necessary may never be left undone: But certainly
some mala prohibita, things which are only unlawful, because prohibited by a
positive Law, and that do not respect Acts of Worship, or the Truth of it, but
Rites relating to it, may under some Circumstances be done, which under others
ought to be avoided; and may under some Circumstances be avoided, which under
others may be lawfully done: Not that any thing prohibited by God, pro hic and
nunc, may, hic and nunc, be done, that were to set up one higher than the
highest; but because the same thing, that under these, or these Circumstances,
is prohibited, under others is not. The Apostle determines to the Corinthians,
that it was unlawful for them to eat Meat offered to Idols, if they had other
Meat to eat, or if their Conscience doubted, or if their Brother was offended,
1 Cor. 10.28. which yet was lawful, if bought in the Shambles, v. 25. or set
upon their Neighbors Table, v. 27. Our Savior has satisfied us, Matthew. 12.5.
That the Priests in the Temple Profane the Sabbath, and are blameless; and
has taught the Physician and the Surgeon, that they may do the same in
healing sick or lame Persons; and the Husbandman, that he may do the like, in
giving Meat or Water to his Beasts, or lifting them out of the Pit. The People
were blameless that were not for Forty Years together circumcised the Eighth
Day, Jos. 5.5. yet the Law was otherwise, Genesis 17.13, 14. Christ sent the
Scribes and Pharisees to learn the Meaning of that, I will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice; and certainly the first Mercy is to be showed to our selves. I do
not therefore at all doubt, but if there can be found a Man who has Knowledge
enough to discern the Lord's Body, and Piety enough to lay hold upon Christ,
and apply Him and his Benefits to his Soul, who yet forbear to receive the
Sacrament at his Parish Church: 1. Either because he did not like kneeling in
the Act of Receiving; or because he should declare himself one Body with some
Profane Persons, or give Offense to other Conscientious Persons, etc. and in
that was blameless, and did what he ought, being at liberty: But under sucha
Circumstance as this, he must do it, or starve himself and Family, or lie in a
Goal all his Life; he may do it. Many things are lawful, which no good
Christian ought to choose; and there are many things which under some
Circumstances he may choose, which under others were Wickedness for him to
choose. Nor will Superiors Commands justify the doing those Acts which other
Circumstances will justify. Superiors Commands will justify none to work on
his Trade on the Sabbath Day; but the saving of a Man's Life, nay, the Life of
a Beast, the quenching of a Fire in his own, or his Neighbor's House, will.
But this is enough to stop the Mouth of this ignorant Clamor, and to let the
World know that all are not Knaves whom some so call, and that some may be
driven to a Sacrament, who saw no Reason to go without driving, and may, very
probably, see as little Reason to go, longer than till the Force (which was not
good) does abate, and be much less blameable than those that drive them, or
such who in Obedience to that Force received the Sacrament, but not the
Eucharist. This is enough to have animadverted upon what the Author has upon
the Notion of a Doubting Conscience, which he subtly calls Scrupulous.

He comes in the next place to defame it: This he does (having told us it is
the same with that some call a Tender Conscience) by telling us,

1. That it is a very sickly, crazy Temper of Mind, p. 7.

2. That it is often a Sign of Hypocrisy, p. 8.

3. That nothing is more Troublesome and Vexatious, p. 11.

4. That these Scruples are endless, ibid.

5. That it has done unspeakable Mischief to the Church of Christ, p. 13.

Our Author is the first Divine (at least that I ever met with) who first
described what he meant by a Scrupulous Conscience, to take to be a Tender
Conscience, and then told the World, It was a very sickly, crazy Temper of
Mind, a great Indisposition, a State of Weakness and Infirmity, arising from
Ignorance, and want of right understanding our Religion; from undue
Timerousness, or Unsettledness of Mind; from Melancholy, or unreasonable
Prejudices and Mistakes about the Nature of Things. What is? what can be a
Tenderness of Conscience, but a Fear of Offending the Great and Living God? It
is true, it is possible this may be too much, and often is, when advantaged
from Melancholy, which naturally influenceth the Mind with Fear. It is as true,
that Fear may sometimes arise from Ignorance, and that all Fear, respecting
Actions to be done, does so; (there will therefore be no such Fear in Heaven,
where we shall no longer know in part, but as we are known.) But Knowledge in
part is our highest Attainment in this Life, which gives a just Ground of
Fear; and indeed, setting aside the Reverential Fear of God, (which is what
will be found in Heaven) I do not know what that Fear of God is, by which all
Religion is usually expressed in Scripture, but a Fear of offending God; and
though it arises out of Ignorance, yet it is no sickly, crazy Temper, but as
perfect a State of Heart as any Soul can have, not cured of the Mortality of
the Body which it informs. According to Degrees of Knowledge, so are Degrees
of Fear, less or greater. Solomon says, Prove. 28.14. Happy is he who fears
always: but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief. Religion is
often described by Fearing God, but never by Confidence, or Boldness, or Hardness
of Heart. Indeed, an Overfearfulness, or fearing where no Fear is, is a great
Evil: But who shall judge of that? The Want of this Externus Judex spoils all,
and where to find him we cannot tell; for he is not to be found in Rome it
self, as to things to be done. If a Man's own Conscience must be Judge, as to
his Practice, an Overfearfulness is rather a Man's Misfortune than his wilful
Sin. I should not have adventured to call it a crazy Temper, lest some should
think that I should think that much Fear of God can make Men mad.

2. It is very true, that an overmuch Serupulosity may be sometimes a Sign of
Hypocrisy; but never is so, unless in the Case he mentions of the Pharisees,
when Men strain at Gnats, and swallow Camels: Let those who do so bear their
Blame, and endure the Imputation of Hypocrites. But want does this concern
others? Making long Prayers is also by our Savior made a Mark of Hypocrisy;
but it is only so when it is done in Pretense to cover the devouring Widows
Houses. Our Author needed not to have told us, That they who pretend to such
tender Consciences above other Men, must know, that the World will watch them
as to the Fairness and Justice of their Dealings, the Calmness of their
Tempers, their Behavior in their several relations, their Modesty, Humility,
Charity, Peaceableness, and the like; because the Prophet Jeremy has told us
so, Jer. 20.10. For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side: Report,
say they, and we will report: All my familiars watched for my halting:
Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and take our
revenge upon him. But besides, all this is built upon this Foundation, That
every Man is an Hypocrite, who pretends Conscience in one thing, and shows
it not in all things, because Conscience is uniform. Then he grants, That
every one that does go to his Parish Church, and there receives the Sacrament,
according to all the Rites of the Church, yet is an Hypocrite, if he be a
Common Drunkard, Swearer, Liar, Sabbath-breaker, Unjust in his Dealings,
Uncharitable, an Unkind, Husband or Wife, a Rebellious or Undutiful Child,
Impudent, Proud, Turbulent, Quarrelsome, an Unfaithful Servant, etc. For the
same Reason that concludes the Nonconformists, so, for not going, yet being
any of these ways guilty, will also conclude the Conformist so. If he be
guilty, this will make Multitudes of Transgressors on Both sides, and not leave
any great Crowds on either sides Masters of any Conscience: And after this, we
need not propound the Question, Are there few that shall be saved? Res ipsa
loquitur. It is true, that a True Good Conscience equally obliges to every
piece of the Divine Law, where the Mind is equally enlightened: But that every
Man and Woman that is not an Hypocrite, will follow the Obligation to every
part, with an equal Pace, I dare not say. It is as he apprehends the more or
less heinous Nature of the Sin. It is commonly observed, that God is most
Jealous in the Matters of his Worship; the Holy Scripture proves it, the Wrath
of God has, from time to time, been most severely revealed against such Sins;
and that not in the Case of Idolatry alone, (for that was neither the Case of
Nadab and Abibu, nor yet of Vzzah or Vzziah, or Saul.) It is not therefore to
be concluded, that that Man that is tender in these things, is an Hypocrite;
though he may, as to some things, fail in his Dealings in Fairness, or Justice,
(if some may be Judges especially) or be guilty of what some Men call Faction
and Schism, and Disobedience to Superiors. Even St. Paul himself, who durst
deliver unto his Coirnthians no more than what he had received from the Lord,
was yet by Tertullus, Acts 24.5. styled a Pestilent Fellow, and a mover of
Sedition amongst all the Jews throughout the World, and a Ringleader of the
Sect of the Nazarenes; which was as much as a Factions Person, and a
Schismatic, and Disobedient to Superiors. By the same Reason, that a Man may
more fear Murder and Treason, than a little unconscionable Gain, or
Petty-Laceny, even a Conscientious Man may fear Deviations from the Rule of
Worship, more than some other Errors of his Life, either not known to him, or
not of the highest Magnitude. But, I trust, the World shall see, and in part
does see, the Generality of Nonconformists as much afraid of a Lewd and
Profane Life, as they are of doing what is superfluous, or (as they apprehend)
forbidden in the Worship of God. If there be a Judas amongst the Twelve, he
will not determine all the rest Traitors, I hope; for they generally let the
World judge on which side are the most (Number for Number) Men of
Righteousness, in giving to every one their due Right; or Charity, in giving
Alms of such Things as they have; or Modesty, in their Speeches or Behaviors.

3. It is very true, that there is nothing more troublesome than unreasonable
Scruples: But what is this to those that have a moral Certainty of the
unlawfulness of things? which is as much as Men can have as to the most of
things to be done or avoided: There are very few Dissenters but do at least
pretend to this, as to those things they boggle at, believing things may by
Circumstances be made unlawful, which, possibly, under other Circumstances
would not be so, as well as other things which are against the Light of Nature,
or the express Letter of the Divine Law.

4. For the Infiniteness of Scruples, it is but asserted; nor will it follow,
that because some particular Persons may scruple or doubt any thing, therefore
it is the best way to fear, or doubt of nothing.

5. Nor does it follow, that because the needless scrupling lawful things has
done Mischief to the Church, therefore none may doubt the Lawfulness of the
things which others say are lawful, and while they doubt, forbear the doing of
them; especially considering, that if the things be but lawful, they are not
necessary to be imposed upon any. This our Author is aware of, p. 26. and tells
us, He only considers things as they stand, and will not consider the Duty of
Superiors, how far they may, or ought to condescend to the Weakness of others.
He tells us also further, That if this were a sufficient Reason why the
Constitution of any Church should be altered, because some things are scrupled
in it, there would never be any settled Church while the World stands. -- There
is nothing now doubted by any sober Person, but what was doubted, and the
Reasons of those Doubts propounded before any such Constitution was, (if he
means that we were constituted by the last Act of Uniformity.) If the Reasons
did not seem sufficient to the Authors of that Constitution, we cannot help it;
they then did, and yet do appear so unto many, and that not only of the
present, but the former Ages, and that not in our own Church only, but are done
in no other Reformed Churches, (except the Lutheran Churches) from whom our
Church also in other things enough differs. Still we want a Judex externus de
agendis, one that shall infallibly judge for others concerning Sin and Duty:
For if a Man's Conscience only can execute that Office, the Superior indeed
(being Judge of his own Act) may enforce, imprison, ruin Men and Families, for
not obeying what he grants he is under no Necessity to command. The Inferior,
that judges the thing sinful, must lie in Prison, satisfying himself with the
Liberty of his Spirit, and take the spoiling of his Goods joyfully, believing
that he has in Heaven a better and far more enduring Substance, or suffer
Exile, looking for a better Country; and it must be determined at the last Day
who is in the Right: And when all is said that can be, this is all that the
Word of God will allow any Inferior in the Case, save that it will oblige him
to use the best Means he can further to inform himself; in order to which, our
Author is so Charitable as to lend us his Candle: Let us see if, by all the
Endeavors we can use, we can light ours by it.

1. His First Direction is excellent, viz. To beget and cherish in our Minds
the Most High, and Worthy, and Honorable Thoughts of God Almighty: But his
Enlargements on this Head we cannot so well agree. Had it not been Sophistry
for any Person to have argued thus: Can the Man have becoming and excellent
Thoughts of the Divine Nature, who imagines that he regards whether the Ark be
carried on a Cart, or upon Men's Shoulders; whether the Fire drops from Heaven,
or be taken out of the Kitchen, by which Incense is burned to him? If any say
we are not under the same Dispensation, was there then in these things any
thing either Typical or Carnal? Has not God as sufficiently revealed his Will
for Gospel, as for Legal Worship? He certainly has the most honorable
Thoughts of God, who thinks him the fittest to direct his own Homage, and not
one whose Wisdom ought to be controlled, or may be so much as tacitly
impeached. The Phrases of thinking to Flatter or Humor God, might have been
spared by one advising others to High, Worthy, and Honorable Thoughts of God.
Offer them now to a Prince, will they be accepted?

2. Whereas the Author advises us to lay out our great Care about necessary
and substantial Duties, he speaks well; the Apostle indeed does tell us, Romans
14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost; in the same Sense that the Prophet tells us, God
will have mercy, and not sacrifice: But if this be urged to persuade us to do
things, the Lawfulness of which we doubt, whosoever urges it, is confuted by the
last Words of the same Chapter; He that doubts, is damned, if he eats;
because he eats not of faith: whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. It is
indeed a Text well urged, to let those that eat know it is their Duty, not to
despise, not to judge, much less to ruin and undo those that doubtingly dare
not eat, and can meet with no Satisfaction to their Doubts, though they
diligently seek and desire it.

3. We needed not therefore our Author's Advice, to be willing to receive
Satisfaction, if the Desires of Peace and Unity, the Goodness of our Natures,
our Love to our Wives and Children, would not obtain this of us: Yet surely the
destroying of our Healths by nasty Prisons, the taking away our Estates, would,
e're this time, have made us willing, if it had been possible for us, to have
believed what we listed, or the Dread of God had not awed us from doing, what
we believe is not lawful for us to do. We have read the Books wrote on these
Arguments, but it is our Unhappiness that we cannot find the Question truly
stated. If we tell them a thousand times, that we question not the Lawfulness
of some Circumstances to be appointed in Worship, but of appointing Ceremonies
and Rites entailed to Acts of Worship; still we find the Question stated about
Circumstances, Whether Superiors may appoint them? Let us often tell them, the
Question is not, Whether we may do things which we scruple? but, Whether we may
do things which we by Arguments, which we cannot answer, do judge unlawful? yet
the next time the Question is stated, shall be about Scruples? Tell them, the
Question is not about things indifferent, but things which (whatever Opinion
Superiors have of them) we judge sinful; still (will we, nill we,) it must be
taken for granted, that the things are indifferent. If we tell them, the
Question is not about the Lawfulness of Forms of Prayer, nor yet of the
Lawfulness of their Use in Devotion, as well as for Instruction; but of the
Lawfulness of the universal Use of them by all Persons, and those Forms too not
prescribed by God, nor made by him that himself afterward uses them, but such
as are made for our Use by other Men, and imposed on us; the next time the
Question is stated, it shall be about the Lawfulness of Forms of Prayer, a
thing we never denied. We would be very glad if our Reverend Author could
direct us to any one Book, where the Questions we insist upon are truly stated,
and the Part opposite to us closely argued, and we not only pressed with the
Arguments of mere Authority commanding, and the Practice of Antiquity, when
it is certain Superiors are not to be obeyed in all things, and we cannot find
any such Antiquity; nor, if we could, can judge it a sufficient Guide to our
Consciences.

We do not despise, nor neglect (some of us at least) to go to our Ministers,
nay, to some Parochial Ministers, (though we could never understand Parishes,
Jure Divino; nor the Rectors, or Vicars, or Curates, of or in them, as such, to
be so; though we own a Ministry, and their Ministry (many of them we mean) to be
such,) but all that we can hear from them, is, The things commanded, are
indifferent; being commanded, you are bound to obey your Superiors: If not, we
must present you, etc. When we tell them, That if we could judge them
indifferent, our Obedience would be Matter of Dispute to none or few of us; but
we cannot so judge them. They indeed tell us, God has no where forbidden them;
but when we reply, Neither has God in any Letter of Scripture forbidden us the
Use of Salt, and Cream, and Spittle, or Oil, in Baptism; yet, were these things
commanded, we could not judge them lawful, because of no Institution, no
Necessity, no Use; we cannot hear any thing satisfactorily replied. We own our
selves bound to obey Superiors in things lawful, but we cannot allow our
Superiors, as to our Practice, to be Judges of things always lawful in God's
Worship, because they cannot foresee all Circumstances that may make things in
themselves lawful, pro hic and nunc, unlawful. We cannot allow our selves the
same Liberty to practice, as our Physician directs us, for the Health of our
Bodies, or a Lawyer, for the Security of our Estates, and, as our Minister
directs, for our Souls, because we think our Souls better than our Bodies and
Estates, and therefore a Trust as to them cannot be so safe, but of infinite
more Hazard; and besides, though we have not Avicen, and Paracelsus, and Galen,
and Hipocrates, to read, and if we had them, we could not understand them, and
the Physician prescribes not ad hominem, but ad Socratem; yet we have the Word
of God, it is nigh us, in our Eyes and Ears, we can read it, and it prescribes
ad homines, the same things to all Men, and we are bid to search it, and by it
to prove all things, and then to hold fast what is good, (not in others, but in
our own Eyes:) So as, under Correction, the Reason is not the same for
following the Prescripts of Divines, as of Physicians and Lawyers; yet few Men
will follow either of them, if they have any strong Opinion they advise them
ill, though they may, when they have nothing to object to what they prescribe or
advise.

But the Author is aware, that the Trumpets also may give uncertain Sounds, the
very Guides and Ministers of Religion may determine differently: He directs
also what to do in this Case, p. 25, 26.

1. His first Direction is very Reasonable, That those who are able tolerably
to judge for themselves, should not rely upon the Authority of any that do it,
nor become the Proselytes of any, further than they give them good Scripture
and Reason for it. Let that Soul forfeit the Name of Rational and Religious
too, that will not receive this. This is indeed to make Men Proselytes of the
Law. But,

2. For others, he says, (and how to know them he has not told us,) they had
better trust to, and depend on those Ministers of known Sufficiency for their
Office, who are regularly, and by the Laws of the Land set over them, than any
other Guides and Teachers that they can choose for themselves. This he says,
To be sure is the safest Course. But he afterward tells us, He speaks not of
such things as concern the Salvation of Men, which are plain and evident to the
meanest Capacities, but of Forms and Ceremonies. His Reason is, Because, if
they chance to mislead the People, they have something to say for themselves:
Their Error is more excusable and pardonable, as being occasioned by those to
whose Judgment, by God's Command, the People owe a great Respect and Submission.

I know not how we shall ever agree here, unless in this:

1. That they had better trust to, and depend upon none at all, but the
Judgment of their own Consciences, enlightened first, as well as may be, by the
Information of those Learned and Holy Men on both sides, who may in the Point
differ one from another, after seeking God for his Direction.

2. For the Truth is, we are for no Trusts, in Matters of Sin or Duty, (all
which Things we take to be Matters of Salvation or Damnation) in which Case,
none ought to trust any further than they can see, though they ought to use the
best Means for seeing, they can. The taking Credenda, or the Matters of Faith,
upon Trust, is the Foundation-Error of Popery: He taking Agenda, Matters of
Practice, wherein the Safety or Eternal Hazard of a Soul is concerned, is
something as bad as Popery.

3. It will puzzle an Angel to make us understand what Virtue or Ability there
is or can be in a Teacher, whom the Laws of the Land have set over us, above
what is in one whom God has set over us: There is indeed no Opposition betwixt
these two; God may have set one to watch for our Souls, whom the Laws of a Land
may authorize to it, but one may by the Laws of a Land be set over us, whom God
never so set. He that should say, that in Popish Countries God has set those
Priests and Confessors over People, whom the Laws of those Countries have so
set, will find it an hard Task to prove what he says.

4. Nor can we understand how the Laws of a Land can set Pastors over Souls:
They can make Rectors, and Parsons, and Vicars, give them Glebes, and Tithes,
and Houses; (but All Souls are mine, says God.) We would gladly see it proved,
that in the Spiritual Concerns of our Souls any can be set over us, but those
whom God has so set, that is, who come to their Places in that Method and
Order which God has prescribed. Now that God has any where directed how Human
Laws should set Pastors over People, wants better Proof than any we have seen:
We only reject the Notion till we see it proved by any Line of Scripture, or
any thing which looks like Venerable Antiquity.

5. We can as little understand how any erring, through the Mistakes of any
such Guides, should have this to say for themselves, Our Error is occasioned by
those, to whose Judgments, by thy Command, (O God!) we owed a great Submission?
Where has God required such a Submission, a Respect and Reverence indeed is
due; but that a Submission of Conscience also is, we no where find.

4. Our Author's next Direction, is, thoroughly to consider the Nature of
Lawful, and how it differs from what is necessary, and what is sinful. Who
does not know, that a thing lawful is what is neither commanded nor forbidden?
That is, not forbidden, either in the Letter of Scripture, or the true Sense of
it; either generally, or particularly, or consequentially; either in it self
considered seperately from Circumstances, or as attended with such or such
Circumstances. This way of arguing indeed is very plain and convincing; but if
the Meaning be not forbidden abstractly, or in the (...), or Letter of
Scripture, it is very false, and weak, and fallacious.

Our Author, p. 28. takes notice of two Mistakes (as he thinks) upon which Men's
Scruples are founded, as to Rites and Ceremonies.

1. That nothing in the Worship of God is lawful, but what himself has
appointed. I know none that thinks so; there are indeed some that think, that
nothing in the Worship of God is lawful, which himself has not appointed,
which is idle, and superfluous, and not necessary to the Performance of it,
upon the Account of Nature, Convenience, or apparent Decency.

2. Neither does any say, that those things are unlawful to be used in God's
Worship, which are necessary upon any of the aforesaid Accounts, and are but
Appendants of Divine Worship, not entering into the Bowels of it, though they
have been abused in Idolatrous Worship; for other things, there are many who
think them eo nomine, unlawful, and may think so still, for any thing our
Author has said to the contrary.

5. Our Author would have Men to consider, That there never was, nor will be,
any Constitution that will be every way unexceptionable. If he had said,
against which none will make Exception, we should have found no Difficulty to
have agreed it; but surely there may be a Constitution that is not
exceptionable: For if only things confessedly necessary be enjoined, and things
which may be left at Liberty, be so left, and a little Charity used, such a
Constitution must be unexceptionable.

6. Indeed his last Direction must make an end of all Controversy of this
Nature, if it were practicable, viz. to throw our Doubts out of our Minds as
dangerous Temptations. This is as if one should advise one under a great Fit of
the Stone, or Gout, etc. never to think of his Pain. Our Author fancieth
rightly, that some would be under Temptations, to think, that he has been
persuading Men to conform to the Orders of the Church, though they be not
satisfied in their Minds concerning them. He tells us in plain Terms, He thinks
this the best Advice can be given such scrupulous Persons. It has only two
Faults, 1. That it is very hard, if not impossible, to be taken. It is every
whit as easy to shake off a Fit of the Gout or Stone, as to shake off a Doubt;
both may be done in Time, and by the Application of proper Means: But I know of
none would keep Doubts, if they knew how to be rid of them. 2. That it is
contrary to the Apostle's Opinion, Romans 14.23. And he that doubts is damned,
if he eat; because he eats not of Faith. The Apostle is there plainly
speaking of things at that time indifferent; and in all that Chapter he says
not a Word of Christians conforming to Practices, though they be not satisfied of
their Lawfulness in their Minds. Could we but clear our Eyes of Interest and
Passion, (of not immoderate Wrath too against our Brethren,) we might see
better Advice by half given, v. 3. Let not him that eats, despise him that
eats not; and let not him that eats not, judge him that eats; for God
has received him: and, v. 13. Let us not judge therefore one another; but
judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall,
in his brother's way. v. 14. To him that esteems any thing to be unclean, it
is unclean. v. 15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. If our
Author should tell us again, he takes things as they are, he does not command
these things, etc. In case they ought not to have been enforced, or at least
not at the rate they are, he ought also to let them alone as they are. Our
Savior reflects on the Pharisees and Scribes, as Matthew. 29. for that they
builded the tombs of the prophets, and garnished the sepulchers of the
righteous; and yet said, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would
not have been Partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.

He says, p. 24. He does not encourage Men to venture blindfold upon Sin. Is
it not Sin then for Men to eat doubting? Is not all Sin that is not of Faith?
Romans 14.23. the Apostle there says, Let every man be fully persuaded in his
own mind of the Lawfulness of a thing, (for he cannot otherwise be interpreted.
Our Author tells us, That before we refuse to comply with the Orders of a
Church (which possibly ought not to have been made, at least we judge so) we
ought to be fully persuaded of the Unlawfulness of what is required. Now is not
this to act Blindfold? The Apostle indeed was of another Mind, he would have
our Eyes direct our way; but our Author tells us, that if we do not see a
plain, deep Pit, we ought to follow our Mother.

Our Author is aware, p. 35. that some. would say, This Principle, once
imbibed, will bring in Popery. All the Answer he gives us, is, That there are
many things in Popery manifestly evil, and forbidden by the Revealed Will of
God, etc.

1. Then it is granted, that it necessarily brings in all that is in Popery,
that is not manifestly evil; and that, according to our Author's Phrase, p. 34.
we are not fully persuaded is evil. Welcome then Oil, Spittle, and Cream in
Baptism, with an Hundred more such Fopperies: Welcome Elevations of the Bread,
and the Priests many crossing themselves and it, etc. Nay, welcome Veneration
(though not Adoration) of Images, etc.

2. To whom must the things be manifestly evil? If to Superiors only, few
things in Popery are so to their Superiors; if to Inferiors, who shall judge
whether they be so, or no? Shall the Inferior? Then our Author has said
nothing, unless to those (which are very few) who think, that in the Worship of
God, things (confessedly indifferent) if imposed, become manifestly evil.

Our Author, p. 35. begins to think of Romans 14.19, 23. To him that esteems
any thing unclean, it is unclean; and, v. 23. He that doubts is damned, if he
eats; because he eats not of faith: whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. To
these he answers,

1. That he means by a Scrupulous Conscience, the Conscience of a Person
tolerably persuaded of the Lawfulness of what is to be done; but yet he does
not like it, nor approve of it; he has some little Reasons and Exceptions
against it; it is not the best and fittest, all things considered. He should
have done well, first to have found out one that owned such a Conscience,
otherwise he means none of those he has all this while been arguing against.
Surely Men must have mighty Opinions of themselves, beyond their just Stature,
that can have such an Opinion as this of all which has been said in the Cases
in question by Dr. Ames, Bradshaw, Calderwood, Gillespy, Cotton, and an Hundred
more. But to what our Author has here said, I have before spoke fully.

2. He answers, Secondly, That if the Question be about things, wherein we are
left wholly to our selves, and are at Liberty, having no other weighty Reason
for the doing of them, then it may be the safest way to forbear all such things
as we scruple at. But in these two Cases, it is most for the Quiet of our
Consciences to act against, or, notwithstanding our Fears and Scruples, when
either our Superiors (to whom we owe Obedience) have interposed their Commands,
or when by it we prevent some great Evil, or Mischief. These Superiors he makes
to be Civil or Ecclesiastical.

1. This now is no more than what indeed Bishop Sanderson long since said, and
we shall most of us agree with him, and with this Author, in things of mere
Convenience and Expediency, where we cannot sin in doing the one part, or the
other; though as to Expediency, Quicquid non expedit, in quantum non expedit non
licet, is a known Rule amongst Divines. Things merely inexpedient, so far forth
as they are inexpedient, are not lawful, 1 Cor. 10.23. But here, how to
distinguish betwixt things of mere Convenience and Expediency, we cannot tell,
unless by Expedient be meant apparently decent, whose contrary would be
indecent. If by things expedient be meant (...), or (...), as the Apostle does,
1 Cor. 10. it can by no means be agreed. I think it therefore better expressed
by Things in doing or forbearing which we shall not sin against God. In such
things, the most of us shall freely yield what our Author says.

2. But if he extends his Notion further than these things, we cannot yield
what our Author says; for then the Apostle's Sense must be, He that doubts
is damned, if he eats, except his Civil or Ecclesiastical Superiors command
him to eat; nor will it agree with the next Words, because he eats not of
faith, that is, of a full Persuasion of the Lawfulness of what he does, unless
any one will say, that is sufficient to persuade us fully the thing is lawful,
if it be commanded by our Superiors, which most certainly it is not. This is
such an Interpretation of what the Apostle says, as will serve to make all
things lawful which the Light of Nature does not show us an eternal Turpitude
and Filthiness in. We must loose our Bibles before we can agree this.

His Second Case, wherein he thinks Men may lawfully depart from their Liberty,
is to avoid a greater Evil. This Evil he makes to be Division from the Church.
Still the Question is, Whether Men may depart from their Consciences for Unity?
Or, Whether Men may do what they verily judge sinful for them to do, provided
it be not against the plain Letter of Scripture, but only by them so concluded
from easy Consequences of Scripture, to keep Unity with those that do those
things, probably not so judging.

The Unity also talked of, is neither Unity of Affection, nor in Matters
Doctrinal, nor in Acts of Worship, by God prescribed, nor in Modes or
Circumstances of Worship so prescribed. The Dissent is in none of these things,
but in things (confessedly) unnecessary to be required, as to the End,
Convenience, or apparent Decency of the Action. But in things of mere Human
Appointment, falling under none of these Qualifications, we beg our Author's
Pardon for thinking that Unity in these things is not to be preferred before
the Satisfaction of our private Consciences, that the things are lawful before
we do them. I dare assure our Author, that very many Dissenters will be very
well pleased with him for propounding to them, p. 39. our blessed Savior's
Example. His Case was this:

He was born and bred a Member of the Jewish Church, constituted by God
himself, in which Church there were very great Corruptions in the Time when he
lived; but the Law was read, and the Passover was administered in it, which
every Jew, not being unclean, was bound to eat; the Law was also expounded and
preached there. He freely reproved, and bare a Testimony against their
Traditions, and what they had added to the Worship of God: He would not
religiously wash his Hands before Meat, as our Author confesses, p. 1, 2. But
having a public Liberty himself to teach and preach in the Temple and in the
Synagogues, (though he had no share in the Revenue of the Priests and Levites,)
he used it, and often heard the Law of his Father opened and read, often
reading and opening it himself; in the mean time he would himself have nothing
to do with their Traditions, (not so much as to wash his Hands religiously,)
but only with his Father's Institutions; nor did he think himself obliged only
to preach there, but in many other Places, in Ships, upon Mountains, in Private
Houses, in Fields, and that not to Four or Five only, but to Four and Five
thousand. Dissenters only crave that they may go and do likewise: If they may
not, this Example is ill produced.

For the Churches of Corinth, etc. they do not think themselves further bound
to follow them than as they followed Christ, (who did not admit drunken Persons
to the Sacrament,) and had our Author pleased, he could have put a fairer Sense
upon (...) than drunken; and so our Translators have done, John 2.10. where the
Translation is, When men have well drunk, (yet the same Word in the Greek is
there used,) and that is all meant, 1 Cor. 11.21. For as none will say that,
Joh. 2.10. it signifies men stark drunk; so, in 1 Cor. 11.21. the Disorder he
reproves amongst the Corinthians, is thus expressed, For in eating, every one
takes before his own Supper, and one is hungry, and another, (...), has drunk
sufficiently; so as it should seem that they made the Lord's Supper but as a
Banquet; or Gracecup, after their own Supper; so could not receive it with that
Premeditation, and Preparation, and Holy Reverence, which they ought.

Our Author concludes with magnifying of Unity, and persuading to it, minding
us of the high Sense the Primitive Christians and old Nonconformists had of
Division; and at last tells us, In all that I have now said, I am not conscious
to my self, that I have used any Argument but what many of those very
Ministers, who now dissent from us, did teach and maintain, and print too,
against the Independants, and other Sectaries that divided from them, when they
preached in the Parish-Churches. And if this was good Doctrine for those who
separated upon the account of Corruptions, for purer Ordinances, in those Days,
I see not why it is not as good against themselves, when upon the very same
Pretenses, and no other, they divide from us now.

We would willingly know what Unity it is they plead for. Is it an Union of
Love and Affection? We profess our selves separated from no part of Mankind in
that Sense, and more particularly to love our own Nation, all those in it, more
especially who are Protestants, and to have a more particular Delight and
Complacency in such of them as we see live Holy Lives, in a more strict
Conformity to their Rule.

Is it an Union in Doctrines? We have often enough professed our selves in
Heart to believe all Doctrines of Faith contained in the Holy Scripture,
particularly those in the Articles of the Church of England, so far as
concerns Doctrine. In the Irish Articles, and Scottish Articles, what in this
thing can they ask more?

Is it an Union in the same specifical Acts of Worship? We use no other than is
and always was used in the Church of England; Prayer, Preaching, Hearing the
Word, Baptizing Infants, Receiving the Lord's Supper, etc.

Is it in the Circumstances of Worship necessary, as some Time and Place is,
some Gesture and Habit is? Was there ever such an Unity, or Uniformity in
England? Or is there now? Did all People ever meet in the same Place, or at the
same Time, or in the same Habits, or use the same Gestures? At all times, did
not some pray standing, some kneeling, some sitting? And did they not always as
much differ as to their Gesture at the Sacrament? Or Convenient, or obviously
decent Circumstances? Are then all the Parish-Churches equally convenient, or
their Pulpits, or Seats, for Preaching or Hearing? Do all Persons come to
Churches in Habits equally decent? Though, possibly, few use Habits indecent,
which none can charge on us.

Do not all use the same Words in Prayer? And do Conformists all use the same,
or did they ever use the same in the Pulpit and the Desk?

Do we not all meet with them in the same Place? Can then all the People in a
great Town or City so meet? Is the Division here then, that we do not agree
Parochial Societies, to be particular Churches? Which amongst our Conformable
Brethren will so own them? Surely they reckon the Diocese the Particular
Church, and the Bishop the Pastor. Will not we own Bishops, and the Government
of the Church by them? We cannot indeed own them by Divine Right to have any
such Power; but we will own the King to be the Governor of the Church, under
Christ, not to make new Laws, but to put his Laws in execution, and to have
Power to appoint his Commissioners, under what Titles he pleases, (whether
Archbishops or Bishops,) who shall have Power (by Virtue of such Commission) to
do in the Church whatsoever the King may do; and if these Commissioners be also
Ministers of the Gospel, by Virtue of that Commission from Christ, they shall
also do what any Gospel Ministers may do.

All the Cry against Dissenters, for dividing and rending the Peace of the
Church, amounts to this:

1. That they can own no intrinsic Officers in the Church, whom Christ has
not appointed in his Word.

2. That they can own no Laws in Worship, but what he has made by himself, or
his Commissioners the Apostles, till those be proved not to have been
sufficient.

3. That they cannot allow the Bounds of Parishes to be on that account the
Bounds of Churches, nor Inhabitants in them sufficient to entitle all baptized
Persons to be Members of the Church in that Place.

4. That they cannot agree all Persons of Sixteen Years of Age, to be fit to
receive the Lord's Supper, (a thing never allowed by any Church in the World.)
To make the Matter short, Dissenters profess themselves ready to unite with
their Brethren in all things relating to Worship, for which the least Line of
Scripture shall be shown, and in other things, if they can be made appear
naturally necessary for the Actions, or convenient, or decent. We never need
fear breaking with them, who will not upon these Terms unite with us.

The Case of the Difference betwixt Presbyterians and Others, was this: The
Presbyterians were regulating things according to the Divine Will; offered
their Brethren Liberty to preach, yea, and in the greatest Congregations; were
ready to hear them in any thing they could object in their Practice, contrary
to the Word of God, and to reform any thing; proffessed to make nothing their
Rule, but the Word of God: They had Reason to blame those who on these Terms
would not unite with them. Are these the Terms of Union now offered?

It may be some particular Persons were too hot at first, and said what
themselves afterward saw Cause to alter their Minds in, (and that in the Space
of two or three Years.) Men, when they are just awake, see not so distinctly as
they afterward do. Our first Reformers altered many things in Doctrine, of
which they had a tolerable Opinion when they came first out of Popery. Because
Cranmer himself, and some others, thought some things at first good Doctrine,
which themselves had afterward other Thoughts of, does it follow it is good
Doctrine still? In things of this nature, we are to take our Measures from no
mutable Men, but from the immutable Rule. Authority therefore is impertinently
urged, and is an Argument only ad excitandum odium, to stir up some ignorant
Peoples Passions.

To let every one see the Weakness of this Argument, let us turn it into Form.

Prop. What was good Doctrine Forty Years ago, in the Mouths of Presbyterians,
against Independents and Others, is good Doctrine still. But what is in this
Sermon about Scrupulous Consciences, and the Duty of Christians that have them,
was good Doctrine Forty Years since in the Mouths of the Presbyterians against
the Independents: Therefore it is good Doctrine still.

We deny the Minor, or Second Proposition, and so take our Leave of the Doctor,
supposing it will take Forty Years more to make it good.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel.
EXpository Notes on the Four Evangelists; wherein the Sacred Text is at large
recited, and the Sense explained; together with the Instructive Pxample of the
Holy Jesus is recommended to our Imitation. By William Burkitt, M. A. and Vicar
of Dedham in Essex.

Divine Comforts Antidoting inward Perplexities of Mind; being a Discourse upon
Psalm 94. ver. 19. By T. Sharp, M. A.

Wilful Impenitency the grossest Self-Murder; in several Sermons Preached at
Rochfort in Essex. By William Fenner, B. D.

Plain Method of Catechizing; showing, That Ministers, Parents, and Masters,
ought to be faithful Teachers of the first Principles of the Christian
Doctrine. By T. Doolittle, M. A. in Compassion to the Ignorant.

The Young Man's Guide in his Way to Heaven; or, Traveling spiritualized.

The General Assembly; or, the gathering of the Saints together. By Oliver
Heywood, M. A.

The Order of the Gospel professed and practiced by the Churches in
New England, in Answer to several Questions relating to Church Discipline. By
Increase Mather, President of Harvard College in Cambridge, New England.

Primitia Synagogae; or, a Sermon Preached at the opening of a New Erected
Meeting House in Ipswich. By John Fairfax, M. A.

The Fountain of Life opened and explained; or, a Display of Christ, in his
Essential and Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty Two Sermons on various Texts.
By John Flavel, M. A.

Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow, with an Appendix concerning the immediate
desire of foreknowing Things to come.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
with an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally Discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to will the Salvation of them
that perish.

A Calm and Sober Enquiry concerning the possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead, in a Letter to a Person of Worth; occasioned by the lately Published
Considerations on the Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity. By Dr.
Wallis, Dr. Sherlock, Dr. South, Dr. Cudworth, etc. Together with certain
Letters (hitherto unpublished) formerly written to the Reverend Dr. Wallis on
the same Subject.

A Letter to a Friend concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the Calm Enquiry on the same
Subject.

A View of that part of the late Considerations addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity, which concerns the Sober Enquiry on that Subject.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, Excellent and
Immortal Nature of the Soul, are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the Necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls, both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto God's Elect, being the Second Part of Gospel Redemption.

The Divine Conduct or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated: All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized, or a new Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.


