Another CRY of the INNOCENT and OPPRESSED, FOR JUSTICE; OR, A Second Relation
of the unjust proceedings at the Sessions held at Hicks's Hall for the County
of Middlesex, and at the Old Baily, London, the 6th and the 14th days of the
10th Month or December, 1664 With and against 32 more of the People called
Quakers, who were all sentenced for a pretended breach of the late Act.

Together with an Account of the most material Passages between the Prisoners
and the aforesaid Courts, in which it does appear very plainly, That only
Meeting to Worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth, is by the Judges, made
and declared to be the matter of Fact deserving so grievous a Sentance.

Unto which also is now Added, A Brief, Short Summary of the Sentencing of 36
more of the aforesaid people, in scorn (...) Quakers, at the two places above
mentioned, 4 at Hicks's Hall, and 32 at the Old Baily, the 11th and 15th of the
11th Month called Janu^ry, where they were all Sentenced for to be Transported
to the Island of Jamaica.

But ye have despised the poor; do not rich men oppress ^ou, and draw you
before the Judgment seats? Do not they Blaspheme that worthy Name by which ye
are called? Jam. 2.6, 7. London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

These are the Names of the Twelve, Sentenced at Hicks's Hall.
Edward Berkly. William Mathews. John Terry. Diggery Marshall. William Brend.
John Goodwin. John Noble. Nathaniel Harding. Vincent Gerrard. Edw. Malitrat.
Francis Tarcy. Martin Groshe.
BIlls o^ Indictments being drawn up against the aforesaid twelve persons, they
were deliverd to the Grand Jury (who were men generally of the same spirit with
the persecutors and Judges) for though the Bills of Indictments contained many
and diverse Criminal Terms to express the matter of fact: [viz.] 1. For being
at an Unlawful meeting, or Conventicle. 2. For being there under color and
pretense of Religious Exercise. 3. That this Religious exercise was in other
manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England. 4.
For being there with diverse other Malefactors (or disobedient persons) to the
terror of the people, and disturbing the peace. Fifthly and lastly, That they
were there to do the aforesaid evils contrary to the form of the late Statute
in that case provided, etc.

Now this Grand Jury never so much as called for evidence to prove any one of
those crimes aforesaid, but all they required of the Witnesses was, to give
evidence that the Prisoners were met together at such a time in such a place,
above the number of five etc. This was all the Witnesses swore, upon which they
found all the Bills.

Their designed work being so far done, the aforesaid prisoners, on the sixth
day in the morning, were brought from Newgate to Hick.'s Hall: And first four
(viz.) Edmond Berkely, William Mathews, John Terry, Diggery Marshall were set
to the Bar, and bills of Indictments was read against them, containing those
crimes before recited; and they being asked whether they were Guilty or not,
answered severally, That they were not guilty of those things laid to their
charge.

Then were the other eight called, viz. William Br^nd, John Goodwin, John
Noble, Nathaniel Harding, Vincent Gerrard, Edward Mallitrat, francis Ta^cy,
Martin Chroshe, one after another called to the Bar, and their Indictments
read, which were for matter the same with the other, being all of one fo^m; who
being asked Guilty, or Not Guilty, they answered as the former had done, viz.
That they were not guilty of being at any unlawful Meeting or Assembly, etc.
and only too of them demanded a Copy of their Indictments, but Judge Hyde said,
Except they would pay eight pence a sheet for them, they might not have them;
so they answered, that was extortion, and they could not do it.

Now note how Judge Hydes cruelty and subtilty appears in this his setting so
high a price upon the Clerks labor, knowing the prisoners would not pay so
dear for it, and therefore would be the l^sse capable to overturn and make void
their Indictments: For it was noted, what would make against the prisoners
every way, that he and the rest were sure to make use and advantage of. And
rather than they would want evidences against the prisoners on the other hand,
the Clerks should loose all their Fees as was observed when the Witnesses did
not appear, the Judges were angry and very much displeased. Then one of the
Justices on the Bench told the Judges the reason why they did not appear was,
because the charge of drawing their Recullizance was so great. Then said Judge
Hyde, to encourage them to be Witnesses (who were bound thereto) against the
Innocent, That they should pay nothing. And if the Clerks did make them pay a
groar, he would make them pay ten for it. One of the prisoners also said to the
Judge, What advantage will it be to me if I should plead?

Judge. If you plead, and are not found Guilty, you may be cleared by the Jury.


Prisoner What if the Jury men be overtawed by you that are Judges? And if you
have already determined the Case, as was known the last Sessions before this,
where some of our friends were sentenced that did plead, and some that did not
plead: And the Jury threatened. etc


Jud. Keeleing. You scandalize us: but the prisoner spoke truth. After some
more words they were all set to the Bar.


Then the Petry Jury was called over, sworn, and charged according to their
usual form, (viz.) Well and truly to try, How this was, let Gods Witness in all
Consciences judge.
and true deliverance make betwixt the King, and the Prisoners at the Bar, and
to bring in their Verdict according to Evidence, etc. Clerk. Set Edmond Berkly
to the Bar, who read the Records of the Justices to prove the First and Second
pretended offense; and the Witnesses were called and sworn to prove a Third.
One was one of the Justices Clerks, who swore that he did see the said Edmond
at such a place, at such a time. Then a Constable present gave Evidence, that
he did not remember the said Edmond, but he did carry the persons mentioned in
the Mittimus to the prison of Newgate. William Turner also gave Evidence, that
he received the said persons into Newgate such a time.


Jud. What say you for your self?


Pris. Their Evidence, and so saying, does not prove me to be guilty of being
at an Unlawful meeting.


Jud. That Is not the thing; were you not at such a time at such a place? if you
were, the Law does judge all such meetings to be unlawful.


Pris. The meeting, simply as it is a meeting, is not unlawful; but the
unlawfulness of it must be proved by something either done or said: Therefore
Jurymen take notice, that the Witnesses have not proved any thing to make the
meeting unlawful.


Judge. Set him aside.


Then was William Mathews set to the Bar, and evidence given as before. Judge.
What have you to say for your self?


Pris. I was at no unlawful meeting, neither have I done any thing to the
breach of any man's peace, nor in contempt to the Kings Laws: but what I did was
to worship God, and to serve him in the uprightness of my heart, and to no
other end did I ever meet, the Lord knows, to whom I must give an account.


Judge. Was you at that meeting such a time (naming the day) at such a place?


Pris. I was at no other meeting, then to wait upon the Lord, and if for which
service and worship of God, and testimony of his Truth, I must be separated
from my Wife and Children, which are near and dear to me, the will of the Lord
be done, I am freely given up.


Judge. Take him away.


Pris. Jurymen, I would have you take notice, that there is nothing of Fact
proved (neither in word nor deed) against any of us: Therefore you ought not,
neither can you with a good Conscience, bring us in guilty.


John Terry at the Bar. Judge. Have you any thing to say?


Pris. I desire to see my Accusers.


Judge. Swear the Constable: Being sworn, he gave Evidence, that he brought the
said John Terry to prison such a day. The Clerks boy looking into his book,
said he saw him at the meeting; also William Turner gave Evidence that he
received him into his custody.


Pris. This does prove me but once; is does not prove three times.


Judge. The other two are plain by Record.


Pris. There are Records that are false: for some have been stopped for the
Third pretended offense, on the First and Second, by reason that several men
are of one Name.


Judge. Will. Turner, what can you say against this man?


Will. Turner. He has been three times in prison.


Prison. So has many Felons.


Will. Turner. He has been three times committed for being at a meeting, the
first time he was committed for three months, and twice since.


Pris. Is it a Crime sufficiently worthy of Banishment, to meet together to
serve the Lord?


Judge Hide. It Is Crime enough, it is Crime enough: set him by.


Then a friend replied and said, Record that, or, Let that be Recorded.

Then was Diggery Marshall called to the Bar.

The Witnesses were sworn (one being the Clerks boy) to whom the Judge spoke and
said, Did you see this man at such a place? The boy looking in a paper said,
Yes.

Judge. Did you see him there such a time?


Boy. Yes.


Judge. Did you see him in the Meeting?


Boy. I cannot tell that; but I see him brought before the Justices.


Pris. I suppose he has not this in his paper.


Judge. Well he has enough: in like manner the other Witnesses gave their
Evidence.


Judge. What say you? If you have any thing to say, you may now speak.


Pris. I suppose it is to little purpose to say any thing, you will go on as
you have determined, let me say what I will.


Judge. No, you shall be tried according to Law, and we will do you justice and
right.


Pris. I have little cause to expect it, for I have seen little done as yet. I
am here Indicted for being at an unlawful meeting, which is not yet proved that
the meeting was unlawful.


Judge. It is proved that you was at a Meeting, and the Law judges that meeting
to be unlawful, and therefore we judge it so, it being under a pretense of
worshipping God contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England.


Pris. I do not understand that it is contrarary to the Liturgy for me to meet
to worship God in reality and truth, and not under any pretense. And if we meet
really to worship God, must we suffer for that?


Jud. Hyde Yes that you must.


Standers by, with much grief of heart, said, Was ever the like known?

Then Judge Keeling, to mend the matter, said, You shall not suffer for
worshipping God, but for being at an unlawful Assembly, contrary to the Law.

But this covering is too narrow, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks.

Then was William Brand called to the Bar, his Indictment read, etc.

Judge. What have you to say?


Pris. The Indictment is null and void, by reason of the Errors that are in it:
And though I do not trouble my self with your Laws, yet according to the
Knowledge I have, there may be much said in exceptions against the Indictment,
in the Nicities and Punctillios of your own Law, but I matter not these things.
I shall come to that part of the Indictment, in which I am charged for being at
an unlawful meeting, (but the Judge often interrupted him, and would not suffer
him speak what he had in his heart to declare, etc.) No clear Evidence did
appear against him, and they were at a stand how to proceed; but at last the
Judge called for his Mittimus, where he found he was one time committed from
Wheelers Street, which proved an Error in their Indictment, being Note, this
would have quashed an Indictment against a Fellon.
Indicted for being that same day at Mile-end. There was no Witresse to prove
the first, second, or third pretended offense, till Thomas Swallow called a
Justice (whose name the Judge saw at the Mittimus) was called to by the Judge,
and asked. Whether he knew the prisoner? who said he did not. Then the Mittimus
was showed to him, to see if he would own it, and the book was given him to
swear. Then said the prisoner, If he must swear and be a Witness, let him come
from off the Bench, and stand in the Witnesses place, but the Judge would not
suffer it so to be: So he gave Evidence upon the Bench upon his Oath, That if
the prisoners name was in the Mittimus, then he must be in the meeting. I own
it is my hand, said he.


Judge. 'Thats enough.


Pris. Must we be Judged by Consequence? I judge that the Jury should have
plain, evident proof to proceed upon.


Judge. They may proceed and take evidence by consequence, except you can prove
that you were not at the meeting.


Then the Clerk of Tho. Bide, called Justice, was sworn. Judge. Reach him the
Mittimus;


I own, said he, this to be my writing.

Judge. Do you know the prisoner? Did you see him at the meeting?


Yes. For he was praying.


Judge. Take him away.


Pris. I have something to say to the Jury.


Judge. We will not suffer you to speak to them. So he was hurried away.


Then was John Goodwin set to the Bar, etc.

Tempest the Constable was sworn.

Judge Keeling. Did you see that man at the meeting such a time?


Tempest. Yes that I did, if his name be in the Mittimus.


Then a young boy was called and sworn.

Judge. Come what can you say, did you see him at the meeting?


Boy. I see him in the Yard, by the same token he told the Justices, that if he
was among the Turks, he might find more favor then amongst them; William
Turner was called.


Judge. Did you receive him such a day into your Custody.


Turner. Yes and please your Lordship, I did. Will Rider gave evidence also
that he saw him in the Meeting.


Judge. It is enough, what say you now?


Prisoner. There is no evil charged against me.


Judge. Set him aside.


John Noble was set to the Bar, etc. The Witnesses not appearing, the Judge
called for the Mittimus, Justice Pitfield and his Clark were sworn (who made
the Mittimus) who gave evidence that he was at the Meeting, etc.

Judge. You see it here appears that you were there.


Prisoner. The Lord God of Heaven and Earth will plead my cause.


Judge. Set him aside.


Nathaniel Harding was set to the Bar, etc. Tempest the Cunstable gave evidence
that he saw him at the Meeting at Mile-end, and no more; and William Turner
gave evidence that he received him into his Custody, etc.

Prisoner. I wonder much how any of us can be brought in guilty, seeing none
does evidence any evil against us.


Judge. Set him aside.


Then was Vincent Gerrard set to the Bar, etc. And being silent, the Judge
said, Its more to be lamented that old men should be such unjust Judges to
sentence men for to be Transported for doing well.
it is pity young men having good Trades, and might live well, should bring
themselves into these troubles.

Judge. What says the Witnesses, was the Prisoner at the Bar in the Meeting?


Clark. I will look in the Mittimus if his name be therein, to be sure he was
there;


Clark. His Name is there.


Judge. Set him aside.


Then was Edward Mallitrat brought to the Bar, etc.

Judge. What have you to say?


Prisoner. Where are my Accusers?


J. H. Call Justice Marches Clark; What say you Tho. Porter? My Lord I did not
mind him there


Judge. Sir William Rider what say you?


My Lord I do not know his face, there was so many there.


Tempest. What say you, my Lord I brought him to New Gate.


Will. Turner. What say you, my Lord I received him.


Judge Twisden. Now you must clear your self whether you was at the Meeting or
not?


Prisoner. What shall I say, I may compare you to the Scribes and and
Pharisees, for they said they had a Law, and by that Law they Crucified the
Lord of Life.


Judge Twisden. No matter for that, have you any thing else to say.


Prisoner. It is to little purpose to say any thing to you. So he was set by.


Then Francis Tarcy was called to the Bar, Indictment read, etc. The Witnesses
being Justice Pitfield's Clark, and William Turner (Turnkey at Newgate) who
gave evidence that he was at the Meeting, and the Clark said he was the first
in the Mittimus, the Judge said that was sufficient.

Judge. What say you?


Prisoner. I did not meet in any seditious Conventicle, neither am I a
malefactor, or evil doer; and I am otherwise persuaded of the Meetings, for
they are peaceable, and are the Meeting-places where the people of God are wont
to assemble.


Judge. Set him by.


Then Martin Croshe was set to the Bar, etc. The Witnesses gave evidence in
this wise, That he was at the Meeting, and being brought before William Rider
at Mile-end, who demanded what he came thither for? He replied, to wait upon
God in his fear.

Judge. Have you any thing to say for your self?


Prisoner. I did meet often at that place in the fear of the Lord, which the
Lord God commands and allows men to do, now if your Law by which you proceed
against me be contrary to this Law of God, then I must desire your Council,
which of these two you would advise me to obey? for you being Judges ought to
be my Counselors, and to deal impartially, and not to flout at me as some of
you have done, by your disdainful language in biding me meddle with my Sizzers;
I knowing that both my liberty and life may lie at stake, I desire to be heard,
for I have not transgressed any just Law; I am not guilty of being at any
unlawful meeting; wherefore I desire your Council what I should do in this
weighty matter, the Law of God commanding and allowing me to wait on, and serve
him in his fear, and your Law prohibiting it, in this case pray what must I do,
or which shall I obey?


Judge Hide. You must go to the Church, and leave these factions.


Prisoner. Do you call the Law of God a Faction?


Judge. Take him away.


Prisoner. I am not guilty of those unlawful things which your Law is made
against, and falcely charged against me in the Indictment, being sure that I am
innocent and clear from any such thing.


Judge. Your impudence shall not serve your turn.


Judge Twisden. Was you at the Meeting to worship God?


Prisoner. I have been at many Meetings to wait upon the Lord in his fear, as
the Law of God commands, and no Law ought to be made against it.


Judge. We do not Try you for any unlawful thing you did at the Meeting, but
we have proved that you was at the Meeting;
and the Law supposes that meeting to be unlawful.


Prisoner. Without any unlawful thing done or said?


Judge Keeleing. We care not what you did there, we have proved that you did
meet.


Prisoner. I understand that God is a spirit, and I meet to worship the eternal
God in spirit, as he persuades my heart and conscience; and must I be condemned
to banishment for that?


Judge Keeleing. Yes yes, for the Law is against it.



Judge Twisden. He has confessed that he was there to worship God, and their
worship is contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England.


Judge. Have you the Common Prayer Book read amongst you?


Prisoner. I desire to know what Law I have broken?


Judge Hide. This Law (meaning the late Act) for suppressing seditious
Conventicles.


Prisoner. What in meeting to worship God according to my perswation.


Judge Keeleing. Ay.



Prisoner Remember you are executing a Law which is contrary to the Law of God.


Judge Twisden. Go meddle with your Sizzers, (he being a Barber.)


Judge Hide. Take him away.


Prisoner. Jurymen, I hope you will take notice that I am not proved guilty of
these evil things the Law is against, and that I am falsely accused of.


The Jury went forth and soon returned, and brought in their Verdict, that
eleven of the 12. were guilty, but they had some doubt about the young man,
viz. Vincent Gerrard, which the Judge pitied, (it may be to please the Judge)
so that they did not agree to find him guilty, but when they understood the
Judges mind more plainly, by his biding them go forth again, they never went
forth to consult any further, but presently agreed among themselves that he was
guilty also, which publicly showed forth their own weakness, and that they
were but as a cipher and for a cloak, etc.

Then they soon (even that very morning) proceeded to sentence, and sentenced
all the aforesaid 12. persons for to be Transported to the Island of Jamaica,
there to remain seven years. Thus it may be seen how the Just are oppressed for
Righteousness sake, and how those that the Lord has chosen are condemned by
the unjust.

This one thing also may manifest the enmity and injustice of the aforesaid
Judges: A friend standing by, (but not in the face of the Court least he should
give an occasion) was by one of their envious Officers haled out into the yard,
telling he was a Solicitor, and came to instruct the Prisoners; The Judges
perceiving that he was, called a Quaker, called for him to be brought into the
Court, the which their Mercenaries quickly did, and set him to the Bar, (but
pulled off his Hat before) as he stood at the Bar, Judge H. asked where his Hat
was? some answered that it was taken from him, then he said, give it him into
his hand again, the friend perceiving his enmity and snare when it was
proffered him, would not receive it, but said that it was taken away violently
from him in the Court, and he should not then receive it; Then said J. H. put
it upon his head, which was done accordingly, Now said he, I command you to
take it off; I desire said the friend to know by what Law thee commands me so
to do? Being silent a while, at last said that they were Ministers of Justice,
and represented the Kings Person, and he should Reverence Authority; He said he
did not keep his Hat on in contempt of the King, or any man's person or
Authority, but for conscience sake, not dareing to be subject to the wills of
men; pressing still to know what Law there was to command him to put off his
Hat any more then any other of his garments; withal telling them that Honor,
Reverence and Respect did not consist in putting off the Hat, or any other part
of his Garments, and that they might as well command him to put off any other
of his Clothes; but I. H. having neither Law nor reason to urge in the Case,
said it was a custom, etc. and in fine, because he did not obey his wilful
command of the Court, (though they made the occasion and created the pretended
offense) they told he should be fined five pound, to be levied upon his Goods,
and be committed to Prison till he found Sureties for his good behavior, which
accordingly was done, and he immediately carried away to Newgate.

Now let the honest righteous principle of God in all, judge whether this be
righteous dealing, that a man should be fined and imprisoned, and not for the
breach of any known Law, nor for any ill behavior; and whether pride and
bitterness, envy and cruelty, partiality and respect of persons does not abound
in and among such Judges and Courts of Judicatory: but the Lord does and will
judge the cause of his people over again, and he will be avenged on his
enemies, and his judgment does and will take hold upon all oppressors and
persecutors of his harmless people.

And this is also remarkable, Thomas Dawson one of the Jaylors of Newgate, who
was the first person (in London) that swore before a Jury against friends in
the execution of this late Act, (who gave false evidence) at their Trial in the
Old Baily London, the 15th. of October 1664. after which time he was took
notice of, that he never thrived in his body, but complained much of distempers
within, and could eat little, but wasted to the time of his death, and he died
the 30th. of December. or the 10th Month.

Now all men that swear against people that fear God, rashly, inconsiderately
and mercenarily, may expect assuredly that the just hand of the Lord will
overtake them, and his righteous judgments find them out, in this world or in
that to come, the wicked shall not go unpunished.

Here follows the proceedings of the same Judges sitting in Justice-Hall in
the Old Baily London, the 14th. of the 10th. Month with the Prisoners hereafter
named briefly related, Viz.

Anne Pressed, William Newman, John Clouse, Rebeccah Trump, Anne Royley, James
Carter, William Parker, Elizabeth Pike, Elizabeth Harding, Thomas Cox, Mabell
Wheeler, Isabel Hacker, Benjamin Greenwell, John Chaplin, Manasseth Howard,
Lawrence Fullove, Edmond Overd, James Pearne, Thomas Vesse, Lawrence Aplin.

The above named Prisoners were brought from Newgate to the Sessions House on
the day aforesaid, and the bills of Indictment, which for matter and form were
all one with those before recited, were found by the Grand Jury, upon the bare
evidence of meeting together above five, etc. The Prisoners being set to the
Bar, and their Indictments read, they were asked Guilty or not Guilty; to which
they most answered that they were not guilty of any evil, nor of being at any
unlawful assembly, etc. only Ben. Greenwell when he was asked guilty or not
guilty, said, he had two or three questions to ask before he should be willing
to plead.

Judge. We shall answer to no questions till you have pleaded.


Prisoner. I am not willing to answer by way of plea, unless you will resolve
me in these things, I knowing that it is matter of weight and concernment to me
in this case to be resolved before I plead, I am ignorant of the Law, and you
that are Judges are bound to resolve the Prisoners at the Bar as to matter of
Law, and I demand it of you as my right, my first question is this, viz. What
method does the Law prescribe as to the choice of Juries? Secondly, whether I
may not make my exceptions against them? Thirdly, how many I may except against?


Judges. You must plead to your Indictment, and you may make your exception.


Prisoner. It Is a matter concerns me to be resolved in before I plead, and it
is reason I should be satisfied what I may, before I cast my self upon the
Jury; for the last Sessions you threatened the Jury, especially such of them as
acted conscienciously, and that could not find our friends guilty; and how can
we expect right to be done to us when men that bears an honest mind are
overawed, and dare not act it may be according to their consciences, and for
such as make no conscience of what they do, we expect no right from them.


Judge. Will you plead?


Pris. Yes, if you will promise before the people to allow me my exceptions.


Judge. We will make you no promises.


Pris. I am not satisfied concerning the Jury, and the choice of them.


Judge. This we will resolve you in, the Sheriffs returned them.


Judge. If he will not plead, take him away.


Pris. I am not willing to plead unless you will promise to allow my
exceptions. So they took him away, and put him into a hole amongst the Felons,
and Lawrence Fullove who did not plead in their way, was put into the hole with
him, for when the usual question was asked him, guilty or not guilty, he said
to the Judge, I shall leave it to that of God in thy conscience to judge: The
Judge was silent a while, then afterward asked him again whether he was guilty
or no?


Pris. Thou sets as Judge, I leave it to thee, do thou dread and fear God.


Judge. Are you guilty or not?


Pris. Look one another in the face, there shall you see guilt.


Judge. That shall not serve your turn.


Pris. Here Is my body given up in the will of God.


Judge. It shall be sent far enough.


Pris. I value not thy Threats, I shall take that with me which shall glad my
heart, and which all the Lawyers in England are not able to purchase, even a
good Conscience, yea a good Conscience.


Judge. You are an impudent fellow, and do not talk as if you were a Religious
man.


Pris. That Is thy own, it is thou that art the stubborn and stiff-necked Jew who
art for judgment.


Judge. Take him away, put him up. So he was haled away and put into a stinking
hole with B. G. among the Felons.


Then those eighteen that pleaded were set to the Bar, and the London Jury were
called over, and sworn in their usual manner and form, well and truly to Try,
etc.

Anne Priest at the Bar, her Indictment read, etc.

Judge. Was you at the Bull and Mouth such a time?


Pris. I was at the door, I was not in the house, but when the Officers came to
disturb the peace as their usual manner is, they forced me in; but the Lord God
has made three Children fatherless, and you go about to make them Motherless.


Pris. Jurymen, take heed to your Consciences; Some of them answered we cannot
help what we do.


William Newman called to the Bar, Indictment read, etc.

Judge. Was you at the Bull and Mouth?


Before he answered, one witnessed that he saw him there with about forty more,
by the same token he pulled down one that was speaking, etc.

Judge. What say you for your self, what did you do there?


Prisoner. I was there according to the will of the Lord, and who dare say
against it.


Judge. Set him by, he confesses that he was there. John Clouse was set to the
Bar, etc. And the City Marshall gave evidence that he was in the Meeting.


Judge. What can you say for your self?


Pris. I say I am not a subject of this Realm, and therefore this Act does not
concern me.


Judge. No, no, we have looked over the old Statutes, and we find that every
one that comes hither to live for any time, he is a subject to this Realm.


Pris. May every subject then purchase Land.


Judge. I tell you no, but answer you to the Fact, was you there or no? he
answered nothing.


Judges. He cannot deny it, put him by.


Rebccah Trump was set to the Bar, etc. Witnesses gave evidence that she was at
the Meeting, etc.

Judge. What say you, was you at the Bull and Mouth? But before she did answer,
the Judge bid take her away, she cannot deny but she was there.


Anne Royley at the Bar, the like evidences above against her.

Judge. What have you to say?


Pris. I was at no seditious meeting or Conventicle.


Judge. Take her away, that's enough.


Set James Carter to the Bar, etc. Witnesses gave evidence that he was at the
Bull and Mouth such a day, etc.

Judge. What can you say for your self?


Pris. There is nothing proved that the meeting I was at, is unlawful, for it
must be an unlawful actions that makes a meeting unlawful.


Judge. Set him by:


Then the Prisoner cried out and said, you had as good knock me on the head at
the Bar, as not let me plead for my life and my liberty, and it may not only be
my own life, but the life of my Wife and Children.

Judge. Take him away.


Then was William Parker set to the Bar, etc. Evidence given as before.

Judge. What can you say for your self, was you at the Bull and Mouth?


Pris. I thought I should not accuse my self, I was at no unlawful meeting,
therefore Jurymen take notice that none has proved the meeting unlawful, or
that we did meet under a pretense, etc.


Elizabeth Pike put to the Bar, Indictment read, etc. Evidence given that she
met, etc.

Judge. What say you?


Pris. I tell you that I am unacquainted with your Law, and was never before
those called Judges till now, but I have often met amongst the dear Children of
the Lord; and I do not question if you have not a hand in sheding my innocent
blood, I shall meet with them again and again.


Judge. Take her away, she has said enough.


Pris. Hear you Jurymen in whose hands my liberty (and it may be my life) is
committed, have you a care of destroying my liberty, and of sheding this my
innocent blood, but if you are wilful and are resolved to do it, who shall pray
that it may not be laid to your charge?


Judge. Take her away, take her away.


Elizabeth Harding at the Bar, etc. Evidence given as before.

Judge. What say you?


Pris. I know the living God, therefore I cannot worship graven Images; And be
it known unto you all, if I had as many bodies as hairs on my head, I could
lay them all down for the living eternal truth of the living God; also know
that I am not ashamed of the Testimony I bear, for I was there in obedience to
the Lord, therefore have you a care that you shed not the blood of the Innocent.


She spoke also to the Jury, and bid them observe the command of Christ, (As
you would that men should do unto you, so do unto them.) And take heed that you
shed not Innocent blood.

Thomas Cox was set to the Bar, etc. the Evidence given was, that he was in the
Bull at a Meeting with others above 5 such a time, etc.

Judge. What say you, were you there or not?


Pris. I was there to wait upon the Lord, and if that is become a Crime worthy
of Banishment let all people judge?


Judge. Set him by.


Mabell Wheeler at the Bar, etc. Evidence as before.

Judge. Was you at the Bull and Mouth?


Pris. I was there, and it was for no other end then to worship God in spirit
and truth.


Isabel Hacker at the Bar, etc. Evidence as before.

Judge. What say you?


Pris. We are innocent before the Lord God, and I do believe you are resolved
and determined what to do against us, so it is little matter for to plead,
however in Gods Court I am not guilty of meeting under a color and pretense,
nothing of that has been proved against any of us.


John Chaplin called to the Bar, etc. the like Evidence against him.

Judge. What say you?


Pris. I am innocent.


Judge. Set him by.


Manasseth Howard was set to the Bar, Witnesses gave evidence as before, that
he was at the Meeting.

Judge. What say you M. H. was you at the Meeting at the Bull and Mouth?


Pris. The Swearers have sworn I was there.


Judge. You will not deny it? This Ed. W. excepted against one of the Jury,
because he heard him say of two friends the would have them soundly whipped at
Bridewell Judge. if that be all, swear him, etc.



Pris. I will not deny the truth.


Judge. Put him away, that is enough.


Then Edmond Ward was called to the Bar, etc. Evidence given as before.

Judge. What have you to say?


Pris. Is it a crime to wait upon the Lord?


Judge Twisden. Yes, yes.


Pris. Speaking to the people, said I have no more to say, if it be a crime to
wait upon the Lord. Then the Judge speaks as if he mistook what he said.

Pris. Take notice I was at no seditious Conventicle.


Judge. Take him away. James Pierce was set to the Bar, etc. the Witnesses gave
Evidence that he was at the Bull and Mouth such a time, etc.


Judge. What say you for your self?


Pris. You do, you know not what, I look upon you not to be competent Judges to
judge me, or any of us, upon this account we stand here indicted for.


Judge. You are a Judge over the Kings Law, away, away. The Prisoner seeing
there was a bad Jury as well as Judges, said, Have a care what you do, this is
the stone at which Generations past, and those that not long since were in
power were confounded by; and if you dash your selves against it, you shall be
broken, and if it fall upon you, it shall grind you to powder. Thomas Vose was
called to the Bar, etc. the Evidence against him as before.


Judge. What have you to say, was you at the Bull and Mouth?


Pris. I was there, and if I have my liberty I shall be there again.


Judge. What would you do there?


Prisoner. I have spoke enough already.


Lawrence Aplin at the Bar, etc. no Witnesses proved that he was at the Bull
and Mouth, but William Turner gave evidence that he had been in his Custody
four times.

Judge. What say you for your self?


Pris. It is in vain for me to say any thing to you.


Then the Jury went forth, and in less then half an hour returned again, and
brought all the aforesaid twenty persons in guilty. Then the Recorder took the
late Act in his hand, and spoke something to the Prisoners concerning the
breach of the Law; as if their condemnation were just; to which a Prisoner
replied, and said, Deceit, you dead men, I see through your law, it is the
eternal Gospel, I stand here this day in bonds for, which whosoever renounceth,
sorrow shall never depart from his house; yea verily says my God. Another
said, you have dashed your selves against the stone, and you shall be broken,
and it shall also fall upon you, and grind you to powder; but the Recorder
(without asking any of them what they had to say, why judgment should not be
given, etc. proceeded to read the Sentence, which was this; (viz.) That they,
and every of them, should be Transported to the Island of Jamaica, there to
remain seven years.

Here follows the Names of 32. more Sentenced the 16th. of the 11th. Month
(called January) 1664. at the Sessions held in the Old Baily, and also of four
Sentenced at a Sessions held at Hicks-Hall on the 12th. of the aforesaid Month.

Robert Hayes, Robert Pute, John Fox, John Tilby, Edward Walker, John Tisdell,
William Garrald, John Grane, Mathias Gardener, George Tailor, Richard Lamhert,
Evan Jones, William Tilleby, William Tillet, Isaac How, Edward Bull, James
Harding, George Evan, John Mason, Josiah Clare* Christopher Dickinson, Isaac
Warner, Edward Brush, Richard Smith, Mary Powell, Ann Dance, Elizabeth Dixson,
Katherin Charles, Susanna Horn, Dorethy Hall, Allice Richardson, Margaret
Vshor, Thomas Stokes, Thomas Clarke, Thomas Burbuke, Bartholomew Harne,

Now because the proceedings of these two Courts was for manner, matter and
form, the same with the former, and little more observable then what is aheady
mentioned in the foregoing Relation, for brevity sake it shall only be touched
at: Thus, the Grand Jury having found the Bills upon no better Evidence then
the former, they were brought from Newgate to the aforesaid Courts, and their
Indictments being read, they generally pleaded not guilty of those evil things
laid to their charge therein, but acknowledged that they met together to
Worship God, etc. which Judge Keeling said and declared publicly several times
that that was matter of fact, and that that was crime enough being against the
Law; and notwithstanding the Prisoners pleaded that they did not meet under
color and pretense, etc. but in reality and truth to Worship God, which the
Law was not expressly against, and that the Law did not make that matter of
fact; yet Judge Keeleing, Recorder Wild, and Rich. Brown, when the Jury was
ready to go together to consult the matter, would feign have persuaded them
that they need not go from the Bar, matter of fact appearing so clear before
them; viz. (the Witnesses gave Evidence that they met at such a time and place)
and the Prisoners they had confessed that the end of their meeting was to
Worship God,) the Jury looked upon one another a while, not knowing well what
to do, at last one of them spoke, and desired they might go together, at which
J. K. the Recorder, and R. B. seemed to be greatly troubled, and in a very
threatening manner behaved themselves both in words and gestures, especially
toward him that desired to go forth, and as they were going, gave them charge,
encouragement, and instructions to bring in their verdict according to the mind
of the Court, withal told them if they would come again quickly they would not
go to Dinner till they come, and then they should be discharged, but they
staying, the Court was adjourned, and went to Dinner; About 4. they met again,
and immediately the Jury came and delivered their Verdict concerning all the
32. persons wherewith they were charged, that they were guilty, at which the
Court seemed much delighted, and very well pleased, and Judge Keeling stood up
and told them they had done very well, and thanked them for their very good
service; (and something was given by the hand of the Ordinary or Priest of
Newgate into the hand of the Foreman, some that saw it judged it to be a Reward
from the Court) so they were forthwith discharged; then the Recorder took the
late Act in his hand, and began a colorable Preamble, which the Prisoners
would not regard nor give place unto, so he stopped, and said, If you will not
hear, then you must hearken to your sentence, which is, that you, and every of
you, shall be carried from hence to Newgate, and from thence be Transported to
the Island of Jamaica, there to remain seven years.

Then he called to the Jailer, and said, notwithstanding sentence was past, Yet
if any of them would send to him, and signify their Conformity to the
Established Religion of the Church of England, and come to St. Paul's Church
next Sunday, such should be discharged from that sentence and imprisonment
also. Then they were all carried away to Newgate, where there are in all under
the sentence of Transportation or Banishment 99. whereof two dead since their
sentence.

At Hickes-Hall the four were dealt with after the like manner.

A few words to be considered by Iury-men, that they might regard their Oaths,
their Law and Evidence, though they lay aside Christianity and Religion.
WHy do you swear well and truly to Try, etc. and true deliverance make, etc.
and to bring in your Verdict according to Evidence, if you do not intend really
so to do? And if you did intend, and truly desire and endeavor so to do, how
then comes it to pass, that you so readily take the Judges Impositions and
prejudiced Opinions, for a sufficient evidential warrant, to clear your
Consciences in the sight of God and men? Do you not know, that those
Indictments against those harmless people, contains and expresses several
crimes, which are the matter of fact, and should be proved to you by sufficient
witnesses? And are not you sole and absolute Judges of Matter of Fact? Are you
bound in Conscience or Law, to believe, or hear any Bitter, Cain-like spirited
Judge or Lawyer, to tell you what matter of Fact is? Ought you not to consult
the Law it self, which declares what the Fact is or may be, of which you are to
judge, even according as the evidence in truth does appear to you, and no
otherwise? else how do you observe your Oaths? Surely you know, or ought to
know, that all penal Laws plainly expresses the manner and matter of Fact, and
also the manner and measure of the penalty or punishment; and does any
Conscientious, Judicious Jury need to value or regard the Judges and Lawyers
meanings, contrary, or beyond the expressed mind of the Law it self? by which,
and the evidence, you are bound by your Oath to judge and deliver up your
Verdict in all Cases: how can you answer when you are called to account before
God or men, for bringing in Verdicts against innecent People contrary to
evidence and the Law, for did ever any witnesses give evidence otherwise then
thus, (viz.) that they were met together, and that peaceably to worship God in
spirit and truth? is not this the largest evidence that ever you had? which no
Law in being is expressly against? what if a Judge tell you that this is matter
of fact, and say you must find them guilty, when no Law of God nor man says
no, will you destroy the liberty (if not the lives) of your Neighbors and
Contrymen to please men of corrupt minds, who judge not for God, but turn
the sword against the Innocent, unto which those that depart from iniquity
become a prey? and can these things be done except you violate your own
consciences, and unman your selves, and smother your own reason, understanding
and judgment, and so become Ciphers and Cloaks, to cover the designs of evil
men, who thirst after the blood as well as the liberty and estates of the
people that truly fear the Lord? and is not this done by your hands, by and
with whom they make a show of a fair Trial, when nothing less is intended, for
may not you perceive though these harmless people plead Reason, Law, Religion,
or Conscience, all is to no effect or purpose, as to overturn the design and
determination of the Judges, so longas you receive their Impositions, and are
afraid of their threats? if the Prisoners plead, and the Law also says that it
is the end of any meeting, which makes it unlawful; yet if the Judge tell you
that it is only meeting that is unlawful; are you not ready to disregard the
Prisoners plea, and lay aside the Law, your own Reason and Judgment, dispense
with your oaths, and presently become Vassals to the Judges Opinion, and so
join hand in hand against the Innocent? Consider this while you have time, and
load not your consciences with, or by adding Sin unto Sin, for a day of account
will come; and as the hills and the Mountains cannot save, nor cover you from
the wrath of the Lamb, so shall not you save them, but you both shall receive a
reward by the hand of the Lord, according to your doings.

Reader, Thou may observe all along this brief Relation, what slender proof
is made to serve the turn for a pretense, color and covering under, which
these Judges carry on their design against harmless people, that they might,
with a show of Justice, bring their determinations to pass; viz. to Judge and
Condemn the Innocent; and that for no other cause than for meeting together
according to the command of the Lord, and in obedience to his Requiring: And
this is some of their first fruits they have, and do still offer up to God, for
his Restoring, and keeping them in power, with the sword in their hands, which
they turn against him, and his precious truth, and innocent people, who are
freely given up to bear their cruel, unnatural, and unmanlike dealings. But,
though they are endeavoring to overrun them by the Might of their power, and
would trample upon a company of Innocent men and women of mine in the streets,
yet shall they never attain their ends, nor finish their intended work against
the Innocent and Oppressed servants of the Lord, no more than Pharaoh and other
persecutors and oppressors did, who only wrought their own destruction, and
shall manifest themselves more and more to be more brutish than those they call
heathen, in saying, that it is a crime to worship God, and in persecuting
harmless people for no other Cause; and in due time it will appear what God
these Judges serve and worship, seeing there is but God and the Devil, one of
which all men obey; and by the fruits which are brought forth, it becomes
manifest which of them these people do obey and worship: And may it not be said
of them, as Christ once said to the Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers, (viz.) ye
are of your Father the Devil, and his works ye will do; for are not his works
manifest by these men's actions against the Lords Innocent people? in
persecuting them only and alone for serving, honoring, obeying, and
worshipping, the Lord God of heaven and earth? And does it not appear, that
they are hard, and seared in their hearts and Consciences, who dare affirm
publicly in the face of their Country, that it is Crime enough to meet to
worship God in the Spirit and in the truth, and that the Law is against it? Did
ever the Jews, the Gentiles, the Barbarians, Turks, or Infidels, or people of
any Nation (that acknowledges and confesses that there is a God) affirm the
like? Shall not Sodom and Gomorrah, Tire and Sidon, rise up in Judgment against
this perverse, crooked, untoward, blasphemous Generation, who say in their
hearts there is no God? for though they sometimes confess him in words, yet in
works they deny him: who shall stand in the gap? who shall intercede for this
Generation? for the cry, and the loud voice of the souls under the Altar, slain
for the word of God, and the Testimony which they held, saying, How long, O
Lord, holy, and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth? I say, this Cry has peirced the heavens, and entered the
ears of the Lord against this Generation; therefore tremble, ye uncircumcised
in hearts and ears, and be smitten with terror, ye persecutors about Religion,
Church, and Worship, for behold, your portion is the same with Cain, your elder
Brother, (who was the first murderer about Religion,) and with the Whore, your
Mother, who has made Nations drunk with the wine of her fornication, and who
is also drunken with the blood of the Saints, and in whom is found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints, of men and all that were or has been slain upon
earth; yea, in her is found the blood of all the righteous since Abel to this
day: therefore all persecutors in Christendom or elsewhere, who oppress, kill,
and endeavor to destroy, and shed innocent Blood, about Church, and Worship,
and Common Service, you are Children of this Whore; and as you partake of her
sins, so you will assuredly partake of her Plagues, for strong is the Lord that
judges both her and you; and the Lord has showed many thousands in this
Nation and elsewhere, the secret Chambers of your Imagery, where you commit
Uncleanness and Idolatry; and also what is in the golden Cup that your Mother
holds forth to the Nations; and also what is under her purple, and scarlet
colored array, and her ornaments of gold, precious stones and pearls, and to
them he has lifted up her skirts, and made her naked and bare, and her
filthiness and fornication is seen in and under her glorious out side; and in
vain do you, her children, endeavor to impose her Sorceries upon such; if the
Lord permit, she may drink yet a little more of their blood, but of the cup of
her fornication they dare not, nor will not drink; for they know the true
woman, the true Church, the Spouse of Christ, (the Kings daughter who is all
glorious within) and having seen her beauty and glory, and partook of her
graces and virtues, cannot now follow other lovers, nor be forced by the power
of the beast (which carries the Whore) nor yet by her fair allurements, to
forsake and deny the true Church, though floods of persecutions follow her and
her Children; therefore in vain is the labor of Babels Merchants, and the
power of the beast which defends them; against such a people whose eyes are
opened, and whose understandings are enlightened, and whose souls have not only
tasted, but daily feed on the bread of life which comes down from above, even
from the heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of all the faithful, and the City of
their Solemnity. I say, in vain do Babels Merchants, the children of the great
Whore, and the Beast that carries her, endeavor to compel such to partake of
her Merchandise, to drink down her Sorceries, and to become Members of their
Church, whose glory is outward fair words, but foul deeds; white garments, but
black souls; the blind, the ignorant, the dark in heart and understanding, the
doubtful and unstable, the wanton, vicious, and voluptuous ones; these and such
like she may prevail upon, and of such do her Church consist; of these are the
Multitudes, Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, on whom she sits, and over whom
she reigns, and has long reigned, -- but the Lord in his exceeding riches,
grace, kindness, and love, has in this latter day caused his everlasting day
to dawn, and his day Starr to appear, and not only so, but the womb of the
morning is opened, and the Sun of Righteousness is risen in the hearts of
thousands, even of those over whom she reigned, and he has redeemed them from
under her, and out of the Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues; and as this Light and
Glory, Riches and Love increases and prevails in the hearts of people, (which
certainly is to overcome) the Whore will lose her Dominion, Seat, and great
Authority, and be cast upon a bed of torment, which is the determinate counsel
of God, to bring to pass upon her; for Babylon is fallen, and must yet fall, Sin,
Violence, Oppression, Cruelty, and persecution had a beginning, and must and
shall have an end, and the whole Creation of God longs, groans, and travails
for that day, even to enjoy her Sabboths, or rests, and to see sin and iniquity
finished, and everlasting Righteousness brought in, and Judges restored, as at
the first, and Counselors, as at the beginning; and the knowledge of the Lord
to cover the earth, as the water does the Sea (or the deeps;) but the wicked
must fill up their measure of doing wickedly, and the Righteous also must fill
up their measure of suffering innocently; and in the end comes the Reward of
both.

The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Prove.
10.7.
And may it not be said of Christendom, as once the Lord said of Israel, Sodom
thy sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as thou have done, and thy
daughters. Ezekiel. 16.48. etc.
Postscript.
READER,
I do here present to thy view, a Narrative of the most malicious, wicked and
Illegal Process against one of the persecuted and oppressed ones of Christ,
called John Otter Shoemaker, who on the 25. of the 10th. Month called December,
1664. was taken in a Meeting at Mile-end, and from thence had before William
Rider, and Thomas Player, called Justices, which Meeting the People of God
called Quakers, have and do, in their usual manner meet to worship God, as he
has made himself known in them, and unto them, the Relation extracted from his
own mouth, is as follows: The said John Ottir, with some of the people of
God, called Quakers, being seized, in the said Meeting was brought before the
two Justices (so called) William Rider asked him his name, the Prisoner
declared his name unto them; then he asked him his Dwelling place, or place of
abode, the Prisoner asked him if declaring his name was not sufficient; Then
Tho. Player said, No; but said in his have, that if he declared not his place
of Habitation or abode, he was to be taken as a Felon, or a Vagabond: The
Prisoner answered that he had a dwelling place where neither thief, murderer,
nor persecuter could come: Then W. R. asked where that was? he said in God. So
they committed him to New Bridewell, as a Vagabond, where he was detained some
weeks, and the Sessions at Hicks-Hall, following shortly after, the said
Prisoner was called down thither, where were Robert Hide, and John Keeling, two
of the Kings Judges, with other Justices (so called) who usually sit there, and
there was three Malefactors, who were Prisoners at the same time, that was
brought down to the Sessions, who was called to the Bar, John Otter being also
set to the Bar, the Judge asked him his Dwelling place? the Prisoner answered
him as he did the said Justices; then after some consultation with the said
Justices, the Judge pronouced Sentence against him with the rest, that he
should be Transported beyond the Seas to any of the Kings Foreign Plantations;
without asking the Prisoner any thing, or taking notice in what Capacity he
was, only he asked the Keeper if he had the Correction of the house? who
answered he had been in the Stocks five times; and so was returned to Prison,
having received the sentence as a Vagabond; their proceedings being signified
to the Council, at the desire of two men, one called Tho. Coltloth, the other
Richard Sherrwood, men having dealings to Virginia, the said Prisoner was
granted unto them with the three Malefactors, to be sent to Virginia, there to
be sold Slaves for seven years. Now whoever thou art that reads this Narration,
and the foregoing Relations of the several trials of the people of God, called
Quakers, comprehended in this Treatise, and if thou weighest things in the just
balance of Truth, which God has placed in thee, thou will see how oppression
is added to oppression, injury to injury, misery to misery, and all to set up
lust instead of Law; and how the Law is strained, and stretched, to accomplish
their envious devices; For the Statute made and provided in that case, against
Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, does show and nominate who are such,
before punishment is proceeded unto, as in 39. Eliz. cap. 4. shows, First,
That all persons calling themselves Scholars, going about begging, all
Seafaring men pretending losses of their Ships or Goods on the Sea, going
about the Country begging, all idle persons going about in any Country either
begging, or using any subtle craft, or unlawful Games and Plays, or feigning
themselves to have knowledge in Physiognomy, Palmestry, or other like crafty
Science, or pretending they can tell Destinies, Fortunes, or such other like
fantastical imaginations, all persons that be or utter themselves to be
Procters, Procurers, Patent gatherers, or Collectors, for Goales, Prisons, or
Hospitals, all Fercers, Bearwards, Common Players of Interludes and Minstrils,
wandering abroad, all Juglats, Tinckers, Pedlars, and petry Chapmen, wandering
abroad, all wandering persons, and common Laborers, being able in body using
loytering, and refusing to work for such reasonable wages, as is tared or
commonly given in such parts; all persons delivered out of Goales that beg for
their Fees, or do travel begging, all persons as shall wander abroad beging,
pretending losses by fire, and all such persons not being Felons, wandering and
pretending themselves to be Egyptians, or counterfeit Egyptians, shall be
taken, adjudged, and deemed Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, and shall
sustain such pain and punishments, as by this Act is in that behalf appointed.

Now unto you Judges and Justices who have passed, and given your consents unto
the sentencing of this innocent man for Banishment, and pretend the Law for it,
I ask which of all or any of the capacities of persons adjudged to be Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, by this Statute did you find this Innocent
person, which of your doors was he taken begging at? or any others? or what
practice else did you find him in which this Statute does adjudge? what must he
be exposed to the uttermost severity mentioned in the same, that is banished?
before you had proceeded to the sentencing for Banishment of this Innocent
person, under the name of Vagabond, Rogue, or sturdy Beggar; he should first
have been proved so to be, or it should have been made appear unto you, that he
had been found in the quality or qualities above mentioned, and if you had
proved him to be such a one, or he had appeared so to be, yet that is not
sufficient for you, who so often repeates your being upon your Oaths, and that
you must do Justice according; to proceed to Banishment, for they must appear
to be dangerous to the inferior sort of people where they shall be taken, or
otherwise be such as will not be reformed of their Roguish kind of life, by the
former Provisions of this Act: If he had been found such a one, as you have
sentenced him to be, nevertheless he was to have been referred to the former
Provisions of this Act, and so then to have proceeded according; but right or
wrong whoever they be that fear God, and make conscience of their ways before
him, if they come but within the verge of your fury, their fare is all alike;
if one snare will not do, another ginn shall, and so the Innocent are deprived
of their Birthrights outward, which is the equity of Laws made and provided to
secure every freeborn Englishman in his Right and Propriety, and the equal and
impartial ministration and distribution of them; and they are oppressed in
their Consciences inward, by that persecuting Spirit which seeks to dis-throne
God there, and exalt it self, but, be it known unto you, we neither can, nor
shall bow unto that Spirit, the way you take to work us to Consormity; is a
contrary way; it is not swords, staves, halberds, nor your Goals, and your
cruel Exercises imposed there, and inflicted on our bodies will do it; I tell
you, we are gentle to lead, but otherwise to be driven, is unnatural to
Englishmen, and such as fear the living God, and no man this day in England can
charge us with evil justly: as we are a people, and God, even God eternal,
bears record unto our Consciences of the same, you have waded very far in
this work, considering your day; well would it be for you, if you laid it to
heart, and them also who whets you on to this work, of whom it may be said, as
of old, Come, let us smite with the Tongue, and smite you with the Fist; and so
the Oppression and Persecution of Gods People is divided between you; and they
are ground betwixt you, even you Lawyers and Priests, as between two
Millstones; but in due time the Lord will arise and plead our Cause, and give
Judgment to our enemies, yea, righteous Judgment, and all the Persecutors of
his Innocent People shall know it; Although we are made in this day, even the
Sponge of the Nation, to drink in the implacable fury of your Malice, yet know,
the very dregs of your Cup is reserved of the Lord for your selves, and in due
time you shall drink the same; and when you are under Judgment, then it will be
given you, to remember them whom you have most injuriously, and unrighteously
oppressed.

I say, Mind, and give good heed unto what is said, for your day hastens.
THE END.

