Animadversions ON THE PROPOSAL FOR SENDING BACK THE NOBILITY and GENTRY OF
IRELAND.

LICENSED January 1. 1689/90.

LONDON: Printed for Tim. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXC.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE Proposal for Sending Back THE Nobility and Gentry of
Ireland.
WAlking the other day in the Court of Requests (near to the Areopagus of
London, where most men spend their time in nothing else, but either to tell, or
to hear some new thing), I encountered a Pamphlet, dressed up in the new Mode
of A Letter to a Gentleman, and stiling it self, The Proposal for sending back
the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, etc. I began to think with my self, what
pity it is, that now (when by a War with France, and the Inhibition of all
Trade and Commerce from thence, the Commodities of that Country are grown
scarce and dear) so much Paper should be wasted in such idle and unprofitable
Trifles. If any Answer be made to this (thought I) there must be more Paper
mis-imploy'd; if it pass without Animadversion, the Author will be confirmed in
the opinion of his own Sufficiency, and be tempted to expose more such unlick'd
Lumps to the amusement of the Vulgar. Thereupon I sat down to read it, and was
not at all deceived in my expectation; for I found it to be a bold, and most
disobliging Justification of a most irrational and impracticable Project, and
aggravated by a very dis-ingenuous humor of Personal Scandals and Reflections.
But, to obviate all suspicion of Prejudice or Passion, I will take the Engine
in pieces, and handle every Wheel and Joint of it, and then submit to every
impartial Reader, whether R. B who subscribes the Letter, has proceeded with
any tolerable candor, or discretion. But I desire to be rightly understood: I
do not undertake this Task, to make an Answer to the Parts of his Proposal and
Scheme; that is done thoroughly and sufficiently by the Answer given in to the
Lords of the Committee, and I shall expose it anon: I design this only to
animadvert on the frivolous Cavils and Conundrums ventilated by the Author of
the Vindication.

And first (looking as big as Hudibras himself) he enters the Lists, with a
bold defiance, That some of his Contrymen dare not put their Honesty in the
Balance with His. I cannot judge of what I do not know; things immaterial and
invisible cannot be crammed into a Scale; and so dare not take upon me to be
the Arbitrator. But surely his Honesty and Integrity may justly be called in
question, who has so manifestly prevaricated in his Projections, and obtruded
upon the World Proposals and Schemes so apparently and materially differing
from those he presented to the Council, and to the Committee. And (that I may
use his words) to demonstrate both, my first and chiefest Argument shall be to
produce the written as well as the printed Proposals, that so every individual
person may observe their interfering and contradiction.

The Proposal presented to His Majesty, and by the Lords of the Council
communicated to the Committee.
AFter the last Rebellion in Ireland, through the want of Tillage, there
followed a Famine; and the heaps of those who died of Famine, caused a Plague;
so that many more died by Famine and Plague, than by the War.

The same thing may be feared now, there being little or no Tillage for the
next year; and the common Irish, who lived most upon their Potato-Gardens,
being now in the Army, do consume five times more Corn than they did when they
lived at home in their Cabbins; by which means the great Harvest of the
English, which they had this year, will be eaten up before the next; so that
tho that Kingdom should be entirely reduced the next Summer, yet the want of
Bread will make it Desolate; for the late King's brass Money, having eaten up
all the Silver in that Kingdom, there is no Money left to purchase Corn abroad,
so that the People must unavoidably dye for want of Bread.

There is now near one half of that Kingdom reduced, and yet the Protestants
even of that part, are most of them still in England; the Consequence of their
stay here, must be a Famine there: For the Irish are almost all taken up in the
Service of the late King, and those who are not, will notwithstanding, neither
Plough nor Sow, where they know not their Landlords; so that while the English
stay here, and the Irish Farmers fly before our Army, there it must necessarily
follow, that the more Your Majestys Army advances, the more must that Kingdom
become waste; but if the English of Ireland, who are now here, were in that
part of the Kingdom, which is now reduced, the Irish who now fly before our
Army, would come in and gladly settle again under their old Masters.

Your Majesty has a fair opportunity to oblige the English that stay here to
return, by the Address which the House of Commons made to Your Majesty in their
behalf, for some relief for them. Now, if Your Majesty were pleased to transmit
into Ireland, whatever Your Majesty is graciously pleased to give them,
excepting only what would bear their Charges thither, and order it to be there
paid, with obligation on every Person who receives any of it, to Sow such a
proportion of Summer-corn (which may be done in March next) it will be the only
means to prevent a Famine; and moreover, such numbers returning, would be a
Terror to the Irish Army, and an Encouragement to the Laboring Husbandman to
return, who is now fled, and who had rather be at the Plough, than at the
Musket.

Such of the English as have their own Estates to go to, have no reason to
expect equal share of Money with those, whose Estates are yet under the
Enemies; and that which is abated, or deducted from them, who can enjoy their
own Estates, will be a considerable Addition, the better to enable those, whose
Estates are yet unconquered, to settle for their present Subsistence on the
Lands that are forfeited to Your Majesty, which Lands will be thereby kept in a
profitable Condition, to be given up as soon as these Men are restored to their
own Estates.

As this will be a competent Provision for the Nobility and Gentry, so that
which is yet remaining of the Collect-Money, may be for the poorer sort; which
being paid them at one entire sum, would be an help to settle them under the
Gentry, to become Tenants, as they were formerly; and if they plow but little,
yet their being in the Country will be an Encouragement for others to go over.

If Your Majesty be pleased to order that this Collect Money also may be
distributed in Ireland, it will then be seen who are real Objects of Charity;
and the Money will be laid out to a good use, and not to feed the Luxuriousness
and Idleness of some here (as too much of it does now) it is to be feared that
all will not go over, who yet complain now that they have not whereon to live.

The House of Commons did humbly address to Your Majesty for to lay down for
our Relief 15000 li. (that being a fourth part of what they were pleased to
rate for a years Allowance for us) they promising to see Your Majesty repaid.
That Sum is indeed much too small to effect this Undertaking; but if Your
Majesty were graciously pleased to make it the whole 60000 li. It would do
greater things than I have yet mentioned; and would send away a multitude of
People, whose wants make them very importunate and troublesome here; and it
would be a means both of saving the Kingdom, and also the Lives of many
thousand of Persons in it.

It is of as great Consequence speedily to Plant that Kingdom, as to Reduce it;
and perhaps 60000 l. may do that now, which cannot be done the next year with
thrice that sum; while the English of Ireland stay here, it cannot reasonably
be supposed that Strangers will go thither. And the Irish who are fed with
Promises from the French, will believe them when they see the English so
fearful to return.

If all such as are a Clamor and a Charge to England, may have this Money, for
going to Ireland to receive, then all those who will not go over, will be left
without excuse.

And if this Money be not sent over now, and the Protestants sent away to Sow
Corn there, a greater sum than now pays the Army, will not be sufficient the
next year to keep the English and Irish in that Kingdom with Bread. And the
Prospect is yet more terrible if we consider, That when ever Corn was dear in
England or Ireland, we always setch'd it from France; but now we must go seek
other Markets, which cannot be done without vast expense, since this general
War through Europe will take up so much Corn for all the Armies.

I have laid down in another Paper, a Scheme, or Method to show that all this
is very easy to be practiced; and I have also laid down some other great
Benefits of it, besides what are here beforementioned.

The Proposal, as it is Printed.
AFter the last Rebellion in Ireland, there followed a Famine; and the
Carcasses of those who died of Famine, caused a Plague; so that many more died
by Famine and Plague, than by the War.

The same thing may be feared now, there being little or no Tillage for the
next year; and the common Irish, who lived most upon their Potato-Gardens,
being now in the Army, do consume ten times more Corn than they did when they
lived at home in their Cabbins; by which means that great harvest of the
English, which they had this year, will be eaten up before the next; so that
although that Kingdom should be entirely reduced the next Summer, yet the want of
Bread will make it Desolate; for the late King's brass Money, having eaten up
all the Silver of that Kingdom, there is no Money left to purchase Corn abroad,
so that the People must unavoidably die for want of Bread.

There is now near one half of that Kingdom reduced, and yet the Protestants,
even of that part, are most of them still in England; the Consequence of whose
stay here, must be a Famine there. For the Irish are almost all of them taken
up in the Service of the late King, and those who are not, will
notwithstanding, neither Plough nor Sow, when they know not their Landlord; so
that while the English stay here, and the Irish Farmers fly before our Army
there, it must necessarily follow, that the more Your Majesty's Army advances,
the more must that Kingdom become waste; but if the English of Ireland, who are
now here, were in that part of the Kingdom which is reduced, then the Irish,
who now fly before our Army, would come in, and gladly settle again on their
old Farms, when they have some body to protect them.

Your Majesty has a fair opportunity to oblige the English that stay here, to
return, by the Address which the House of Commons made to Your Majesty, in
their behalf, For one fourth part of a years Allowance, which in the whole did
amount to 60000 l. Now, if Your Majesty were graciously pleased to give them
here the Sum of 15000 l. being a fourth part thereof; and to transmit into
Ireland the Sum of 45000 l. more to be there paid to such of them, as will go
over, with Obligation on every Person, who receives any of it, to Sow a certain
proportion of Summercorn, (which may yet be done in March and April next) it
will be the only means to prevent a Famine; it would send away a multitude of
People, whose wants make them importunate here, and would in a great measure
supply those wants. And moreover, such numbers returning, would be a Terror to
the Irish Army, and an Encouragement to the Irish Labourer and Husbandman to
return, who are now fled, and who had rather be at Plough, than at the Musket.
Whereas now, the Irish who are fed with Promises from the French; will believe
them, and be thereby encouraged, when they see the English so fearful to return.

Such of the English as have their own Estates to go to, have no reason to
expect to be under the same Conditions with those whose Estates are yet under
the Enemy; and that Difference made between them, will be a considerable
addition, the better to enable those whose Estates are yet unconquered, to
settle for a present subsistence, on such little Farms as their Circumstances
will allow of, whereby they may get a little Stock of their own, against they
remove to their own Estates: This will be a great help to those of the North,
who have Land to set.

As this will be a competent Provision for the Nobility and Gentry, so that
which is yet remaining of the Collect-Money may be for the poorer sort; which
being paid to them at one entire sum, would be a help to settle them under the
Gentry to become Tenants as they were formerly: and if they plow but little,
yet their being in the Country will be an Encouragement for others to go over.

If Your Majesty be pleased to order that this Collect-Money also may be
distributed in Ireland, it will then be seen who are Objects of Charity, and
the Money will be laid out to a good use. It is to be feared that all will not
go over, who yet complain now that they have not whereon to live.

It is of as great Consequence speedily to Plant that Kingdom as to Reduce it,
and perhaps 60000 l. may do that now, which cannot be done the next year with
Ten times that Sum; and while the English of Ireland stay here, it cannot be
supposed that Strangers will go thither to Plant.

If this Money be sent into Ireland, to be there given to such as will go for
it, then those who will not go over, will be lef;t without excuse.

But if this Money be not now sent over, and the English sent away to Sow Corn
there, a greater Sum than now pays the Army, will not be sufficient the next
year to keep the English and Irish in that Kingdom with Bread. And the Prospect
is yet more terrible, if we consider, that when ever Corn was dear in England
and Ireland, we always fetched it from France; but now we must go seek other
Markets, which cannot now be done without vast expense, since this general War
throughout Europe will take up so much Corn for all the Fleets and Armies.

The first Scheme delivered in by the Projector.
1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would be pleased to cause it to be made
known publicly, That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Ireland, who
now are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith
return to that part of the Kingdom which is under His Majesty's Authority,
under pain of His Majesty's displeasure, except such whom His Majesty shall
particularly order to stay here for His service. And that for their
Encouragement so to do, it is humbly proposed,

2dly, That His Majesty would be Graciously pleased to give to all his English
Subjects of Ireland, whose Estates have been returned in to the House of
Commons, and by them Rated, the Sum of 15000 l. to be paid them here, and that
he would be graciously pleased to send into Ireland the remaining sum of 45000
l. Stir. to be there distributed to such of them as will go over to that part
of the Kingdom which is already conquered, and there Sow Summer-Corn on their
Estates (if they be of that Country) or on such Estates of the Irish, as the
Commissioners to be appointed for that purpose shall assign to them, if their
own Estates be in the Enemies possession; and the said 45000 l. be put into the
hands of 2 substantial, wealthy Gentlemen of that Kingdom, of clear and
unsettled Estates, Men of known Integrity; and that are not Dealers in Money,
who may be Treasurers of the same, they giving sufficient and undoubted
Security for the payment of the said 45000 l. in Ireland, in such manner as is
hereafter laid down, and that without any Fees or other Charges to be paid by
the Persons who are to receive it.

3dly, That His Majesty would be pleased to nominate a number of Commissioners
of the Nobility and Gentry of the North of Ireland, who knew all the Estates of
the Irish that lie among theirs; and that those Commissioners may have
Authority to set out and assign the Estates of the Irish to such English as are
willing to Sow Summer-Corn thereon for this next year only, and that every
Person whose share of the said Money shall amount to 20 l. or upwards, shall
give Bond to the said Treasurer in the King's Name, to the value of what he
receives, That for every 10 l. which he shall receive, he will Sow, if he be on
his own Estate, Four Acres of Oats, Barley, or Pease. Upon his giving of these
Bonds, the Commissioners shall give him an Order to receive his share of Money
from the Treasurers; and also a Writing of Assignment of the Lands, on which he
is to Sow his Corn.

4thly, For the encouragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are yet in
the Enemies Possession, that they may be obliged to sow but 2 Acres for every
10 li. that they shall receive, because of the necessity that they will lie
under of building for themselves some convenient dwelling upon Land which is
not their own.

5. That the said Treasurers, or one of them, shall take care, that every
person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do; and that the same
be not negligently thrown into the ground, only to escape the Penalty of the
Bond; and therefore that at Harvesttime the said Treasurers, or one of them,
shall ride about to see the same reaped; and that the Bonds shall be in force
against all those who have not their share of Corn to reap, tho they did before
answer the Obligation of their Bond by Sowing. By this means, His Majesty's
fatherly Care of His People will most evidently appear, in contriving that his
Subjects there shall have at least 10000 Acres of Corn the next year; whereas
without this, there will not be an handful in the whole Kingdom, and thousands
must die for want of Bread.

6thly, That every Gentleman who will go for Ireland, on these Conditions,
shall out of his share of the 15000 l. buy a good Musket or Case of Pistols,
for himself, and every Relation or Servant that he carries over with him able
to bear Arms; without the producing of which Arms in Ireland, and the making
Oath that he himself bought the same in England, he shall have no title to any
of the said 45000 l. in Ireland.

Lastly, That the Collect-money may be divided, that one 3d part for the Relief
of Women only, and the other two 3ds sent for Ireland, for the Encouragement of
Tenants and Laborers to go over, to plow and sow for the Nobility and Gentry,
or for themselves; and that these also, when they have entered their names to
the Bishops, and other Commissioners of the Collect-money, that they will go,
they shall receive, if they go from London, 20 shill. or if near the Sea, 10
shill. apiece to bear their Charges, and a good Musket, or Case of Pistols, at
Chester, (which the Commissioners shall provide, and pay for out of their
Stock) and the rest of the Money they shall have divided among them at their
arrival in Ireland; and that all such as will not go, shall find no more relief
here.

We know by computation, that there are in all about 10000 men that will go
over; and by this means his Majesty will, as it were, send a Recruit to the
Army of so many fresh Inniskilling Men, inspired with rage for their Losses;
Men, who when they get into their Country, will not be driven out again. So
that our Army need not be weakened by putting Garrisons into any Town, but may
march on entire; and these men will keep the Towns and Country behind them.

The second Scheme.
1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would be pleased to cause it to be made
known publicly, That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Ireland, who
now are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith
return to that half of that Kingdom which is under His Majesty's Authority,
under pain of His Majesty's Displeasure, except such whom His Majesty shall
particularly order to stay here for His Service; and for their encouragement so
to do, it is humbly proposed,

2dly, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to give to His English
Subjects of Ireland the Sum of 60000 l. Ster. and that it be put into the Hands
of two substantial wealthy Gentlemen of that kingdom, of known Integrity, and
that are not Dealers in Money, who may be Treasurers of the same, they giving
sufficient and undoubted Security for the payment of the same in Ireland, in
such manner as is hereafter laid down, and that without any Fees, or other
Charges to be paid by the persons who are to receive it.

3dly, That the King would declare that no Person of Ireland should have
Benefit of the said Money, but such as will go over to that Part of the Kingdom
which is already Conquered, and there Sow Summer-Corn on their Estates (if they
be of that Country) or on such Estates of the Irish as the Commissioners (for
that purpose to be appointed) shall Assign to them, if their own Estates be in
the Enemies Possession; Widows only excepted, who shall yet have but a fourth
part, or what their share would have amounted to out of 15000 l.

4thly, That His Majesty would be pleased to nominate a number of Comissioners
of the Nobility and Gentry of the North of Ireland, who know all the Estates of
the Irish that lie among theirs; and that these Commissioners may have
authority to set out and assign the Estates of the Irish, to such English as
are willing to sow Summer-Corn thereon, for the next year only; and that every
person whose share of the said Money shall amount to above 20 l. shall give
Bonds to the said Treasurers in the King's Name, to the value of what he
receives, That for every 10 l. which he shall receive, he will sow three Acres
of Oats, Barley, or Pease. Upon his giving of these Bonds, the Commissioners
shall give him an Order to receive his share of Money from the Treasurers.

5thly, For the Encouragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are in the
Enemies possession, it may be declared, that they shall have 5 parts to the
others three; and moreover, that the shares of all such as will not go over
(except as before excepted) shall be divided among them, because of the
necessity they will lie under of building for themselves some convenient
Dwelling upon Land which is not their own.

6thly, That the Treasurers, or one of them, shall ride about, and see that
every person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do; and that the
same be not negligently thrown into the ground, only to escape the Penalty of
the Bond; therefore that at Harvest-time the said Treasurers shall ride about
again to see the same reaped; and that the Bonds shall be in force against all
those who have not their share of Corn to reap, although they did before answer
the Obligation of their Bond, by Sowing. By this means, His Majesty's fatherly
Care of His People will most evidently appear, in contriving that his Subjects
there shall have near 10000 Acres of Corn the next year; whereas without this,
probably there will not be an handful in the whole Kingdom, and thousands must
die for want of Bread.

7thly, That every Gentleman who will go on these Conditions, shall receive
from the said Treasurers 20 shiil. a man (being part of the said 66000 li.) to
buy him a good Musket, or Case of Pistols, and also shall have a reasonable
proportion to bear his Charges over, viz. all they whose shares do come to 50
l. or under, shall have out of their share 40 s. a head (not reckoning
Servants) and all whose charges exceed that, shall have 3 l. a head, as
aforesaid; this, if they go from London, and but 20 s. a head, if they be near
the Sea: We know by computation that there are about 10000 that will go over;
and by this means his Majesty will, as it were, send a Recruit of so many to
the Army, which will be as so many fresh Inniskilling Men, inspired with Rage
for their Losses; Men, who, when they get into their Country, will not be
driven out again; so that our Army need not be weakened by putting Garrisons into
any Town, but may march on entire; and these Men will keep the Towns and
Country behind them.

Lastly, That the Collect-Money may be divided, and one third kept here for the
relief of Women only, and the two other thirds sent for Ireland, for the
encouragement of Tenants and Laborers to go over, to Plough and Sow for the
Nobility and Gentry, or Themselves; and that these Men also, when they have
entered their names to the Bishops, and other Commissioners of the
Collect-Money, that they will go, they shall receive, if they go from London,
20 s. apiece; or if at the Sea, or near, 10 s. to bear their Charges, and a
good Musket, or Case of Pistols, (which the Commissioners shall provide, and
pay for out of their Stock), and therest of the Money they shall divide amongst
them at their arrival in Ireland; and that all such as will not go, shall find
no more Relief here.

The Scheme as it is Printed.
1. IT is humbly proposed that the King would cause it to be made known to be
His pleasure, That all the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Ireland, who now
are in England, and whose usual abode has been in Ireland, do forthwith return
to that part of that kingdom which is under His Majesty's Authority, except
such whom His Majesty shall particularly order to stay here for His Service;
and that for their encouragement so to do, it is humbly proposed,

2dly, That His Majesty would be graciously pleased to give to all His English
Subjects of Ireland, whose Estates have been returned into the House of
Commons, and by them have been Rated, the sum of 15000 l. to be there
distributed to such of them as will go over to that part of the Kingdom which
is already Conquered, and there Sow Summer-Corn, and that the said 45000 l. be
put into the Hands of two substantial, wealthy Gentlemen of that Kingdom, Men
of clear Estates, without any Encumbrance or Settlements, of known Integrity,
and that are not Dealers in Money, who may be Treasurers of the same, they
giving sufficient and undoubted Security for the Payment of the said 45000 l.
in Ireland, in such manner as is hereafter laid down, and that without any
Fees or other Charges to be paid by the Persons who are to receive it; and
that every Person, whose share of the said 45000 l. shall amount to 20 l. or
upwards, shall give Bond to the said Treasurers in the King's name, to the
value of what he receives, that for every 10 l. that he shall receive, he will
Sow, if he be upon his own Estate, four Acres of Oats, Barley, or Pease, upon
his giving of which Bonds, he shall receive his share of Money from the
Treasurers.

3dly, For the encouragement of all such to go over, whose Estates are yet
unconquered, it is proposed, That they shall be obliged to Sow but Two Acres of
Corn for every Ten pounds that they shall receive, because of the necessity
that they will lie under of being at some Expense upon Land which is not their
own, and of paying some small Rent.

4thly, That the said Treasurers, or one of them, shall take care that every
person do sow as much Corn as by Bond he was obliged to do, and that the same
be not negligently thrown upon the ground, only to escape the Penalty of the
Bond. And therefore that at Harvest-time the said Treasurers, or one of them,
shall ride about to see the same before it be reaped; and that the Bonds shall
be in force against all those who have not their share of Corn to reap (that
is, if the same have happened through any neglect of theirs), although they did
before answer the Obligation of their Bond, by Sowing. By this means, His
Majesty's fatherly Care of His People will most evidently appear, in contriving
that His Subjects there shall have at least 10000. Acres of Corn the next year;
whereas without this, possibly there will not be an handful in the whole
Kingdom, and thousands must die for want of Bread.

5. That every Person who will go for Ireland on these Conditions, shall out of
his first share of Money, buy for himself, and every Relation and Servant that
he carries with him (who are able to bear Arms) a good Musket, or Case of
Pistols for the Defense of his Family; without the producing of which Arms in
Ireland, and the making Oath that he himself bought the same in England, he
shall have no right to receive any of the said 45000 l. in Ireland.

Lastly, That the Collect-money may be divided, that one 3d part of it may be
kept here of it may be kept here for the Relief of Widows and Orphans only; and
the other two thirds sent for Ireland, for the encouragement of Tenants and
Laborers to go over to plow and sow for the Nobility and Gentry, or
themselves; and that these also, when they have entered their names to the Bps,
and other Commissioners of the Collect-money, that they will go, they shall
receive, if they go from London, 20 s. apiece; or if from the Seaside, or near
it, 10 s. apiece to bear their Charges, and a good Musket, or Case of Pistols,
at Chester and Bristol, which the Commissioners shall provide and pay for out
of their Stock, and the lest of the Money they shall have divided among them at
their arrival in Ireland; and that all such of them as will not go over, shall
find no Relief here.

We already know by computation, that there are about 10000 Persons that will
go over; and by this means His Majesty will, as it were, send a Recruit to the
Army (though it is not at all hereby intended that they shall be put into it)
which will be as so many fresh Inniskilling Men, inspired with Rage for their
Losses; Men, who, when they get into there Country, will not be driven out
again. So that our Army need not be weakened by putting Garrisons into any Towns,
but may march on entire; and these will keep the Towns and Country behind them.

And now have not the Answerers of this Proposal much Reason to cry out, that
this is not the same with that which lay before them? that it differs in
Alterations (but no Amendments) more of Matter, than Phrase. And whereas he
alleges, that this might have lain before them, and saved a great deal of
needless Trouble, but they positively refused it. I appeal to his own
Conscience and Ingenuity (if his Ambition to be a Politician have not stifled
the Sentiments of a Gentleman) whether those Persons (who sat in the Committee
to consider of the Papers communicated to them by the Orders of the Lords of
the Council) did not offer, and consent with the Projector, that he might
retract one of those Papers, if he would own, and subscribe the other; which he
resusing to do, and withdrawing in a Huff, they proceeded to what lay before
them. But if any of them dealt so uncivilly with that poor Paper, as to doom it
to light a Pipe of Tobacco, or cendemn it to a worse Employment, I cannot
apprehend how this should argue any want of Loyalty, and Respect to His
Majesty; I rather think it a high Presumption in the Vindicator, to interess
His Majesty in the sostering of his Abortive Conceptions. But as I cannot
believe, or understand, that His Majesty would spend ten Days in the Perusal of
it (whose piercing Judgment would discover the Emptiness of those Papers in the
space of ten Minutes) so I account it no wonder, that it lay near three Weeks
before the Lords of the Privy Council; where, I persuade my self, it might have
lain till Doomsday in the Afternoon, if the fond Father had not cried to have
his Child restored to him. And doubtless they thought it fitter for the
Consideration of a more Inferior Assembly, to whom they remitted it; it being
below their Wisdom, and high Employment, to throw away their Time on such
Paltry Business: And happy had it been for this Young Statesman, if it had
pleased them to commit those crude Notions to the Bundle of Wast Papers; then
the unhappy Author had not published so ungrateful a Proposal, nor exasperated
the whole Body of Irish Protestants by so unhandsome a Vindication. And tho he
very rudely and unkindly taunts the Gentleman who expressed a dislike of his
newfangled Whimsies; yet when Judges, Attorney, and Solicitor Generals Places
come to be disposed of in Ireland, I dare say, there will be found (even among
those of that Committee) men very competently qualified for such Employments,
and truly worthy to serve His Majesty in the greatest Trust.

His Second Argument is a mere wheedle, fo^sting in the Approbation of a great
many of the Gentry of our own Country: and with what a convincing Instance does
he prove this? why it is the Sense of his most humble Servant R. T. Truly, if
he do not produce Credentials, that this Single-soul'd Gentleman, R. T. was
employed to represent the Sense of a great many more; I must conclude that his
right Name is Legion, that he carries a Garrison in his Guts. But if the
Vindicator writ to some Persons, on whom he has an Influence, in Leverpool, and
dictated, and bespoke their Answer (which is more than whispered among us) it
was an easy matter for him to transcribe it for the Press. And because the
Gentlemen in Chester seemed to be prejudiced by mis-representations of it from
London, the Crasty Projector writ an insulting Letter to Chester, that the
Gentlemen, who answered his Proposal, were ashamed of it, and rebuked for it;
which, how false soever, yet he by often repetition of that Fiction, at last
imagined it to be real, and true. But to confront R. T. and those at Leverpool,
I will set up T. T. and produce a Letter from him, in which may be seen the
Sense of the Gentlemen in Chester.

SIR,
WE had hopes of having the 15000 l. speedily, but I fear it may be delayed, if
not quite lost, by some of our own Peoples foolish doings: By this last we had
an Account of Sir R. B's Project, to cause Plowing and Sowing Oats in the
North; he wrote a Letter to Captain Foster, to prevail with us here, to
Subscribe our Consent to his Project, but at the same time never sent us the
Particulars of the thing, so that he must either take us for Fools, or that we
have a mighty implicit Faith and dependence on his Parts and Interest; all
that he mentioned in his Letter was, that 45000 Pound should be advanced and
paid to the People of Ireland in this Kingdom, who should return to the North,
and fall to Plowing and Sowing Oats, for which they should have 5 Pound per
Acre, which (if his Proposals to the Parliament consist of no other
Particulars) is one of the wildest and most unlikely Projects, to take effect,
that ever I heard of. I doubt not but every body would be glad that good store
of Corn were sowed in the North against the next Season, and that there were
some probable Measures taken to encourage it, but no body can imagine that the
King or Parliament (who I believe have occasions enough for all the Money they
can raise) should advance 45000 Pound, to sow Nine thousand Acres of Land,
which may be bought at Harvest time for 18000 Pound, for Oats was never yet
worth at most 40 Shillings per Acre; nay and the Party that sowes the Land to
have the Corn afterward. I believe if the King would for encouragement bestow
4 s. per Acre on the Weilder, which would buy Seed or pay the Rent, 'twould be
much cheaper to the King, than to advance 45000 Pound, and it would certainly
encourage the People of the North to sow enough for the Army next Summer; or if
some abatement were made the Country in Excise and Chimny Money, proportionable
to what they should Plow, perhaps it might encourage them to do something; for
my share I pretend not to projecting, but if this of Sir R. B. be, (as we are
informed by other Letters it is) that all who shall receive any of the 15000
Pound, must be obliged to go into the North to sow Oats, I fancy he designs to
hinder the Payment of it, for on those Terms few certainly will take any of it;
for does the Knight think that the Gentlemen of the Quill, and Tradesmen, and
others, who never understood any thing of the Plow, (and who if they should
undertake it would do more hurt than good at it) should go into the North and
turn Plowmen, without any prospect of Horses, or other Materials for plowing,
or of Houses to lie in? For I believe those are scarce enough to quarter the
Army: Or does he intend to Transport the other three Provinces into Ulster? I
believe his Worship will preserve his own Person in England, and cares not what
becomes of a great many better; if it be left to every ones Choice (by his
Project) whether they will go on those Terms of 5 l. per Acre, or stay, I doubt
not but the Gentlemen of the North themselves will (if they be sure of the
Money) earn it all; or if Sir R. B. has a mind that some Gentlemen of other
Provinces should mix with the Northern People in this Affair; there is Sir F.
B. who we hear is a joint Projector with Sir R. B. and others, who I could name
at London, who I believe with little entreaty will take all the Money on any
Terms they will part with it; and so I have done with Sir R. B's Project, which
I would not have meddled with, had I any thing else to do.

T. T.


Perhaps in the Third place some of those who were there (and the Assembly
consisted of there times Fifty) did mis-understand it, that is to say did
approve it: (the Number of whom will hardly reach to make a Mournival) perhaps
some of his few Accomplices may have subscribed a Paper, expressing a sense
consonant to his Proposal; yet I am apt to suspect this Assertion, since the
Vindicator (who has published so readily his Proposal, and the
Leverpool-Letter) has forborne to stuff this Subscription into his Farce. But be
as it will, it is undeniably certain, that the Sense of the Gentry at their
meeting ran generally against it.

As for what he says of the Committee, consisting of three out of a Province;
if that was not a fair way, I would desire to know in what manner can he
Project that a Committee should be chosen? it must be a select Number, else it
is no Election: Business must be appointed to them, else they are no Committee;
it must consist of such as are present, and must be named by them who are
present; and I am sure that in the great and solemn Assembly of Parliament, the
Members name one another, and so they become a Committee. But let him say what
he pleases, I very well remember that the Establishing of that Committee was
done withal Calmness, without Dispute or Contest, until two (either nominated
by the Projector, or suspected to be in Conspiracy with him) were publicly,
and with some Resentment, rejected.

He takes the liberty to say, that he saw at their Table some Gentlemen of
Munster, whose Estates singly are by all their Neighbors owned to be more than
the Estates in Ireland of the three Persons, who now stand for that Province in
their Committee. This is considently spoken, and very idly; for it is notorious
to the Neighbors in Munster, that if the Estates of those Persons, who stood
for the Provincce of Munster in that Committee, were discovered and laid in the
Balance, they would poise with any as many Gentlemen of Munster at that Table;
and would certainly outweigh those two, who stickled at that time for the
Place, though the Projectors Estate were cast in with them to help the Balance.

But suppose it true, that seven or eight of those twelve Persens are in such
good Circumstances here, that they would not return, if the whole Kingdom were
reduced, does that render them unqualified to be of the Committee? or if others
fetched over thousands in Cash; and will generously release their claim to any
share of the Fifteen thousand Pounds; or are called to the Bar, and in some
small Practice here; are not they the more fit, and more impartial Arbiters of
what is most conducing to the Benefit of Ireland?

The remainder of the Paragraph is in coherent, and not well tacked to the
rest, and by the forced Inference, or Application, (that some Gentlemen, who
had good Estates, and great Stocks, are become distracted by excessive wants. I
might have suspected that the Author had pointed at himself, had he not
mentioned the putting of Daughters, young Gentlewomen well educated, to
Service: for I think the Projectors Children are not yet grown up to that
Maturity. And I retort his own Words. What barbarous Cruelty is it to hinder
Men from getting Relief (how dear soever they pay for it) who otherwise may be
forced to starve, or perhaps to put an end to their miserable Days with their
own Hands? But let God and the World judge, who it is that has maliciously, or
ignorantly most contributed to such unfortunate Possibilities.

These Men are not unwilling to go themselves, but probably their Reasons may
be such, as will demonstrate it un-practicable for others to go, upon such
delusive Terms as the Projector has contrived. Therefore, to follow his Method,
I will impart to the Reader the very Answer drawn up by the Committee, and
presented to the Lords of the Council.

The Answer of such of the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of Ireland, as are
now in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, to a Project contained
in Three Papers; which were by the Right Honorable the Lords of the Committee
of Council for the Affairs of Ireland, delivered to the Reverend Dr. Walker to
be communicated to them.
WE having seen and duly considered the aforesaid Papers, do humbly offer

First, That many of the Allegations and Suggestions in the said Papers
contained, and on which the whole Project is founded, are notoriously false, or
very fallacious; as for Example.

1. The Suggestion that half, or near half of the Kingdom of Ireland is
reduced, is not true, for really one fourth part of the Kingdom is not in his
Majesty's Possession; and even in the center of that part, the Irish, as yet,
keep the important Fort of Charlemont, to the great Annoyance, if not the total
hindrance of Tillage in the Neighborhood of that Garrison.

2. The Allegation, that the Protestants of that reduced part are most of them
in England is as untrue, it being certain that not a twentieth, and we believe
not the fortieth part of them are now in this Kingdom.

3. The Assertion, that the consequence of the stay of the Irish Protestants
here must be a Famine there, is a great mistake, and the quite contrary is more
likely; for if they were there, they and their Families would eat more than
they could sow, or the Projector proposes they should sow, and consequently
would hasten and increase the Famine rather than prevent it.

4. The Suggestion, that too much of the Charity-money is expended to feed the
luxury and idleness of some that receive it is very scandalous and no less
false; since the small sum given to any one person is too little to administer
to his wants, much less his luxury; and it is manifest by the Book and reports
of the Commissioners, that the Charitymoney is distributed with as much care
and caution as is possible, and very little of it is given to any of the
Gentry, and that sparingly to such as greatly need it.

5. The Insinuation, that the Irish who now fly before our Army, would gladly
return and settle again under their old Masters, is offered at adventure, and
it is much more probable that the influence their Clergy have over them, and
the Wrongs they have already done to their old Masters and Neighbors would
hinder them from returning. Moreover the Country, to which those Irish are now
fled, is far better and more Fertile than the reduced parts are, and so they
are invited back to their loss; but if they had any such intention to return,
yet this Argument is fallacious as to all the rest of the Nobility and Gentry
that have no Estates nor Tenants in Ulster.

6. The main Supposition of all ( viz. That there is want of Men in Ulster to
till the Land) is not true; for there is not such want of Men there; but that
which is really wanting in order to Tillage, is Seed, Corn, Cattle for the
Plough, and other Necessaries.

7. The Suggestion, that the English are fearful to return, is very injurious
and false; for it is manifest that the English desire nothing more than an
opportunity to serve his Majesty, the Protestant Religion and Interest in the
reduction of that Kingdom, and have always declared their readiness so to do,
whenever it shall please his Majesty to enable them thereunto.

8. The Assertion, that those who will not go to Ulster will be left without
excuse, is a great mistake, for it is a a just excuse for any Man not to engage
in so unreasonable a Project, when the Grounds of it are untrue, and the
methods of it impracticable.

9. The Projector says, that if the 60000 l. he not now sent over, and the
Protestants sent away to sow Corn there, a greater Sum than now pays the Army,
will not suffice to buy Bread to keep the English and Irish that are now in
Ireland next Year. If that should be true, yet the Projector has not by any
Proposal in these Papers offered any method to obviate it; for he proposes only
sowing 10000 Acres, which will not serve those that sow them and their Families.

10. The Suggestion, that there are many forfeited Estates in Ulster (which is
another Pillar of this Project) is manifestly untrue; for there were fewer
Irish Papists restored to their Estates in this Province then in any other in
that Kingdom: So that there are no other considerable Estates in that part of
Ulster, now in our Quarters, that belonged to such Irish Papists, except the
Earl of Antrim's, Lord Strabane's and Sir Neal O Neale's; and it is well known
most part of those Estates are in Possession of Protestants by settlement in
Jointures, Leases, Mortgages, or other Encumbrances.

Secondly, The proposed Method is altogether impracticable: And,

1. As to the Proclamation proposed, it is without Precedent or Law to oblige
any person to improve and dwell upon another Man's Estate; and if it be
answered, That the proposed Encouragement will invite them, then there need no
such Proclamation; for Interest is attractive enough without other Obligations,
but the quite contrary appears by the general dislike of those Proposals.

2. The Inconvenience, Charge and Trouble of so tedious a Journey at this time
of the Year, and the hazard and trouble of passing the Seas, would be so
insupportable, that very few would be found to undertake it; but above all,
there being no Houses or Conveniences for the Reception and Entertainment of so
many Families of the other Provinces, as the Projector proposes, should go to
that reduced part, renders the whole Project unreasonable.

3. Either the number that will go will be very inconsiderable, or their
proportion of the Money not sufficient to bear the charge of the Voyage. The
Proposer writes of ten thousand men that he has computed will go over, if so
the 60000 l. will be but six pound apiece one with another; and when the price
of a Musket, or a Case of Pistols, and the Charge of the Journey and Voyage
are deducted from eveone, there will not be enough left to support them, and
much less to build Houses, buy Bedding (not to mention other Furniture) and to
buy Seed-corn, Horses, and all other Necessaries for the Plough.

4. It seems very improbable, as well as unreasonable, that any person of the
other Provinces should be induced to go to Ulster and build a House, and give
it up at a years end, and live miserably in it the mean time.

5. It is unlikely that two such substantial wealthy Gentlemen of Ireland, of
clear and unsettled Estates, of known Integrity, and not Dealers in Money (as the
Proposer describes them) can be found, who will take upon them to be Treasurers
of the 45000 l. upon the terms proposed, or that can give sufficient and
undoubted Security for the same.

6. That it would be great severity, and no less disservice to his Majesty, to
force the Inhabitants of the other Provinces so far from their Estates and
Relations, since they are so forward to assist all such Attempts and
Impressions as His Majesty's Forces shall make in their respective Provinces,
where they may be much more useful.

7. To send the Nobility and Gentry of a Kingdom to till the Land, and to build
Houses in a Country so impoverished, in the Wintertime, when neither Timber,
Brick, Mortar, or other Materials for Building can be had in that Country, nor
Firing, nor Victuals to comfort and support them till the Corn be reaped; and
to oblige all the several degrees of Men of that Kingdom to reap their Corn,
and to lie under their Bonds, tho they have duly sown their proportion, unless
they do also reap it, would be an Injunction far more rigorous than those of
the Egyptian-Task-masters. And now having demonstrated, as we presume, That the
aforesaid Project, is founded upon many false Suppositions and is in it self
impracticable for the Reasons aforesaid, and many others, we humbly hope that
the Project will be rejected; in all things most humbly submitting to His
Majesty's great Wisdom.

And when he says, p. 10. That His Majesty and his Privy Council were well
satisfied of the great Necessity and Benefit of the Proposal, and therefore
gave it into the Hands of some Persons to consider, etc. I take this to be
arrogantly and precariously insinuated, Why may it not as reasonably be
supposed, that His Majesty and His Privy Council, to rid themselves from the
Projectors Importunity, remitted it to some Persons of our Country, who, they
well foresaw, would soon discover how impracticable and utterly vain the
Proposal is, and so would damn it? and I am clearly of his Opinion, That it was
not at all to have these Gentlemen's approbation of it, for they in their Wisdom
knew it would never be approved by them.

Most unkindly said! to call the poor robbed Protestants a Rabble. It is not
likely that the Rabble could transport themselves and Families into England:
and I am very confident, that those honest People who composed that Crowd
(howsoever they might make no splendid Appearance here) made no contemptible
Figure in their own Country. But to account Sollicitors, Attorneys, Clerks,
etc. so, and to make them a parcel of the Rabble, is a most injudicious and
scandalous Censure; since their way of Education at School, at the Inns of
Court, and Practice in the Courts of Justice, may fairly absolve them from the
Ignominy of such a Character: beside that it is notorious, that some who
appeared there, and do pass under the Denomination of Clerks, are able to vie
with the Projector in Estates and Plantations. As peremptory is his Claim to
nuzzle himself under the Kings Robes, and pretend, that an Affront offered to
him, is the same as if done to his Majesty.

But now behold a wonder! no sooner did the mighty Man enter the Room, but the
two inconsiderable Fellows of that Committee, who penned that scurrilous and
abusive Answer, were absolutely confounded; and he that was reading it to the
Assembly was struck silent, by the Magic Power of his presence: nay, they were
so confounded with the sense of their own Scurrility, and Reflections, that for
shame, they could not read any more, till he was gone; and after he was gone
(mark that) then the Author began to beg Pardon of the Projector.

To the best of my remembrance, there was but one draught of an Answer laid
before the Committee (though transcribed twice, because of some Blottings, and
Interlineations) while most of them present had so despicable an Opinion of
this Chymerical Project; that had it not been honored with a Pastport from the
Lords of the Committee, it had been answered only with Ha, Ha, He: in the mean
Time if he be a stranger to the Contents of the Answer agreed on by the
Committee, how comes the Vindicator to take Notice of it? and to answer the
Paragraphs of it, page 11, and 14. And where he suggesteth, that the Gentleman
at the Delivery of their Answer, received a severe Reproof to themselves, it is
wholly untrue in matter of Fact: the Answer was delivered in by the same
person, to whom the Proposal was given by the Lords of the Council, from whom
there came no Reproof, nor the least signification of any Dislike.

It is but the Projectors malicious Fancy, that the Northern Gentry will be
ordered to go without money, as it is wildly intimated, that some of them
refused to go with money. They have not deserved so ill at His Majesty's Hands,
by quiting their Estates, and Habitations, out of pure Zeal to their Religion,
and untainted Loyalty to Him, rather than live under the Tyranny of their
Oppressors, or voluntarily contribute to promote the Interest of the implacable
Enemies to King, and Country. But as none of them have resisted the Temptation
of Money to transport them; so none will demur upon the Kings Commands, if He
think fit to oblige them to return, though they should beg by the way.

And since he has so uncharitably pronounced, that their staying here is
unaccountable, it is well for them, that he has founded his Doom upon a false
Bottom, That some Gentlemen of that Country of the best Quality have not lost
out of their Houses, to the value of a Silver Spoon. If there be such a House,
it must be some enchanted Castle; for had it been visible either to Papists, or
Protestants, it had not escaped a more detrimental Inquisition, nor compounded
for so little Damage with the Military Romagers. I know one Person of Quality
(the Lord Viscount Massareen) who, beside rich and plentiful Furniture in his
House, and a mighty stock of Horses, Mares, and Cattle upon his Demesns, has
lost above Three thousand pounds worth of Plate in his House, and has not saved
of it so much as a Silver Spoon. But perhaps he means those, whom before he
hinted at, who removed their Goods and Effects long before this Revolution, and
so were out of Danger of losing out of their Houses to the value of a Silver
Spoon. Yet even they (though they may have saved some Money, Plate, or
Housholdstuff) are deprived of their Rents, and will be forced (if they have
not begun already) to live upon the Stock, and convert their Goods into
necessary Food.

His Objections are but the Transcript of the Committees Answer set down
before, and it were a needless Repetition to say them over again. I look upon
them as unshaken, notwithstanding all his undermining, and bombarding.
Nevertheless I shall look over his Reply, and endeavor to render his new
Batteries forceless, and ineffectual.

Indeed if it were possible, or probable, that the Return of a few into a
desolate and ruined Country, would tend to the Preservation of them that will
stay here: then (to allude to his Simile) it were good service to throw some of
the Passengers, and Goods over-bord, to lighten the Ship, and save the rest:
but if in a Tempest some of the Mariners should leap into the Sea, to appease
the Storm, it would contribute little to the Success of the Voyage.

It is not impossible, but in the Counties of Down, and Antrim, and part of
Ardmagh, by the Care and Conduct of Duke Schomberg, and the circulation of
Money, Food, and Firing may be had: but in the other six Northern Countries
(where the Protestants must ramble, according to the Projectors Scheme) there
were not Men to reap, no Horses to gather in, their last Harvest; and
consequently their Provision for the ensuing Year must need be skanty: and when
by their Flight, and Desertion of their Houses, they had no opportunity to
provide Turf, their stock of Firing cannot but be very slender.

I will not take upon me to predict the Fate of such as should go there, and
being there, should be distressed for Provisions. I do not doubt His Majesty's
Care, and Tenderness: but at such a Distance, many unforeseen Accidents may
intervene to frustrate, or prorogue His pious Intentions; while the poor
Expectants must inevitably perish.

The instances of the Vandois, and of New England are no way applicable to this
Occasion. The one are conducted with an Army, and Success attends them; the
other were safe in their own Dwellings, and were easily supplied with Bread,
which was their only want.

But now without Question the Man is in a Dream. He talks like a Hen wife, of
Hens and Geese giving them Eggs (as if he had lately come from Surveying
Leaden Hall, or the Stocks-Market) but will not know, nor understand, that in
such parts of Ulster, where the Enemy have ravaged, and even in many of those
where our Forces are quartered, there is not left a Hen to cackle, or a Cow to
give them Milk.

As we may with too much Sadness and Truth contradict his Assertion, that all
things are at present in great plenty in Ireland (since the contrary is too
sensibly felt there, and the consequence of it does ascertain our Miseries
here) so I hope his presages of Famine and Plague are not grounded upon
Astrological Calculations: or if they be, may prove as erroneous as the
Judgment of the Almanac Makers; and shall fall only on the Heads of them, who
are Enemies to the King, and to the Protestant Religion.

Methinks I see Sir Positive strut, and look big, when he assumes to himself
the satisfaction, that the Government is of the same mind with him: and what a
pertinent Reason he assigns for it? because true Policy is the same in all wise
States. This indeed is a delicate conceit, that when our King has thrown off
all Dependency, and Correspondence with the Church of Rome, the Projector will
have him to take pattern from the Court of Rome, and imitate them in their
Politics. But since he is pleased to fix that glorious Commendation on his
Proposal, that it is agreeable to the sentiments of the wise State of Rome (a
Consideration which would very much ingratiate him with King James, if he were
but now at Dublin, and had succeeded Sir John Dary's in his Office of Principal
Secretary of Scate) I am the less concerned, that he has slandered the
Protestant Gentlemen of Ireland with the scandalous Nickname, of a Cabal of
our Rabble, p. 14. by which he must need intend the Gentlemen, who took too
much pains to answer such an insignificant piece of Foppery; because he
intimates, and ridicules them for setting up for Irish States men, which
certainly none of the Rabble would aspire to. I was either one of that Number,
or had some very good Friends in it, and therefore I have as much Reason to
resent a wound given to their Reputation, as the ill-natured Projector assumes
to himself, p. 20. in his Epilogue to that Libel, by which he has aspersed the
Honor of an honest and worthy Gentleman. And therefore henceforward I shall
not treat him with that softness, which I intended at the first.

In the matter of his Politics he might perhaps amuse such a poor Rabble as we
are; but when he comes to talk like a Traveller, or an Intelligencer, he is
lamentably out, and the most ignorant of us can disprove him. For though there
be no Army encamped near to Colrane, Belturbet, Eniskilling, or Londonderry;
yet in each of them there are so many Men in Garrison, that together with the
Inhabitants of those respective places, there is no room to be had for
stangers. But why will he shoot thus at random? With what confidence can he
aver, that there are not in Derry twenty Houses uninhabitable? When if he had
inquired of twenty Persons now resident in London (who endured all the Miseries
of the Siege, and were Spectators of the Desolation of that place) they would
have assured him, as they have done me, that there are not in that City ten
Houses, which may be inhabited with safety, and convenience. And if there be
six hundred Soldiers there, as he seems to suggest, for my part I stand in
admiration how they are accommodated with Quarters: for in the time of Peace,
when the City was very populous, and full of Trade, when there were more Houses
in the Suburbs, than within the Walls, there were seven Companies quartered
there (which hardly would make up four hundred men) the Inhabitants grumbled,
and complained grievously of it. This I do aver upon my own certain knowledge

What an idle, and most improbable Whimsey has he found, as an Expedient to
supply the Protestants with Horses for the Plough? That because the Irish ran
away in such haste at the landing of our Army, that they left their Corn ripe
in the Field, it is as likely that they left their Plough-Garrons behind them:
If they did so, is it not more likely that they have been taken up by our Army,
who stood in such need of Baggage-horses? And can he imagine, that the
Soldiers will part with them for the business of the Plough? Methinks this
subtle Contriver (who has invented a new Employment of Itenerant Supervisors to
see the Corn sowed and reaped) should have propounded the sending over two or
three Muleteers, or Commissary Generals, to gather up the wandering Garrons of
the Country, and to secure them in some Pin-fold, till they might coveniently
be distributed among the Gentlemen designed by him to till the ground at next
Seed-time.

What a lame incongruous Reason is this? Because we shall find black Cattle
enough in England, to carry back; therefore we may be supplied with Horses from
Scotland and Wales. This is so ridiculous, that it would disparage a Man's
Reason to go about to confute it.

As little Ingenuity does he discover in his Answer to the next Objection.
Because we are Sojourners, and Lodgers in England, and pay dear for the use of
Houshold-goods, Beds, etc. therefore we may sojourn more cheaply in Ireland,
where neither Houshold-goods, nor Beds, etc. are to be had for Money. How scanty
is the Intelligence brought to this small Politician? or how wilfully is he
prejudicated in his Opinion? Tho in the Counties of Down and Antrim, many of
the Inhabitants are returned to their Houses, very ill furnished with Household
stuff; yet in the other six Northern-Counties ( especially London derry,
Tyrone, and Dongal) they are so far from having Beds to lie on, that for the
most part they have not a place to lay a Bed in; the Gentlemen's Houses,
Market Towns and Villages being utterly burnt and destroyed. And I am very
confident, that of the many a Score of Ship-loads of Bedding, and other
Household Stuff brought into England, there will be but a small share left to be
carried back again, since the Owners have been constrained by their Necessities
to convert them into Money for their daily Support. He that consults (as he
says) Bristol, North Wales, Chester, Leverpool, and Cumberland, will find this
to be true.

But what! would he have us to go into a desolate Country, only because it is
desolate? And suppose the Gentlemen would condescend to become Holders and
Drivers of the Plough, yet what shall they do with their Wives and Children?
Where shall they stow them? And tho the Country be not possessed by the Enemy,
yet the Garrison of Charlemont, lying in the Center of Ulster, may possibly
make such Incursions as will mightily dis-array the young Plough-men. But I
perceive little Nehemiah would have us carry a Sword in one hand, and a Goad in
the other.

And where he insinutes an Inclination in us to beggar one another by
Indictments for Trespasses, which has more of the Lawyer in it than the
Christian (as if Christian and Lawyer were in the Predicament of Opposites) I
may well say, That his Supposition has more of the Viper in it than the Lamb.
And I wish also, that his snarling and cavilling do not give the People of
England occasion to think us litigious, and an uncharitable People; or at least
very tame and supine to suffer one man with Impunity to abuse a whole Kingdom.

Sir Silvester Brown, who proposed to the Council in Ireland, to settle Stages,
and a Post-road between Dublin and Holyhead, under the Sea; or he that would
have O Brasile (being a floting Island) clapped in, like a Gusset, between
England and Ireland, that so they might become one entire Island, did not offer
at a more impracticable Project, than this of Treasurers, Supervisors, Riders,
Landwaiters, and Corn-Guarders. And tho perhaps he may have an Eye to two
publick-spirited Men, duly qualified, who would postpone their private
Advantage, and undertake this Labor for the public Good; yet I remain in
doubt, that even those will hardly be persuaded to practice so great
Self-denial, as to undergo so much Hazard and Toil, without the Prospect of a
Reward.

Truly he has placed a very obliging Complement on the Nobles of our Land, when
he says, I bear as great a Respect to our Nobles, as the Answerers: And what
Respect he bears to the Answerers (among whom also there were some of the
Nobles present, and several were consenting) may be judged by his former
Civility, when he styles them a Cabal of our Rabble, p. 14. who set up for
Irish Statesmen.

The noise he makes about Proclamations and Precedents, is already stilled by
the Answer of the Committee. And who could have suspected that a Protestant of
Ireland should have darted suce virulent Invectives against his Countrymen and
Neighbors? reproaching them with a fatal Laziness, to stand looking at their
Country, and not return, tho perishing here with want; aggravating their
Restiness by a Comparison with the French Refugees, and taxing the Goodness of
our King, in troubling himself to conquer a Country for a People who will not
return and plant in it when it is conquered: which discovers his Judgment to be
as shallow, as his Humor is cankered. Neither is he less mistaken in his
Chorography, when he supposes the Security of Londonderry, or Eniskill^ng
(the first of which is sixty Miles distant, and the other above thirty) though
the Irish are are Sligo, but makes no mention of Charlemont which may infest
them in a days march. But what if London derry, and Eniskilling, and other
Towns were out of danger? what if the new Planters could all be crowded into
the Towns? where shall the Plough go? the Corn must be sowed in the
circumjacent Counties, and who will cover and protect them when they are
following their Labor? But the Gentleman has read Heylins Cosmography, and can
tell to an Inch how far it is between the Country of Vandols and Turin; and how
little a distance there is between Hunningen and Basi. But to what purpose is
this Historical Vaunt? where lies the Elixir of the Application? If the Vandols
had been up in Arms, and ravaged the Country to the Walls of Turin, it is very
probable the Duke of Savoy would not have left Paris, and go keep his Court
there: And if the People of Basil had been driven out of the City, and
sheltered in Amsterdam, I am ap to believe they would not have run in great
have, much less would the States of Holland have by Proclamation obliged them
to return within Cannon shot of their Bloodthirsty Enemies.

And now he gives you a Taste of his Craft: So cunningly did he contrive to
avoid the menace of the Proclamation, by a tacit Proviso, that he is among
those, whose usual abode has not been in Ireland: And indeed I suspect a
further reach in this State-Ingeneer; for that being ameng the first that shall
go over to sow Corn, and believing (as he has before surmised) that the People
will not return and Plant, when the Country is conquered; it is demonstrable,
that if His Majesty will send over Money, and appoint his two Public spirited
Friends to be Treasurers, they will soon agree upon the Partition. In the mean
time he need not take the pains to go out at the gate, when he may safely creep
out at a Loop Hole; and if he can do His Majesty more Service by sowing Corn,
than by staying here, it is Talent beyond what I ever heard that accomplished
Gentleman pretend to. It is a Noble Art to be a good Seeds man; and I wonder he
has not put in for a Monoply, or a Patent for fourteen years, to be the
Sower-General.

It seems to be the design of the Vindicator, not so much to justify the
Proposal (though at all times he discovers a Self-conceited fondness of it) as
to asperse and villifie the Gentlemen of Ireland now resident in London,
representing them as an inconsiderable Number; noting them rather as a Club,
who get together upon every Occasion; girding them with a secret Ambition of
staying for Employments, or to be made Privy-Counsellors; and upbraiding them
with an unmannerly Presumption, in pretending to answer for a whole Nation,
without consulting, etc. To this (though it may deserve a Return of another
Nature) I shall only answer by direct Contradiction: for neither is it true,
that forty or fifty Men upon every occasion, or that upon some Occasions there
met less than Three hundred; whose Resolutions were consented to by Five
thousand Persons resident in London, more considerable for Number and Quality,
than those in Bristol, Chester, and Leverpool; neither has any thing been acted
in their Committee, without the Presence or Approbation of some of the
Nobility, and some of the first Magnitude consulted.

Perhaps others has given in Proposals to the King; perhaps the Pretensions of
the Vindicator are as good as any Man's of them all, perhaps better: I am a
stranger to the Persons of the one side, and to all Merits on the other, and
therefore can say nothing. But this is clearly visible, that this Paragraph was
prolonged, only that in the Fag-end of it, we might be told, That he was known
to our present King in Holland, attended him in his Expedition for England, and
has Access to him here; and this with an insulting Glance at some few of our
Country Gentlemen, who know few of their own Countrymen, more than what they
meet at an Assizes; when his Conversation is at the Courts of Kings, and his
Diversion in the Closets of Princes.

Nay the very Distribution of the Brief-money cannot escape his Censure. In his
Opinion, it had been laid out to better purpose, if imployd in the maintenance
of his Project. Upon the next occasion, I hope he will employ his Interest to
be made the Kings Almoner.

And now irritated by his own waspish Disposition, he falls fowl upon Sir St.
J. Br -- ck; a Gentleman, whom an Acquaintance of many years has rendered very
well known to me, and no way deserving those black Characters fixed upon him in
that scurrillous Pamphlet. And because I am convinced, that he suffers under
those opprobrious Reproaches, merely for his warmth and concernment for the
Protestants of Ireland, I hold my self obliged to struggle in his Vindication,
as far as my own knowledge of him will conduct me. And because some officious
Person may have traduced this Gentleman, (by whispering to the Projector, that
his Proposal was defamed by the other, with the Epithet of dishonest and
knavish; which is not likely to proceed from a Person of his Prudence and
Temper) the Vindicator has adventured under his own Hand, to publish to the
World, that Sir R. B. is guilty of Knavery, Insolence, and Folly. Durus Sermo!
This is Language fitter for Billingsgate, and deserves an Answer more severe,
than is proper for me to use. Nevertheless I shall endeavor to be his
Advocate, as far as my experience of him and his Actions will warrant me. And
passing over the Calumny he places on the Gentleman, (that he has kept lusty
young Men, that would have gone over with our Army, these five Months in Pay
upon the Brief-Money; that he has promised to carry over a hundred of them as
Cadets; that the King will be deceived in relying on him) the improbability of
which may justly supersede all labor of Confutation, by a blunt Declaration
that it is not so: I shall only say, that I have not observed a Gentleman more
injuriously treated, nor more undeservedly. And because (according to his
Method) he has squeesed in an Occasion to celebrate the great Author of a late
excellent Treatise, called the Character of the Protestants of Ireland: I begin
to be confirmed in my suspicion, that the Author of the Proposal and of the
Character, is one and the same: (notwithstanding that there is a great
Disparity in the Style and Design of those two Papers, as well as in the
Humor) had not the Epithet of great, not properly applicable to him undeceived
me.

This Gentleman (whom the Vindicator caluminates) is above sixty years of Age;
had the Character of a Colonel forty years ago; has been settled in England for
Fifteen years past; what Temptations could prevail with him to forego his Quiet
and Retirement, and expose his Life to imminent danger? I am satisfied, that
his Undertaking was truly generous, prompted by Zeal to his Religion and
Country; proposing to himself a requital only in the futurity of Debenters, and
putting England to little or no Charge for his present Pay. And if by his care,
and Charity (which has appeared universal to all the distressed Protestants of
Ireland) he procured a small and temporary Relief for lusty young Men, as well
as others; he is very ill requited by such a Sarcasm, as if he had kept them in
Pay by the Brief-Money, and so cheated Widows and Children of the Common
Charity. What his Behavior was in the time of the late King, I am not privy
to; but this I will say, that if he did truckle to the Idols of those Times, he
is the most altered Man in the World: I have known him these many years a stout
stickler for the Protestants, and their Interest, and on that Account mightily
envied, hated, and threatened by the Irish and Papists. But let the Truth of
these Scandals be measured by his next Assertion, where he confidently says,
This Gentleman proposed in the Committee, that the Fifteen thousand Pounds
might be applied to the raising of his Regiment, and mounting them; when it is
notoriously known to all of that Committee, that there never was the least
Motion to any such Purpose made among them.

And if before the Kings pleasure were known, he tacitly informed himself,
whether he might rely on a certain Number of Men, to compose a Regiment, or a
good part of it; I think it was but common Prudence in him, to be assured of
that before he undertook it to the King, least his Proposal might prove as
impracticable as that of the Projector. And when he demanded forfeited Lands,
in lieu of present, and growing Pay; it was at his peril to lose the
satisfaction, if they did not deserve it, and the King could run no Risque by
it.

And now if the Vindicator will put himself into the Balance with this
Gentleman, he must forgive me if I say, it w^^ concern him to cast in some
visible Trumpery, beside the airy weight of his Reputation; else it is easy to
guess on which side the Scale will turn. But let any one judge, whether that Man
be not scurrillous, that shall (without the least color of Reason) say of a
Gentleman, that he provokes even Clergymen to beat him? As I heartily wish the
Proposal of the Projector may not make him any thing; so I agree with him in
Opinion, that he is unable to execute the Treasurers Place, and unqualify'd for
it; though at the same time he may fancy himself big enough to fill the Place
of Principal Secretary of State, or some other great Employment, where Profit
may be had without Danger: It is an ungentile Humor to make Comparisons; and
though the Projectors Estate be settled, and has lasted for four Generations
past, (which perhaps some Men do wonder at) what need was there to say, that he
got none by perjuring himself, or other men; is not that a tacit Reflection on
Sir S. B. as if he had gotten his by such means?

I would fain know if Two Gentlemen, having handsome Wives, should fall into a
Debate about their Honesty, and one of them should say, my Wife is a handsome
Woman, but I am no Cuckold, would not the other presently apprehend that he
meant and reflected upon him? But the Estate of Sir S. B. it is well known was
honestly gotten, by the mere dint of Industry, and most of it at sixteen Years
Purchase, after the Court of Claims was (...)

But will you quarrel, Sir, because they would not give you admittance among
them, when they were drawing their Answer? Is that a usual way among
Antagonists? why you know, that formerly as soon as you entered the Room where
they were reading it, the Reader was struck silent, they were ashamed to read
any more, till you were gone: and would you have them run into the same Error
again? Alas! the Fancy can never operate clearly, when the mind is awed by the
Presence of a Superior Ascendent. This Essay proves your Conjecture right,
That some of us do make that use of the leisure we have by our Exile, to answer
every new Pamphlet, that does not suit with our own Notion: So that if you
think fit to retract your Resolution, and put out a Reply, I shall hope to find
leisure to furnish a Rejoinder.

In the mean time let it be observed, that when your first Paper was decry'd,
you had leisure to alter your Sense in the second: and when both were confuted
by the Answer of the Committee; you had then opportunity to reform them both,
and publish your last Model without the Errata's in the former.

The rest is but a Repitition or Comment upon his former Discourses, insisting
upon the sowing of Corn, the Distribution of Money, the approbation of the King
and Council, etc. Only he superadds on irresistible Encouragement to the
Undertaking, that he has declared his Purpose of going along, and undergoing to
the utmost of his Ability whatever hardships we shall meet with. And who would
be so hard-hearted and so stupid, to refuse to go under the Conduct of such a
Leader? or baulk any Hardship in the Society of such a Companion in Misery.

The Paper concludes with a scornful side-look upon all the Protestants of
Ireland, who do not concur with his Sense and Notions, as having forfeited His
Majesty's Favor (which if any did suspect before, they knew no reason for it
till now) to which there is no possiblity of being restored, but by an humble
Supplication to his Majesty, etc. joining with the worthy Irish Gentry of
Leverpool, whom they may find in the Person, or at the Lodgings of one R. T.
And by this it seems, that the Author of it not only had the Honor to be known
to our present King in Holland, and to attend him in his Expedition for England
(when if there were not two more of Ireland to be seen, he means two more such
as himself) and to have access to him here, but would make us believe, that he
is acquainted with the Kings Mind, and knows the very Expedient that may
capacitate us to be Partakers of his Favors.

He that has imbroyl'd the Kings Affairs, and retarded the swift-winged Success
of his Forces in Ireland, is bound to ask the Kings Pardon; and so is the
Author of the Vindication; and not only so, but to crave Pardon of all the
Protestants of Ireland, the Nobility, Gentry, Lawyers, Attorneys, Solicitors,
Clerks, etc. and all whom he terms a Rabble. But if he be not so ingenious as
to publish his Remorse in a penitential Sheet, I mightily dread his Fate, which
if it prove unhappy, he must only thank himself for it.

FINIS.
Lately Printed,
A Just and modest Vindication of the Protestants of Ireland, with Reflections
on a late Pamphlet, Entitled The Character of the Protestants of Ireland, etc.

Sir St. John Broderick 's Vindication of himself, from the Aspersions cast on
him, in a Pamphlet written by Sir Richard Buckley, Entitled, The Proposals for
sending back the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, together with a Vindication of
the same.


