THE LIFE AND FUNERAL SERMON Of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand.

BY Dr. SAMVEL ANNESLEY.

Phil. ii. 20. I have no Man like minded who will naturally care for your State.

LONDON: Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultrey, 1692.

To the Honorable the Lady Bridget Roberts, Grace be with you, Mercy and Peace
srom God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father in
Truth and Love. 2 John 3.

MADAM,
THIS Eminent Saint, now in Glory, having been sixteen Years your Soul guide,
to the eternal Advantage of your self, and dearest Relations, and your House
being (as it were) the Sanctuary for Divine Worship, for the spreading of
Religion through the Country. This cannot but render his Memory to you
precious; and you may expect, that as they had the Benefit of his Ministry from
your House, they should receive the Memoirs of it from your Hands. I make no
Apology at all for what is In the Narrative, but only for what is left out. I am
(perhaps) so needlessly scrupulous of offending any, that (perhaps) I may
eventually please none. Be it so. It Is Spiritual Profit I aim at, if I can but
hereby provoke and encourage to what is deservedly imitable: I gain my point. I
shall say nothing particularly to your self; should I speak any good of you,
though never so true, 'twould look like Flattery, which I abhor; and to speak
ill of you (with Truth) is beyond the Power of your most captious Enemies (if
you have any such.) Go on therefore, as you have begun, practically to remember
the sound Doctrine, and Non-such Example set before you; which is beyond any
thing that can be said, or done by me: I shall always add my poor Prayers, that
in so doing, you and yours may be blessed in both Worlds. Though this may by
some be accounted the least: Yet this is really the most that can be done by

Madam, Your Ladiship's most hearty (though most worthless) Servant, Samuel
Annesley.

To my deservedly honored Friend Mr. John Brand, the only Brother of Reverend
Mr. Tho. Brand, now sleeping in Jesus, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
SIR,
MY delay of this ill drawn Portraiture is utterly inexcusable. I Will lie down
therefore under the Censure of it, to be so long in tacking together so short a
Story; which though it be true (and that is all the good that can be said of
it, yet) it is pity such Truths should be exposed, so despicably naked, as to
have no fashionable Ornament, to render it acceptable, some being first taken
with the Dress, and that insinuates the Matter: To this I Will say not a word for
my self, and but a few to the Subject. I am more than a Witness, how
sollicitous you were in fitting your Brother for the Ministry; he came first
into the World, but (I think) you were first in Christ: Pardon me for giving a
hint of your Soul travel for his New birth. I cannot forget, how restless you
were, till you had brought his troubled Soul to a well grounded Peace. Jer. 2.2.
I remember (and Christ much more) the Kindness of your Youth, with what zeal
you set out your Race: Go on, dear Sir, go on with a growing Vigor. It is not
long since you thought to have been in Heaven before your Brother; but he has
got the start of you, and has left you such an Example, which is more to you
than to any one else in the World; follow him close (tho I hope you will come
late to Heaven) in his Piety, Charity, and Usefulness all manner of ways; That
none may complain (his Ministerial Labors only excepted) that Mr. Thomas Brand
is dead while Mr. John Brand lives; And, O that he may live in your Posterity,
that you and yours may be the Blessed of the Lord from one Generation to
another. So prays,

Dear Sir, Your Soul-servant, Samuel Annesley.

The LIFE Of the Reverend Mr. THOMAS BRAND.
WOuld to God you could bear with me a little in my folly, and indeed bear with
me, 2 Cor. 11.1.
for I have undertaken what I can no way perform, so much as to my own, much
less to others satisfaction, when the collecting of some Memorables of Mr.
Brand's Life was desired of me I too suddenly consented, not sufficiently
considering, what Difficulties beset me: Namely some things of greatest moment
must not be mentioned at all, either some Persons, or Times will not bear it;
in other things, Places and Persons, upon the same Reasons, must not be named:
and of those things which may be spoken, where they cannot be mentioned without
commending of him, others of name, will count themselves reproached; and what
scapes these difficulties, is attended by another, which though it be really
better, it is in some respects worse, it is that which Christ charged the Jews
with, Joh. 8.45.
because I tell you the truth you believe me not: So, when I shall mention
somewhat done by him, which perhaps was never done by any before, those that
have Faith enough to save their Souls, may want Faith to credit such a
Relation, though attested by such evidence which is in its kind infallible. What
shall I do? must I? shall I, yes I will, venture out a crippled Discourse which
will present you with somewhat worthy your acceptance, and let that procure
your pardon for the mangling the rest.

His Birth.
Mr. Thomas Brand was born at Leaden Roothing, in the County of Essex, in the
Year, 1635. his Father was Mr. Thomas Brand, a Dignitary of the Church of
England, the mentioning of this, unavoidably leads me to obviate the only
plausible Objection against his being so zealous a Dissenter, to which I need
say but this: His chief Zeal was neither for, nor against any Party whatsoever,
but for the vigorous promoting of the sound Knowledge of those Doctrines
wherein we are all agreed, and of that Holiness which we all commend, though too
few practice: And this right Christian Temper he exercised toward the
Conforming Clergy. He spoke honorably of the Piety and Learning of some, and
never let fly indecent Reflections, or bitter Invectives against any, but
maintained and increased this commendable Moderation all his Life. Those who
were intimately acquainted with him could not perceive his leaning to any Party
whatsoever, but when any Discourse tended to partiality, he did industriously
divert it to downright Godliness, or to somewhat useful to promote it. He was
never without some Project for doing good, and could as soon cease to live, as
cease to be attempting the doing good to Souls.

More particularly,

His School.
He was sent to School to Bishop Starford, where, how soon, I cannot say, he
attained to such an accuracy of Grammar-Learning, that he made good use of it
to the great Benefit of others, whom he would critically examine upon all
occasions, throughout the Course of his Life; scarce any young Scholar whom he
occasionally met with, but has felt it: He well apprehending as other learned
Men complain, that the defect of Grammar-Learning is very hardly, if ever
repaired by after Studies.

University.
He was sent thence to Merton College in Oxford (that he soon ran through his
juvenile Academical Studies may be by this evident) He entered upon, and
thoroughly studied the Arminian and Socinian Controversies, with that of
Scientia media; these Studies pleased him wonderfully in the doing, but not
upon a later review, he said since, nothing yields me comfort, but my
Preaching, Catechizing, and what I did for the Conversion of Souls: If he had
his time again, he would spend it in reading the Holy Scriptures, with two or
three good Commentaries, in Prayer, and Meditation, and laboring in public.
Only I must acknowledge, that I am not certain, whether it was there, or after,
that he lanch'd into those depths, I must confess, I rather think, his study
there, looked another way.

Temple.
For he removed thence to the Temple being designed for a Lawyer, and there (as
in all places else) his profiting was not ordinary. I remember I heard him many
a year after, warmly discourse of an occasional Moot-case he then read in the
Temple, but God designed him for his Spiritual Temple, God brought him to
London, where his Soul trouble was the Introduction to our intimate
Acquaintance, which increased, and continued, while he lived. Now was the time
of his effectual Calling, which was in some things like that of the blessed
Apostle Paul, who was at once called to be a Christian and an Apostle; so this
our Timothy, was at once called to be a Saint and a Minister. What the Throws
of his New Birth were, are not fit to be made public; only this let me say, He
was more abundant in Spiritual cases of Conscience than ever any I have met
with in my almost fifty Years Ministry. (And thanks to Divine Grace, I have
been intimately acquainted with Christians as Eminent for Grace, as most in the
Age, wherein they lived.) This new Convert had daily need of a more
accomplished Guide than he made choice of: And therefore, though he desired to be
one of my Family, yet, besides the want of suitable Conveniences, I recommended
him to a more experienced and aged Casuist with whom he sometime continued; and
though the Word of the Lord was as Fire in his Bosom, to be dispersed thence, for
the kindling a holy Flame in others, yet the Concerns of his own Soul were so
pressing upon him, that he could comparatively mind nothing else. He went about
with the Arrows of God sticking in his Conscience; and, now God furnished him
with such a stock of Experiences, that he might counsel, and comfort others,
with the very Method wherewith God refreshed him. Now he began to be restless,
because he did Christ no service, fain he would do something, but the Office of
the Ministry appeared so tremendous, that the thoughts of it made him tremble.
What shall he do? be idle he dares not, work in the Lord's Vineyard he dares
not. Oh, the Perplexities of his Soul! an expedient is thought of, that he
might be led into the Ministry by Family Worship and Preaching sometimes, which
might be afterward more frequent, and constant, and behold here a Wonder of
Providence calls him into Kent, to Glassenbury, to the honorable and most
deservedly Honored the Lady Dowager Roberts, who had four small Children, to
whose pious Education he was singularly helpful, where he preached with such
Acceptance, and God followed him with more success then could be so soon hoped
for. Now this Star begun to rise and shine and lead Men to Christ: for though the
Modesty, Humility and Self-denial which ran through the whole Course of his
Life restrained him, yet his Love to Christ and Souls forced him to what is more
then vulgar, in all he attempted; I cannot single out any sort of his Actions,
but might be as a general Head, attended by numerous particular instances, all
of them well worthy of remembrance: He better deserving than the Kings of
Persia to have Scribes continually present, to write down remarkable Passages:
He doing nothing, (humane frailty excepted) but what was deservedly remarkable.
To begin with instances of what was in his own eye most contemptible, namely
worldly business his Wisdom, Prudence and Sagacity about worldly Affairs was
beyond appearance deep, and piercing: I have known him in dubious cases,
wherein great Lawyers have been short in their Advice, his Council has been
proper and safe: But when he has been consulted, he still bad them go to the
great Counselor, and in all Plunges it was his usual saying, I commit it to
God, or I leave it with God and this he would do with the greatest quiet of
Mind and acquiescence in God's issuing of it which way he pleased. I cannot say,
for I have been least solicitous to enquire after these his good works, but do
not hesitate to apply to him that of Job, Job 29.11,12.
When the ear heard him it blessed him; and when the eye saw him, it gave
witness to him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish, came upon him: He
was a Father to the Poor, etc. Presently upon his coming to the place where
providence sent him, he set himself to his great Master's work with that vigor
and prudence which evidenced he came there for nothing else: Receiving no
Sallery for himself but directing it to pious Charity. His Deportment in the
Family was every way instructive. The Worship of God in the Family was so
seasonably timed, so constantly awefully and sutably performed that it did much
conduce to the drawing others into the ways of God, that there were but few, if
any in that numerous Family, who did not worship God in secret as well as with
others; where, Reading the Scripture, or Catechizing, or Singing of Psalms,
accompanied Family Prayer twice every day: He constantly rose, if in health at
five of the Clock, and continued in his Study till Family Prayer, and then to
his Study again, till a little before Noon, and after Dinner when he had walked
or discoursed a little, he returned to his Study, saying, I must to my
business: Complaining, if by Company he had been longer detained then he was
willing, often saying, Amici sunt fures temporis (Friends are thieves of time.)
After Supper he came down with great cheerfulness; so far was he from being by
study, or any thing else, sowr'd into any disgustful temper, that some who
providentially abode awhile in the Family, who (it was seared) were no great
friends to the Power of Religion, could not but express a pleasedness with his
Conversation, and it is hoped went thence seriously Godly.

He carried himself with a sweet, humble and affable Deportment, void of
Ostentation, or Vain glory; he was well acquainted with his own heart, and the
Temptations wherewith we are beset, and therefore would frequently inculcate
the Precepts of Humility, and the danger of Pride, he begun betimes to watch
against these, and continued it while he lived. How desirous he was of the
Welfare of that Family in every sense, was clearly seen in his joy when things
went well there, and his trouble if they did not; I doubt not but the root, and
all the branches of that House are ready to make their grateful Acknowledgments
thereof, he being more concerned for the Honorable Lady, and her Children than
for himself, when any Trouble threatened: He was not long there, before his
amiable Deportment and instructive Discourses insensibly drew in the best of
the Neighborhood into his familiar acquaintance, that they might enjoy the
Blessing of his Labors; here he soon, preached twice every Lord's Day, and
frequently a third time on the Lord's Day evening, at two miles distance;
repeating his Sermons, examining, and instructing the Family, and praying with
them at his return: All this he continued till he procured for them an
excellent Preacher, whose preaching was deservedly esteemed by the Serious, and
above the Contempt of Scoffers: This besides weekly Lectures at several places,
and a monthly Fast: These Lectures were set up by him, and carried on by him,
or by others of his procuring. I forbear naming the places.

A zealous Minister for a Neighbor Corporation was procured, and maintained by
him and his Friends. In short, his Labors and Expenses for Souls was abundant,
and [thro' Grace] his success was answerable, many, very many there, will bless
God for him to Eternity.

But all this while, he durst not undertake the Office of the Ministry, he had
such awful thoughts of that tremendous Office, and so low thoughts of himself,
that he durst not venture till Providence thrust him forward, in this, as in
other things, to undertake what he trembled at.

Now Reverend Mr. Pointall dying, a door is opened for more public Service, to
which, God and Man so called him, that he is not able to withstand it. Now though
his stay was earnestly desired, and affectionately urged by all in the Family,
who might say to him, what was said of Jacob, Genesis 30.27.
I have learned by experience, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake, yet
he was deaf to all Solicitations, being easily perswadable in any thing
concerning himself, but inexorable in the Cause of God. But he did with great
Conscience and Ingenuity introduce a worthy Successor, whose great Piety, and
ministerial Abilities were beyond vulgar.

Much about this time, (not long before or after) God sent him to a Borough in
Sussex, where he has occasionally acknowledged he met with peculiar assistance
of the Spirit of God; compassion to Souls, in a case somewhat more then
ordinary moved him to set up a Meeting there; what Difficulties he grappled
with, I will not mention; many wearisome Winter Journeys he had, which were not
tiresome to him, through hopes of doing good, which made all pleasant; and he was
not disappointed in his hopes. The Lord was with him wheresoever he went, and
gave wonderful success to his Labors. He procured eleven more Ministers to
join with him to set up constant Preaching there.

Among many Remarkables there, I Will mention only this,

One Lord's Day being to Preach, the Doors were no sooner opened, but the place
was crowded full, and many that could not get in, stood about the Door, in his
Prayer he had such a strong Impression on his Spirit, with respect to the
Multitude, that Christ would have compassion on the Multitude, and not send
them empty away, his Soul was so vehemently carried out in earnest Prayer for
the Multitude, that he had much ado to contain himself, and some of the Hearers
were sutably affected. In short, while there was Liberty, and afterward when
Liberty was restored, though he was removed at a great distance from them, he
ceased not to be mindful of them, but his Care and Purse procured them one
Minister after another, till they were settled, as they were before he died,
under the Guidance of a Master Workman in the Lord's Vineyard.

But to return to Staplehurst, about this time God lift him up above his
sinking fears about Ordination. He that to the Apostles question, Who is
sufficient for these things? hitherto as it were, answered, not I Lord, not I,
I would not be excused from being a Preacher, for I love it; yet would feign be
excused from being a Pastor, For I fear it; Now answers God's question to the
Prophet, Whom shall I send? here am I, send me. Isa. 6.8.
I think, few ever undertook the feeding of a Flock of Christ with lower
Thoughts of themselves, yet with more humble expectation of Help and Success
from the great Shepherd than he did. The Lord Jesus spent the whole Night in
Prayer before he ordained his Twelve Apostles, compare Luke with Mark. Luke
6.12. Mar. 3.14.
The manifold suspense of this Servant of Christ, plainly implies, that he
spent a good part of many Nights and Days, if not Weeks and Months, perhaps
Years in fervent Prayer, and conscientious Thoughtfulness about his Ordination.

But now as he durst no sooner venture, so he dares no longer delay. Thus, his
wary entering into this Office presages a careful fulfilling of it. He now
studied the Necessities of his Hearers, and did suit his Sermons accordingly,
to this end did he frequently converse with the most ignorant of his
Neighbors, that he might know what their Apprehensions, Objections, and
Prejudices were, about, or against a serious Holy Life; accordingly did he
frame his Discourses to inform, convince, and persuade them. He was Constant
and Zealous in this weighty Work. On those days when he had assistance in his
own Congregation, he would ride out and Preach where there was necessity.

A while after this, when he was settled, as much as in those times could be
expected, he was near marrying a young Gentlewoman, but before the time
appointed for the Marriage Christ took her to himself.

About two Years after that, he married a gracious Widow, by whom he had
several Children, but they all died young: but her having living Children, was
a Mercy she never enjoyed by her former Husband; but had only abortive Births.
The first living Child he had, I have cause to remember, the more then ordinary
workings of his gracious Soul about its solemn Dedication to God by Baptism,
what the inward workings of his Soul were is only known to the Heart-searching
God, but so much burst out beyond his intention to be taken notice of, that I
never did see before, nor ever expect to see the like again; I have many a time
reflected on it with admiration: There you might have seen the Covenant
improved, and what might well make you more serious ever after, in the
Celebration of that Ordinance: But I Will say no more of this, because I know not
whether any besides my self took notice of it.

Some expected that now he had a Family to provide for, his Charitable expenses
must be retrenched; the Stream must run in another Channel; but they were
mistaken; those that most narrowly observed his constant Charity, could
perceive no abatement at all, but rather an enlargement, that the addition to
his estate procured an addition to his Charity. And here give me leave to tell
you, that this (next to my inexcusable Laziness) is the true reason of
retarding these Papers, there was somewhat of Charity, very singular, and
extraordinary, about this time, which he, in his great Humility acquainted me
with, I will not say advised with me, for he was fitter to advise me, than I
him; this has wholly slipped my Memory all but the undistinct Notions that there
was such a thing, though some Circumstances made it impracticable. I confess I
have made all the enquiry I can, by Letters, and other ways, yet I cannot
retrieve it; if I could, it would be the most considerable Instance in this
confused Story, but I must wave it.

After some years in this place he was morally forced to another; the Arguments
for his remove took hold of his Conscience, and those that did so, he was not
able to resist, though never so much against his Inclination: There he continued
till driven away by persecution, not only from them, but from the County. Some
while he wandered about from place to place, like his Master, he went up and
down doing good, and God was with him.

Could I hope that it would provoke to holy Emulation, not to sinful Prejudice,
I would be more particular, in naming the several Counties, and the several
Places, in such Counties where he spread the Gospel, to the apparent detriment
of the Devil's Kingdom, and advancement of Christ's, and he comfortably saw a
good Success of his Ministry wherever he came.

But after many wearisome Journeys, and tiresome Labors, his ill frame of
Health necessitated him to a more fixed Station, near London; where he was
greatly importuned to exercise his Ministry, to which he yielded, upon these
Conditions; Namely, to be at liberty three Sabbaths in the Month, to preach
where he should find need, they being supplied by two other worthy Ministers,
and afterward by one. And this he did 'till bodily Distempers disenabled him,
though he was often told it was impossible to hold out such a Course of Labor,
yet his zeal was such, that he could not forbear attempting beyond his
strength, though to prolong his life.

That lingering Distemper which brought him to his Grave, first seized him upon
a wet Journey, about his Master's Work, upon which, he was so intent, that he
Acts 20.24.
counted not his Life dear unto him; It was his only joy to fulfill the Ministry
which he received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

Thus I have run over his Course of Life, give me leave to be a little more
particular in some, I wish I might not say unparalelled Singularities.

Preaching.
His Preaching was remarkable, both in what it was not, as well as in what it
was. It was not with enticing words of Man's Wisdom, He did as industriously
avoid as others do industriously study Declamations for Sermons; He took more
pains for his Sermons, both on his Knees, and in his Study, then most others,
that he might Preface all he said with, thus says the Lord.

He constantly kept one day in the Week, little other ways than a Fast for his
Lord's-day's work: He would never offer either to God or Man what cost him
naught; His Praying was always fervent, his Preaching always clear and
vehement, his words well fitted to his Matter, and his Matter well chosen for
Conviction, and persuasion, for Conversion and Edification: And when did he
Preach any one Sermon without some of these Effects? Bear with this Digression,
to give you a single Instance of Advice he some Years after gave to a young
Preacher. You will need a double Portion of the Blessed Spirit to guide, and
bear you up against the Temptations you will meet with from the snareling
World. It Is hard to be lifted up by the Lord and not to lift up our selves;
your Watch must be constant, and your Prayers frequent and fervent, or you will
forsake your first Love, and wax careless and carnal; -- and afterward warned
him against two extremes, viz, Pride and Diffidence, saying, if Ministers were
to Preach before a learned and large Auditory, they were too apt to be
diffident, more concerned at the Presence of Man than of God, and on the other
hand, if the Assembly was popular and mean, and did appear affected; how hard
do they find it to subdue Pride. But to return, God blessed his Labors
wherever he went, a special Presence of God accompanied him ni all his
Undertaking: For he Preached as well out of the Pulpit as in it; It was seldom
that any one could speak to him, but he would hook in something of Religion ere
they parted.

When he went into any House, he quickly enquired what entertainment Religion
met with there, he scarce spoke to any, but he presently insinuated something
of Practical Godliness, for he always declined speaking of Christians different
Practice as to Modes of Worship, when any such things were asked him, he would
if possible put it off with something else, or tell them other Men's Judgments
rather than his own; and through gracious exercise he had a notable Dexterity in
putting by Tit. 3.9.
unprofitable Questions, i. e. Questions whereby we can profit nothing, and
taking occasion thence, to inculcate something of real moment. He did not this
only in a customary way of Discourse, as that which he was most habituated to,
but out of the abundance of his heart his mouth spoke. His general Conversation
toward all was Pious, and Pleasant, he used innocent mirth as an inviting
Vehicle to convey his pious Instructions. He was plentifully stored with very
useful Narratives of Men, both good and bad; he gathered up excellent Remarks
upon the Temper and Carriage of Mankind, which he made use of, not only to
divert, but to instruct; for he would sometimes pleasantly droll upon the
Miscarriages of some which he thought would not digest a direct, and plain
Reproof; he that told me this, lived in the House with him, and says, He
diligently observed, and does not remember, That ever he heard him rehearse so
much as one Story without a manifest Design either to exhort or warn, or gently
to rebuke those to whom it was directed: And this was not only an instance of
his candid Temper, but of his great Discretion, for the Memory is more apt to
retain affecting Stories, than mere Precepts, and the Conscience will make a
direct Application of an indirect Reproof: And if the Story be intended to
excite Duty, it does not only imply a Precept, but shows the Precedent, which
is a great Motive to Industry.

And though he was of too sweet a Temper, willingly to displease any, yet he
could not but deal so plainly with those he conversed with, that when he saw
any thing to be reproved, he would not in a Compliment forbear them, but rebuke
them sharply, that they might be sound in the Faith. I Will single out one
instance of a Person who was very tender of him in his weakness, and expressed
a more then ordinary concernedness for his health; to whom he spoke to this
effect, You are thus kind to me, you seem to be very religious, but I fear you
are not hearty, nor sound; and then mentioned the grounds of his fear, and
urged a through Conviction.

He did not only himself Preach with a more than usual Zeal; but, I should
welcome him who could tell me of any other who has contributed to the setting
up or building so many Meeting-places, and contributed so largely to the
supplying them with such Ministers, Work men that need not to be ashamed as he
has done: He never thought much of any Charge so he could but serve Christ and
Souls.

I am loath to mention what unreasonable Opposition he has met with in some
places, where they endeavored to eclipse his Reputation, which soon shone more
clearly: But I will rather incur being censured for a Baulk in my Narrative,
then for mentioning what I hope the Persons guilty, have repented of, which if
they have not, the Lord give them Repentance and Pardon: And go on to bless
those places with flourishing Churches, where the Devil struggled most to keep
his dominion: He lived to see it, to his great Satisfaction. May the Harvest
answer the Seed time to the Salvation of Thousands.

Catechizing.
Next to his Preaching I Will mention his Catechizing, which in some respects, he
preferred before it, saying, if he were to be confined to Preaching or
Catechizing, and might not do both, he would choose Catechizing. He had a more
than ordinary Dexterity at insinuating Truths, not only into the Heads, but
God, hereby testifying his Approbation of his Zeal, impressed it on the Hearts
of greater Numbers then I dare mention, lest it should seem incredible.

He had so thoroughly digested the whole Body of Divinity; and so thoroughly
acquainted himself with all sorts of Catechisms, and so continually exercised
himself in sifting and instructing all he conversed with, that he
experimentally knew how to propose such questions as were suitable to the
Capacities and Necessities of all sorts of Persons, so as to discourage none
but to benefit all. He would ask questions of all who he thought capable to
inform him, and his Humility made him willing to be any Man's Disciple, what
method was most likely to be most effectual. He parcelled out the Catechism
into several Sections, and sent them about to his Brethren, requesting them to
write down what they judged pertinent, and proper to be proposed to the
Catechis'd Persons for the furthering of their Knowledge and their
Establishment in all things necessary to be known and practiced.

He had a singular Dexterity at insinuating himself into the Affections of
young People, and overcoming their unwillingness to be instructed. Some that
were more in years, who though they were ashamed of their Ignorance, but were
more ashamed to learn at that Age, yet were prevailed with, by his importunity,
to come to this public Exercise: And where Entreaties and Arguments would not
do, he would hire them, by giving them new Bibles (many whereof were gilt, and
bound in Turky-Leather) or good Books, so that he has acknowledged with
thankfulness to God, that he seldom failed to gain at last, those who were very
averse at first. And though the Instruction of young and ignorant People is the
usual design in Catechizing; yet he was so full and accurate in illustrating
the several Heads of Religion, the aged and more improved Persons did
frequently attend his Catechetical Exercises, with great satisfaction and
delight: For his custom in reading not only bodies of Divinity, but practical
Books, was to collect what was most valuable in them, and refer them to their
proper places in his Catechism, which was interleaved for that purpose, whereby
he was ready furnished to give a grateful Entertainment, as well to the most
judicious, as to the meaner Christians. He would often express how difficult as
well as necessary this Work was; and therefore he took much pains to have the
most clear understanding of the Doctrine of the Gospel: He was a diligent
Observer of the Practice, Method, and Success of his reverend Brethren in this
Matter, all which he improved, and his Success was answerable to such
preparations and endeavors: He would frequently say, That he never experienced
more of the Assistance of God in any Duty than in this: God making him an
instrument of conveying very much knowledge hereby, some that had been under
his instruction have proved most judicious and able Christians: In short, he
saw so much need, and so much good effect of his Labors in this way, that he
would say, While he had breath he would spend it in Catechizing

Besides his own weekly Catechizing, and Catechizing in all the Schools which
he erected; He hired some Persons in distant places to Catechize all Children
and others who were willing to learn; and once a Month or oftener, He rode about
from place to place to Catechize them himself; And then to encourage those who
did well, he gave some Reward, either in Books or Money, according to the
Quality of the Persons. And to encourage Parents and Masters to send their
Children or Servants, he presented them with some Books curiously bound and
gilt, that might be most acceptable, and if they were Poor he gave them many
more than they could have earned in the time of their Learning. And his
Discourse with Parents, and Masters was really Catechistical, though so
managed, that they could not think themselves disparaged by such Instructions.
He had a way of so proposing his Questions, that the Question should lead them
to, or furnish them with an Answer.

I have occasionally heard him examine a Boy; his Questions were such, as I
never heard before, yet so instructively worded, that any one of ordinary
capacity, who took but notice of the Question, could not miss the right Answer.
And though his way of trying their Knowledge was more critical than others, yet
through Grace and Exercise, he had attained such a Skill for it, that his
Examinations were not only acceptable, but desirable, wherever he came: For
he carried with him prevailing Motives that were morally forcible to all sorts
of Persons. That when he visited his Schools, the Children would rejoice more
then for a Playday. When he preached in Neighboring Congregations, they waited
for his Catechizing as earnestly as Beggars for an Alms.

When he visited any Family, they expected his Instruction, as a Sucking Child
the Breast.

Yet all this did not suffice him but all those Ministers toward whom he
contributed maintenance, which were not a few, he engaged them to set up
Catechizing, and enquired how it thrived.

And all those Ministers with whom he conversed, he provoked to set up
Catechizing.

He gave away, I cannot say, how many thousands of Catechisms, many hundreds
with Expositions upon them; neither did he consine his Catechumenists to the
Assemblies Catechism (though the Lord Primate of Armagh said 'twas the best
Extant) but he gave very many of Doctor Cumber's, and the Principles of the
Christian Religion cleared, and confirmed by the Articles and Homilies of the
Church of England by Mr. Thomas Adams.

In short, he did not content himself to receive a Parrot like answer, to any
form of Words whatsoever, but his constant Endeavors were to make them
understand the Things. Frequently and greatly he bewailed the lamentable
Ignorance that overspreads the Nation. He did often pathetically cry out you do
not believe, you can hardly conceive the gross Ignorance of this great City.
The palpable Darkness of this valley of Vision. Many Persons he discovered to
be absurdly ignorant under conceited Knowledge. I Will give but one instance.

When he was inquiring into the Knowledge of a Self-conceited old Woman of a
different way, she said, she knew very well, and understood the whole Bible,
only knew not what to make of the Vision of the white Horse in the Revelation,
said he, you are a happy Woman, would I could say so: But pray how do you
understand that of Canaan, being a Land flowing with Milk and Honey? What do
you think, there was such abundance of it, that it flowed upon the Land, as
Water does? Yes, sure said she, how could it be otherways? I see now, said he,
how well you understand the Scriptures, and thence he took occasion to convince
and instruct her.

To one whom he urged to Catechize Children, who said, he saw little fruit of
it among young ones, He replied, never talk so, if you cannot make them bear
fruit, you may make them bear leaves; When another said they saw but little
remain of it; he called for a Sieve, and some Water, at first they thought him
not in earnest, but when he persisted to call, they brought it, he bid them
pour the Water into the Sieve, which when they had done, Look here, said he,
most of it is run through, but some remains, here is a Dew, a Moisture.

In short, I Will only say, I never heard of any that took so much Pains, Cost,
and Care about Catechizing as he: His Heart was in it, living and dying.

His Charity.
Next to this, take a view of his Charity; And here, though I can give but
general Heads far short of its true extent, both as to Places, and Times,
Posterity will reap the Fruits of his Charity, more than I may mention; yea I
wish it may not be more, than I can persuade any to imitate; here let me
mention that, under several Heads, which if you think your Charity cannot run in
so many Channels, yet choose what likes ye best, but imitate some of them.

He evidenced himself to be the genuine Son of his Heavenly Father, by doing
good to all, to the Bodies and to the Souls of all manner of Persons, though
with great difference and judgment.

I Will begin with the lowest, who least tasted of his Charity; and indeed they
least sought it, for I question not if they would not have spilled the Sauce,
they might have had the Meat, if they would but have accepted the Counsel with
which he sauced his Alms, for I think I may peremptorily say, He never gave any
thing without suitable and earnest Instruction, those who accepted that might
have any thing they desired. This premised my first instance shall be this.

1. When wicked wretches have come to him to beg or borrow Money; after he had
taken some pains with them, to convince and reform them he has given, or lent
to them, hoping it might be at least a hiring of them to be less vicious. But
he had fewest, though some he had of these Customers. Profligate Persons shunned
coming near him, their Consciences frighting them, with his charming
conviction. 'Twas Christ's Poor toward whom his Charity flowed.

2. Necessitous Persons or Families always found his Heart, and Hand open, for
their relief, and that not dribbling Alms, because they would not be answered
without giving them something, but the something he gave them was always
somewhat answerable to their necessities, having an extraordinary value for
real Saints, though they were never so poor and mean.

3. He took poor Children from indigent Parents, and wholly maintained them,
put them to Trades, and set them up in the World: Or, if they were capable of a
more liberal Education they had it, being a great Encourager of young Men to
the Ministry: I cannot forbear telling you of one, whom God took to glory, a
little before he took himself, who was a Candidate for the Ministry, of curious
Parts, polite Learning, serious Godliness, an excellent Preacher, of most
obliging Conversation; but we must Psalm. 39.9.
be dumb with silence, for God has done it. Several others he has been a
Foster Father to.

4. He set up petty Schools in several places to teach Children to read and to
learn their Catechism; and he contrived it to be double Charity namely to the
Teacher and to the Learner.

And since, he came nearer London he has hired a Writing Master to come into
some Families, to teach some Servants, who had no time to go to School, to
learn to Write, and cast Accounts.

Any one who applied himself to him, by himself, or by any one else, though a
mere Stranger, whose face was set Heavenward, who was poor and willing to
learn, those were Arguments sufficient to draw out his Heart and Purse for
their Instruction, in anything they were capable of attaining for further
usefulness. It Is next to impossible to name the Instances of his Soul Charity,
'twas as diffusive yet as secret as 'twas possible. I Will mention one instance
among many. I take, said he, more delight in thinking this one Man (he was
speaking of) will e're long be serviceable to the World, then if any had given
my self a hundred Pounds.

5. His spreading of the most Awakening, Convincing, Practical Books, to
provoke, and encourage serious Godliness. This is one of the things that is
hardly credible, not only Books of small price, as Thousands, if not Ten
thousands of Catechisms, many of them with Expositions; but bigger Books I
cannot say how many thousands of Sheppard's Sincere Convert, Mr. Richard
Allein's Vindiciae Pietatis, Mr. Joseph Allein of Conversion and his Life;
Several of Mr. Baxter's Treatises, his Call to the Unconverted, his Now, or
Never, his Directions to prevent miscarrying in Conversion, his Saint's Rest,
etc. with several others. One thing I had almost forgot about Mr. Joseph
Allein's Treatise of Conversion which several (of whom he was the chief) agreed
for an Impression to be given away, (they altering the Title into [A Guide to
Heaven] (to make it more acceptable) He paid down 50 l. at first as an Earnest,
besides more afterward for that Impression of Twenty Thousand to be dispersed
through the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and (I think I may say)
there has been Twenty Thousand more printed since to be sold at under rates:
And he gave not only the Writings of Non-Conformists, but of Conformists,
namely Pink's Trial of Sincere Love to Christ, Caley of Eternity, Wade of
Redemption of Time, Dent's Plain-man's Pathway to Heaven, Scudder's Daily-walk,
Reiner's Precepts, etc. But he gave Books of greater price; As the Books of
Martyrs in Three Volumes, Charnock's Works in Two Volumes, several Annotators
on the Bible, several Commentators on the Holy Scriptures, several necessary
Libraries to young Students and Candidates for the Ministry. There was no place
where he came, and he was providentially drawn or driven into many Counties,
but he stored the Houses of all that would accept of his kindness with Books of
Devotion. I know not whether ever he gave away any one Book of Controversy,
unless it were Pool's Nullity of the Roman Faith, and his Dialogue between a
Popish Priest, and an English Protestant. He was always for Promoting down
right Practical Godliness.

But above all his Stratagems to disperse goods Books, I cannot but prefer his
Device for the spreading of the Bible, I cannot say how many hundreds, if not
thousands, he gave away. But he found this would not reach his end, many would
rather be without Bibles than put him upon the Charge of giving them. Therefore
he took this course, which succeeded to his heart's desire, by himself, or
Friends, he sold Bibles at Eighteen Pence a Bible to all that desired them for
themselves, or their Children, or Servants, provided, not to sell them again.
And by this means very many who refused them gratis, Caught at them, at this
under rate, whereby they were furnished with Bibles, and something returned
toward the buying of more, and this is the only trade, he ever drove with
Books. He saw comfortable Fruits of his Liberality in giving Books some were
converted, more were edified by this spiritual Charity; though he did not
confine these Gifts to the Poor, but gave also to the Rich, both Bibles, and
other Books, which he had extraordinarily bound, that they might be the more
generally accepted, and he contrived such Books to such Persons, that he was
seldom disappointed of Success, though sometimes he was; to give one instance,
He once gave Wade's Treatise of the Redemption of Time curiously bound to a
young Minister, who at first received it kindly; but when he began to read it,
he finding Mr. Baxter quoted in it, he hastily returned it, not enduring to
read any thing that Mr. Baxter had written. But I Will close the Narrative of his
giving Books with this Story.

Some Years since, when the times were more hazardous to Dissenters, A. N. C.
Minister of his acquaintance, being unavoidably necessitated to undertake a
Journey of above Two hundred Miles in length, when he could not at any
reasonable rates get any Lawyer, or other, to go with him, to advise him, in
the Difficulties he foresaw he should meet with; Mr. Brand surprizingly
offered, what could not be impudently asked, charitably to go with him, and give
him his best assistance: 'Twas not then safe to be known to be a Dissenting
Minister; he therefore concealed himself (though his Friend must venture, being
known in the Place whither he went) but carried down a considerable quantity of
Catechisms and good Books in the Coach with him. And in every Inn where he
lodged, or but baited at Noon, he would not be many Minutes there before ('it was
so familiar to him to insinuate something for the good of Souls) he would be
fishing out whether any was, and who was capable and pliable to receive
Instruction; and if he found any, he would presently fasten upon their
Consciences, given them Counsel, and Catechisms, or other Books according as
their case required. At one place, a Servant was so affected, as to go after
him (the Town being situate upon an Hill) while he walked down hill, before he
went into the Coach, begging to be taken with him to London, having never heard
so much about Soul-concerns before, nor ever expecting the like again, unless
this request were granted: He promised to call there at his return, but the
Coachman without his knowledge went back another way. At another Inn, when he
met with a Youth, that he found capable, he gave him a Catechism, and promised
if he would learn it by his return, which would be about a week, he would give
him five Shillings, which he did and had his reward. At another Inn, where he
met with a Schoolmaster, he persuaded and encouraged him to season his
Scholars with the knowledge of those things, whereby they might be saved. The
Stock of Books he carried down did not hold out all his Journey, but he sent
down upon his return up, at once as many as cost above eight Pounds. At one
Inn, where he gave Books in his going down, some of them fell into those hands,
who waylaid his coming up, at the time he said he should return, that they
might clap him in Prison for spreading of Seditious Books (that is the
Character they put upon Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, of which there
has been printed as some guess a Hundred Thousand, so generally acceptable and
profitable has it been; it is impossible for me to tell you how many have been
Converted by it) but here I must not conceal, the chief Contrivance was against
the Minister, he accompanied and their Design against him failing (a design
more full of base Ingratitude and Treachery than ever any you heard of, but
that is foreign to this account) they contrived this design against Mr. Brand,
but God disappointed them in this also, for the Night before they were to set
out to return, one of the Coach-Horses fell so lame (not known how) that in the
Morning he could hardly be led to watering, and so continued two or three days,
till they were weary of waiting for his return, so that he past the place
unmolested. Thus, E^ 8 31.
the Hand of God was upon him, to deliver him from the hand of his Enemies, and
of such as laid wait by the way. God delivered him, without his knowing that he
needed any such deliverance. I know not whether ever he knew of the main
Contrivance, for that lay undiscovered several Years, till the chief Contriver
revealed it under horror of Conscience, for that and other unsuspected
Abominations; only this was at present plainly remarkable, that a Horse should
be suddenly so lame as scarce to bear being dragged to watering, and suddenly
so well, as to go above Two hundred Miles without halting. One as soon as he
came into his Inn where they intended to have seized upon him, asked him; Why he
came not the day in the former week, as he mentioned in his going down? and
another dropped it afterward, that if he had come then, some were ready to
apprehend him for the Books he gave away. Should I add more instances, 'twould
be more than need. I Will therefore mention some of his Infirmities; which may
serve as a Shadow to his ill drawn Picture.

As to the World, though he was too wise, and prudent to be imposed upon in his
worldly Affairs, yet there was one Snare he frequently run into for many Years,
namely, he was not only charitable himself, but he did many times as Moses
fetch Water out of a Rock of Flint, Deuteronomy. 8.15.
he got something for charitable Uses, where none else could; but in one of his
methods, he was often deceived; he would persuade some to promise or subscribe
so much by the Year to some good work, either the Education of a Youth, or the
relieving of some Minister, or something that might promote the Gospel, they
would give, and pay, one or two quarters, and then leave the charge wholly upon
him: He was too apt to think that when he had persuaded them to an act of
Charity, that that would presently grow up to an habit, but he felt the
difference to his cost.

Another mistake that made his Life uneasy, was this: He had many years ago
such sharp pains, as he thought proceeded from the Stone in the Bladder, he was
confirmed in this by being searched, by the most celebrated Lithotomist in this
City, who said he felt it, the return of those pains frighted him into the
Expectation of a Necessity of being Cut, and this lasted all his days; but upon
the opening of his Body by his Physicians, who desired to see where lay the
cause of that Disease which was hid from them; they found that he had neither
in his Kidneys, nor in his Vreters, nor in his Bladder any Stone, nor so much
as any gravel tending to it, thus you see, much of our real trouble arises
from those evils which are but imaginary; this was an uncomfortable mistake,
but the last I shall mention was fatal; namely, his too great carelessness of
himself, he did too much for others, and too little for himself to hold out
long, though he lived of a slender, weak sort of diet, yet he often speak
grudgingly of the time that was necessarily spent in eating and drinking; very
much longing for the place, where he should need no supports of that nature.
When he was declining apace toward his end, he used to say, if he were
younger, or could bear riding, he would fix at no one place, but go about the
Country, where he found most need, and there preach the Gospel, Catechize the
Younger sort, distribute good Books; erect Places for Divine Worship, and fix
Ministers at them; This would have been his delightful Employment, but when
that Person to whom he freely communicated his thoughts, told him, his Work was
greatly disproportionable to his strength, and requested him to leave off, what
visibly impaired his health, to work less, that he might work long. He with
some quickness answered, Nay then, it is no matter if I were dead indeed; he
thanked God he did not desire Life merely for its own sake, nor for any thing
of the Pleasure, or Profit of it, but only for the Work he was at, saying, He
had rather die that moment, than live and not be useful to the World. I am just
gone, but if God give Faith and Patience, all will be well, and have a glorious
Issue. He expressed a comfortable, assurance and spoke as one that had arrived
to the top of it, and at parting, desired Prayers a little while, for said he,
I shall not need them long.

To sum up his charitable Expenses as computed by an intelligent Person, as
well able to pry into Concealments as most Men I know, who had the fairest
Opportunity by living some Years with him under the same Roof, who told me,
that, they (besides what he could not find out) to his Knowledge amounted to
above Three Hundred Pound per Annum one Year with another. And he himself has
sometimes dropped this Expression, He would not Sell his Estate, because it was
Entailed, but he would Squeeze it as long as he lived, which he has done for I
know not how many Years. He would often say, He would accept of no Man's
Estate, if he must have his Hands tied up from his making use of it on
Spiritual Accounts, and would very much pity the miserable Condition of wicked
Rich Men, the Truth (in short) was this, His Zeal for doing Good was so
transporting, that he could as soon cease to live, as cease to attempt it, A
double Instance we have of this, there was one place where he was contriving to
settle a Minister, and another place where he was endeavoring to build a
Meeting Place when he died.

And now having mentioned his Death, I will give you some Account of the
Circumstances of it: About three Years since, his being wet in a Journey about
his Masters Work, cast him into a violent Fever, which may be called his last
Sickness, for he never well recovered of it, but was followed with a
Complication of many grievous Diseases, sometimes his Legs swelled, threatening
a Dropsy, sometimes great pain in his side, as if he had a Pleurisy,
sometimes all over him, as if he had a Rheumatism. But especially he was
afflicted with an Asthma which made him unable to walk, to go up a pair of
Stairs was almost death to him: These things gave contrary Indications; and
therefore made his cure the more difficult. In these straits he was often let
blood, and relieved by it till his Friends were afraid of his proper remedy.

Though he was lingering almost three Years, yet he was never observed to have
any unquiet Motion of Mind, but had always a serene and humble Submission to
the sovereign Will of God; he did often bewail his own Imperfections, and small
knowledge of God and Christ, and expressed his longing Desires of seeing God face
to face. A while before his death he did often say, What is the World! It Is not
worth a straw. O my God, I would be with thee, Oh, how I long to be with Christ
my dear Redeemer: This he spoke with great earnestness; Oh my God bring me to
thy self. Whereupon he spoke much of the Glory to be revealed, and insisted on
those words, I will be your God. What greater Gift could he give? He gave
himself. He gave all. Then he was rapt up into a serious Amazement and deep
Admiration, and cried out, Oh, my God! my God what is sinful Man! Worm-man!
What manner of Love is this! Love indeed! Oh, I cannot express it!

He desired one to read to him, John 17.22. And the Glory which thou gave me,
I have given them, etc. The very hearing of which put him into an ecstasie of
Joy, and he desired him to read of Christ's Love. 14.15.16.17. of John. Some of
which he then read to him. A while after, speaking to one about Family Prayer,
he said, a Camel may as well go through the Eye of a Needle as a Man that prays
not in his Family go to Heaven. He prayed much for the Enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom. The Evening before he died, this Person was with him from one of the
Clock in the Afternoon till Six, during which time he was possessed with such
foretastes of heavenly Joys that made him earnestly cry out, O let me be with
thee! With thee, Oh my God! Oh, I long for Heaven! Oh, welcome Death! Oh, happy
Death that will put an end to all my Troubles and Conflicts, one moment in
Abraham's Bosom will make amends for all, turn Sorrow to Joy. What a dreadful
appearance will there be at the Great Day? What a sad thing will it be to be
disappointed at last and come short of Heaven! O my Redeemer lives, I have
served a good Master! I would not desire Life for a moment, unless it was to
promote the Interest of Christ. If God would give me my choice what I would
ask, I would not ask Life. Nay, I have prayed to God that I might die. Why so,
said a By-stander? That I may, said he, be with God. Upon which he cried out, O
my God, I would come to thee! Let me live with thee! Here he added something
with a peculiar Fervor, which bearing hard on some, he thought too remiss in
their spiritual Warfare. I forbear to mention, but if this hint twitch any
Man's Conscience, let him not slight it. His last words to this relater were,
Pray much.

What follows is from another intelligent credible Person, about Nine of the
Clock sitting in a musing Posture, he started up of a sudden, prayed with such
ardency of affection, with such Power and Joy, that amazed all the Family:
Wherein he admired God's Goodness and distinguishing Love, and begged to be
made more fit for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. When he had done,
being asked the reason of such a sudden Motion. He answered, 'Twas to rouse up
his Soul to Heavenly Meditation.

As he was going to bed, he did with concernedness of Mind, say, There will be
a Cry at Midnight, prepare, prepare, which accordingly fell out, for when he
went to bed, though he was no otherways affected then formerly, he was
immediately taken with a Vomiting of Blood, whereof he died in a few hours. And
now I Will say no more, lest I lose my end of saying so much. I must draw a Vail
over the face of this our Moses, lest it cast such a Luster, as ill Eyes cannot
behold it: In short, all that I have said tends but to this (next, praises to
God for casting him in our Age) to be a Provocation to take Christ's Counsel to
the Lawyer, Luke 10.37.
Go and do thou likewise.

The End.
THE Reverend Mr. BRAND's Funeral Sermon.
Josh. 1.2. Moses my Servant is dead, now therefore arise, etc.


THE Occasion of this Assembly is more than ordinarily doleful, Oh, that God
would direct and bless what I have to say, that the Consequence may be
proportionably profitable! How God spoke these words to Joshua, is doubtful. It
was not immediately by himself, God spoke to none, as he spoke to Moses, face
to face, That was Moses his peculiar Privilege, Exodus 33.11.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a Man speaks unto his Friend.
But it was either by an Angel, or by a Vision, when he was awake, or by a Dream
when asleep. Moses my Servant is dead, God honors him, by owning him as his
faithful Servant in performing all the Duties required of him in his Place.
Though he so sinned at the Water of Meribah, for which he should never go into
Canaan; yet he died in the State of Service, and God (as it were) says,
whatever he was, whatever he wrought, it was all mine.

Moses my Servant. The Title of God's Servant is more than the mere Title of
Apostle. Jude he calls himself, Jude 1.
the Servant, conceals himself to be the Apostle of Jesus Christ. Peter he
postponeth Apostle to Servant, 2 Peter. 1.1.
Peter the Servant and Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Is dead, and now no longer able to execute his Office. This is spoken after
his extraordinary interment, whether immediately by God, or by a good Angel, or
good Angels. It is questionable whether any one of the Evil Angels were
permitted to attend his Funeral, lest they should tempt the Israelites to
idolize him. And after the Israelites solemn Mournings, God tells him, Moses my
Servant is dead, now therefore arise: As if he should say, be not as one
astonished, and dispirited, but rouse up thy self, to know, and do thy Duty; do
not sit musing, but presently, and vigorously set upon thy Duty: The Words I
think need no farther Explication.

You shall have what I have to say under this Doctrine.

Doct. When God takes away an Eminent Minister by death, God requires our
suitable Notice and Improvement of it. Moses my Servant is dead, and that makes
way for more, and greater duty, both for Joshua, and all the People, than ever
before was incumbent upon them; That now becomes their Duty which was never so
before. Josh. 3.5,6,7.
And Joshua said unto the People, Sanctify your selves; for to morrow the Lord
will do wonders among you. And Joshua spoke unto the Priests, saying, Take up
the Ark of the Covenant, and pass over, etc. And the Lord said unto Joshua,
This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they
may know that as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee. Here you have
Joshua's charge to the People, and Priests, and God's encouraging of Joshua,
for they are all put upon such kind of Duty, that cannot be done by a lazy,
careless performance of it; such a Duty, that if it be not performed in the
season God vouchsafes, they can never expect the like season again.

For the opening the Doctrine, take it in these Five Propositions.

I. Prop.
I. The greatest Service God imploys any in upon Earth, does not exempt them
from death. God's choicest Ministers are not immortal; Those that can most
effectually direct others to eternal Life, cannot secure themselves to live one
day in this World. Zach. 1.5,6.
Do the Prophets live for ever, etc. John 8.52.
Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead. This Proposition will be evident
if you consider,

1. Ministers are subject to the same Diseases and Casualties with other Men. I
know not any disease but the Leprosy that the Priests were privileged from,
under the Law; and I dare not be peremptory in asserting, that Ministers have
this privilege continued under the Gospel.

2. Ministers are subject not only to more Distresses, and Sufferings, but also
to more Diseases, and more bodily Infirmities than others. They are to be the
Lights of the World, and they are as a Candle set upon a Hill, which flares out
before others.

3. Ministers Lives may be shortened, as well for other Men's Sins, as for their
own. We may with trembling, consider what manner of Ministers God has in our
day taken, or snatched from us by different diseases. I Will confine my self to
two instances under each Head.

Some indeed God continued long in the World struggling (I will not say to
preserve) but to improve their dying Life under unusual and tormenting pains to
the Churches benefit, whose Bodies were worn out with anguish, but their Souls
had foretasts of Heaven, before they got loose from their clogs, viz. Mr.
Corbet, who besides his Pulpit-Labours wrote a greater number of Healing
Treatises, than any I ever heard of. And Mr. Baxter of whom his Works say so
much, I need say nothing.

Some others God did not continue so long, indeed it is impossible they should,
without miracle, their pains being in a sad measure intolerable to those that
but sympathized with them, viz. Mr. Jeremiah Whitaker, who was a mirror of
Patience, and Mr. Joseph Allein, whose Sufferings for Christ little other than
hurried him to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, if any bodily diseases may be called
so, for their being terrible to the beholders.

Some others, whose Labors were more than ordinary, and success answerable,
God laid them to sleep, without any hint to their admirers, to put up so much
as one Prayer for their continuance, viz. Mr. Gouge, whom I think none will
grudge the Title of the Evangelist of Wales, who did more for the promoting the
Gospel there, than ever was done before; who when he went to Bed well, was
found dead there in the Morning. And Mr. Hardy, whose Zeal (and Prudence to
manage it) was such, that those who envied him his Station, were forced to get
a By-Law on purpose, ere they could remove him. And when he was a great
Blessing to the People, whither God sent him, God put him to sleep in much like
manner with the former.

Some others, God startled the Congregations with their Surprizal in the
Pulpit, God calling them up thither, not only to preach but to die, viz. Mr.
Oaks, who was (I think) as well in health as any time of his life, when he had
ended his Afternoon Prayer before his Sermon, God called him to begin his
eternal Sabbath with himself. And the next Lord's day but one, when Mr. (...)
Kentish had rouzed the Peoples attention with the mention of Mr. Oake's being
so lately struck dead in the Pulpit, God made him a like instance.

Some others, who had but just begun to preach, but would probably have
outstript most others, God only showed them to the World, and snatched them to
himself, viz. Mr. John Janeway, who lived so much in Heaven, that God as it
were said of him, Mich. 7.1.
my Soul desires the first ripe fruit, and this good Man soon perished out of
the Earth, i. e. ceased to live; as I remember, he never preached more then one
Sermon. and Mr. (...) Tyro, who was but offering at the Ministry, admired by
all that heard him, but God soon took him to admire himself in Glory. Thus died
these Worthies. Upon whose Provocations? not their own, besure. They kept off
Judgments, not procured them.

God said to them as to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.26.
Thou shall not be to them a Reprover.

These Instances have enlarged the first Proposition. I Will be briefer in the
rest.

II. Prop.
II. When God takes away any of his eminent Ministers by death, God requires a
more than ordinary notice should be taken of it. Which may be thus evidenced,

1. God sets Ministers for a Sign to the People, that the People may receive
Instruction, as well from the Providence of God toward them, as from their
Doctrine. Isa. 20.2,3,4.
At the same time spoke the Lord by Isaiah, the Son of Amoz, saying, Go, and
loose the Sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy foot:
And he did so, walking naked and barefoot. And the Lord said, Like as my
Servant Isai. has walked naked and barefoot three Years for a Sign and Wonder
upon Egypt, and upon Ethiopia; So shall the King of Assyria lead away the
Egyptians Prisoners, and the Ethiopians Captives, young and old, naked and
barefoot, even with their Buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt. Here are
Symbolical and Significative Ceremonies, whereby the Prophet was to represent
to them, not only in Vision, as some suppose, but really, how they should be
carried away captive, he must put off his prophetical Mantle (such as fell from
Elias, when he was carried up to Heaven in a Whirlwind,) so they should go
stripped (not stark naked) in sorry and ragged apparel, as Prisoners are wont to
be led; so he was to walk up and down in that manner, that they might be
convinced what should befall them. See the whole 4 th. Chapter of Ezekiel, and
Ezekiel. 12 th. Chapter from V. 3 d. to the 10 th. and Chapter 24. from v. 16. to the
19 th. Son of Man, behold I take from thee the Desire of thine Eyes with a
stroke; yet neither shall thou mourn, nor weep, neither shall thy tears run
down, v. 19. Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead -- v. 18. So I spoke
unto the People in the morning, and at even my Wife died, and I did in the
Morning as I was commanded, v. 19. And the People said unto me, will thou not
tell us what these things are to us, that thou do so? The People enquire, as
well they might. What is it that we are to learn by this? These are types, what
do they mean? but I Will close this with this Scripture-story. In 1 Kings 13. A
Prophet is sent to tell Jeroboam what should befall his Idolatrous Altar, he
stretches out his hand against the Prophet, but must be beholding to the
Prophet's Prayer, that he may be able to pull it to him again: For this
kindness he invites the Prophet to Dinner, but the Prophettells him, v. 8. If
thou will give me half thine House, I will not go in with thee, neither will
eat bread or drink water in this place, v. 9. For so was it charged me by the
word of the Lord, saying, eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the
same way that thou came. But this young Prophet was seduced by an old one,
who pretended God by an Angel sent to him to invite him to take some
refreshment, he having delivered his message, and was returning home another
way, as was commanded him; but as he sat at the Table, the old Prophet is
forced to tell his guest, he had seduced him, and for his yielding to the
pretended Dispensation, a Lion should kill him, which was executed that very
day, and the poor Prophet's death must assure both Court and City of the
Certainty of the Prediction. O what need have Ministers to be cautious lest God
by their death confirm their Doctrine, v. 32.

2. God requires something more than ordinary. Joshua and the People had
observed the ordinary time of Mourning. Deuteronomy. 34.8.
And the Children of Israel wept for Moses in the Plains of Moab thirty days:
So the days of mourning for Moses were ended. Numb. 20.28.
So many days they mourned for Aaron; the time of mourning for ordinary Persons
was seven days. But of Moses, when they had mourned as long for him, as for any
one. God now puts them upon something more. It is not enough to do only as the
People that went to see Christ crucified; Luke 23.48.
They smote their breasts, and returned. A transient Pang of Passion is not so
much as the least that God calls for. Therefore,

III. Prop.
III. When God takes away his Eminent Ministers, there is more work devolves
upon others, both Ministers and People, by it. 1. The Work they did must be
done by others, that the Church of Christ may not be a looser by their death.
And this you will find to be hard work, for many to perform what some one has
done, whom God has taken from us. One Moses did more then the seventy chief of
them, who were to ease him of his burden; he did more with God and Man in
Egypt, and in the Wilderness, by Sea, by Land, in Peace, in War more by lifting
up in hands, in prayer, than the whole by lifting up their hands in fighting.
Exodus 17.11. When Moses held up his hand Israel prevailed; and when he let down
his hand Amalek prevailed. More for the quieting and satisfying of a murmuring
People than any of them, than all of them could do. What is now therefore next
to be done? and by whose hands? they might tremblingly enquire, for Moses is
dead, and if the deliverance he begun, be not carried on, they must perish. Who
dare now undertake it? But I Will speak of Moses as a Minister, and of such
things wherein we are all concerned.

2. Repentance of the Sins they reproved, which are not yet repented of; and
the Performance of the Duties they called to, which they have not yet obeyed
the Call; Zach. 1.5,6.
Your Fathers, Where are they? And the Prophets do they live for ever? But my
Words and my Statutes which I commanded my Servants the Prophets did they not
take hold of your Fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the Lord of
Hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to our
doings, so has he dealt with us, q. d. Where are disobedient Fathers? though
the Prophets die that threatened them, Did not the Threatenings pursue and
overtake them? and so the Word will have the same effect upon you, though the
Ministers that preach it do not live to see its Accomplishment.

3. New Duties spring as it were out of their Graves. There should be a
Progress in the Knowledge and Practice of serious Godliness; Can you think that
God requires no more of you now than he did of our Forefathers, when he first
sent the Gospel amongst them? that we should know no more now, than those who
had the first dawnings of Gospel Light out of worse than Egyptian darkness?
that God expects no more fruits from you who have been so long cultivated, than
from those that scarce ever heard a Conscience-awakening Sermon? Surely, you
cannot persuade your selves, I hope all the Devils in Hell cannot persuade you
to think so. Besides, every Age has its peculiar Truth. The Apostle Peter, 2
Pet. 1.12.
when he mentions his departure, tells them he would have them established in
the present Truth. And the Apostle Jude tells those to whom he wrote, Jude 3.
that 'twas needful for him to write unto them and exhort them, that they
should earnestly contend for the Faith which was first delivered unto the
Saints. Does it not concern us diligently to enquire what may be the Doctrine
of Faith, which God calls us now earnestly to contend for? Give me leave to
propose it to your Enquiry, Whether it may not be the Doctrine of the Kingly
Office of Jesus Christ? Mistake me not, I urge no other Contentions than that
which every one will grant to be a Duty, namely, strive with God, in fervent
Prayer for his fulfilling all the Promises that concern Christ's mediatory
Kingdom, in short, that God would grant what Christ has taught us first to
pray for, Thy Kingdom come, that Christ's Kingdom may be advanced, and Satan's
Kingdom may be destroyed. And strive with Men by the most forcible Arguments
that the Scriptures furnish us withal, to be Christ's willing People in this
day of his Power. And to strive with Enemies with the most piercing
Convictions, that those Arrows may be sharp in their Hearts to wound, and heal
them. Christians, pray, let it be your great care to approve your selves to be
the faithful Subjects of the Lord Jesus Christ, without any reserve of either
Sin, or Duty.

4. New Sins, like new Diseases, are peculiar to special times, for the Cure of
which we must apply proper Remedies. We yearly speak of new Fevers, when they
are but the same with some peculiar Circumstances. So in spiritual Diseases,
several times have their several dangers. Acts 20.29.
After my departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the
Flock, v. 30. Therefore watch, etc. and v. 25. And now behold, I know that ye
all among whom I have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God shall see my face no
more. When ravening Wolves can no more worry, then Seducers will be busy to
pervert, and when watchful Shepherds are taken away, it is then time for the
Sheep of Christ to be sensible of their danger, that they may neither be
frighted, nor flattered out of the Fold of Christ.

Prop. IV.
IV. While the Sense of the Death of any Eminent Minister is fresh upon us, we
should take that advantage of getting an abiding benefit. When the Iron is hot,
then is time to strike, to fashion it into that useful form, that it must abide
in till it is worn out. Whose heart is heated and mollified by such a
Providence as this, let it not cool again without some powerful Improvement. 1.
The Circumstances of such a Providence, which are most affecting, will wear
off, if there be not great care to preserve them in their present vigor. We are
in many things more affected with the Circumstances, than with the things
themselves. Do but observe it in those signal Passages of God's providence
toward you, which you did presently put down in writing, to keep by you; when
some Years after you read them, does it not bring to mind those Circumstances
that were forgotten?

2. Several things of great moment fall out but once in our Life, and perhaps
you will find this to be such a Providence, when you considerately consider of it.

I think every one that will but seriously reflect upon the Providence of his
own Life will find himself furnished with instances of this kind, both in the
things of this Life and a better. Some speak peremptorily, that every one has,
some time of his life some providential offers of worldly advantage which if it
be let slip, they never have a second offer like it. Nay more, they say,
there is never any one under overwhelming pressures, but if he had complied with
some hints of Providence, he might have prevented it: I will not divert
strictly to examine this assertion, because it is not my business to preach a
worldly Lecture. But observe it therefore in Spirituals. There Is not any one
now perishes under the Gospel, but if he had, or would comply with the
strivings of the Spirit he might be saved. You will say, it is only the Elect
shall be saved. I say so to. But add then; There is not any one in the World
((...) can prove he is not elected. I grant it is easy to prove that they are
not yet effectually called, but who can prove they never shall be. Though
Salvation be of Grace, yet Damnation is only for Sin. There Is not any one in
the World, ever was, or shall be damned, only because he was not elected. Do
you therefore catch at the offer of Salvation, and let not one offer slip:
Perhaps you will say, this Counsel is too late, you have let many slip. Well, but
be entreated to slip no more, cast thy self at the feel of Christ in a way of
Duty, and there humbly resolve to live and die. I do once more in the name of
my Master invite and adjure thee to accept of this offer, do not neglect it, it
may be thy last; thou can not of thy self close with it, call in help from
the Spirit of God, take Provocation and Encouragement from the Apostles way of
urging it. Phil. 2.12,13.
Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God which
works in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure.

V. Prop.
V. The present time is always the fittest for the present Duty. What is our
present Duty? There are preculiar Seasons for particular Duties, Eccles. 8.6.
Because there is a time and season for every work, therefore the Misery of Man
is great upon him. Here it is that we blunder, and run our selves into
confusion, in perverting our Duties, in doing that first which should be last,
and putting off that to the last which should be first. Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God. We tire our selves in hunting after the
World, and when we are weary, we would have rest, not in Heaven, that is a Holy
place, possessed by holy Inhabitants, Holiness is hated about all things, let it
be called Heaven, but let it be a Turkish Paradise, a place of freedom from
Misery, and an enjoyment of sensual Delights. Thus we pervert both means and
end, and while out our life in a Dream, till we awake in Hell. At best we lose
our Tide, and then must row against it all the way. Whereas the hardest Duties
of Religion, did we but mind their season, would be made graciously natural to
us. 1. Consider what help God ordinarily affords for present Duty, which, if
that be neglected, he sometimes offers it not again. Should we reflect upon the
Duty God now injoined in this Verse, and remember what God did to their
immediate Ancestors, Numb. 13.31,32. V. 30. And. Caleb stilled the People --
and said, Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are well able to overcome
it, v. 31. But the Men that went up with him, said we are not able to go up
against the People, for they are stronger than we; compare this with Number.
14.37,40. v. 37. Those Men that did bring up the evil Report upon the Land,
died by the Plague before the Lord, v. 40. The People rose up early in the
morning, and got them up into the top of the Mountain, saying, Lo, we be here,
and will go up into the place which the Lord has promised; for we have sinned.
The sum of the Story is this; 'twas their Duty to go presently and take
possession of Canaan. Those that discouraged them to this Duty, God struck them
dead suddenly: This startles the Survivors, they did but sleep upon it (or
rather wake upon it) one night, on the very morrow morning, they will go to
rights to Canaan. No, it is too late, God refuses the Conduct of them, there is
never a Man of them shall ever see Canaan. Think of this over again.

2. The oftener present Help for present Duty is neglected, the more likely it
is that God is upon his departure from such a People, Jer. 16.21. Therefore
behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause them to know mine
hand and my might, and they shall know that my Name is the Lord, q. d. once for
all, and I Will trouble my self with them no more.

And now God says, My Servant Brand is dead. Perhaps some may be ready
presently to say, Will you compare him with Moses? It is said. Deuteronomy. 34.10.
There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face. You may observe, several Persons are commended in Scripture as
Non-such Persons for some peculiar Excellency, wherein they excelled others,
though some in other things excelled them, e. g. 2 Kings 18.5,6.
Hezekiah trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like
him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him, etc. For
trusting in God without calling in Heathenish Succors, none like him. So of
Josiah, 2 Kings 23.25.
Like unto him was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all
his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the
Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him. For his diligent care
to root out Idolatry, and establish the true Religion, none like him. And of
John Christ says, Mat. 11.11.
Among them that are born of Women, there has not risen a greater than John
the Baptist. Other Prophets prophesied of Christ to come, John Baptist could
point to him, and say, Joh. 1.29
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the Sin of the World. He could show
him to be already come. And the blessed Apostle says of the Galatians. Gal.
4.14.
My temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected, but
received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus, q. d. If Christ Jesus
himself had come amongst you, you could not have been more kind to him then you
were to me. In a word, I will grant Moses excelled all the Prophets, not only
in the Sublimeness of his Prophecy, but in the Excellency and Multitude of his
Miracles. In one Age he wrought Seventy six Miracles, when all that were
wrought from the Beginning of the World to the Destruction of the first Temple
were but seventy four, as some of the Jewish Masters count them. Moses had an
Hundred seventy three Colloquies with God, which we read not of all Prophets
besides.

But yet if you will consider Mr. Brand, though I compare him not with Moses in
the forementioned Particulars, yet I could mention more than I dare. I Will
therefore wave all that I have to say, and come to that which I would and
should come to, after all that can be said, and that is, Application.

Application.
I Will begin with a word of

Information; But I fear the Belialists will call it a Use of Consolation, That
Mr. Brand is dead; What was said of the two Witnesses, may in its measure be
said of him; Rev. 11.10.
They that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and
shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that
dwelt upon the Earth. We shall never be troubled with his Zeal more; we were
uneasy whenever we came where he was, though he said nothing to us, we were in
fear, he would awaken our sleeping Consciences, and make them fall upon us,
that we should have much ado to quiet them; but now, he will never disturb us
more. I will not stay with these; only leave one word with them. That though
they would not hear it from him, yet, unless by some other hand, they take the
Counsel he did, or would have given them, viz. To turn from sin to God, they
will never go whither he is gone.

But the little Application I intend shall be to those who will receive it.

I. To my Brethren therefore let me address my self. And seeing God by his
Providence has singled out the meanest amongst you to be your Remembrancer, do
not slight the Message for the Messenger's sake, but receive it for its
moment's sake. God speaks to you by (shall I call it) a visible voice, and
should we not answer as Paul did to Christ upon his first powerful speaking to
him. Acts 9.6.
Lord what will thou have us to do?

1. Reflect upon what you have heard, and seen of Mr. Brand. This will requite
your second thoughts, the most sedate thoughts, and till they present you with
a better Method make use of this, viz. Withdraw your selves as you do for
secret Devotion, and there with awful Apprehensions of God's special Presence,
thus (or in a more transporting manner) bespeak your own Souls. O my Soul,
here is an Employment worthy of thy self! Here a Minister of Christ indeed! Isa.
42.2.
Here Is one that made no noise in the World, but did his Master's work in his
Master's way! Here Is one, whose Body, and Soul, and Estate, and Interest were
all vigorously laid out for Christ! Is not this Example worthy thy Imitation?
shall no more use be made of this, then of a Squib, to be thrown away for a
blaze, and a noise, and there is an end of it; or to use a better Metaphor,
shall it be only looked upon as a Prodigy, to be talked of for a while, and
nothing more? No, my Soul. God requires another kind of Improvement. God's
giving me notice of such a Person is a Talent I must account for! Brethren, are
you in good earnest, will you do thus much? If so; I am sure your Consciences
will not be quiet till you do more.

2. Put down in writing what in his Life your Consciences charge upon you to be
your Duty to imitate. I Will suppose you now in the Secrets of God's presence,
wholly taken up with such (as more spiritual) Soliloquies. This, and that he
did, which I do not. This and that, he did, otherwise than I do. I cannot but
say, It Is my Duty as much as his to fulfill my Ministry, where he had gracious
Ability to discharge his Office, I may have the like to discharge mine. I Will
therefore put down my present Sentiments of these things, and lay them by, for
further Meditation and Prayer.

3. Every day review what you have written; do it with Meditation and Prayer.
Where you left it the day before, endeavor to take it up with the same (or
greater) Sense of being concerned for the Souls of those to whom God sends you,
he has done much; it cannot be denied, but what has been done, may be done.
Here Is one gave up himself more entirely to God, and to do good than I have yet
done. What, though his worldly Estate was better than mine, shall I therefore
imitate him in nothing? What! do nothing more than I did before! Think of it
and pray over it again, and lay it by again, till it be ripe for a Resolution.

4. Take it up again, and read it over, and pray it over, and think it over,
with substracting, adding, altering as upon the most mature deliberation the
Matter requires, and then bring it to a serious, humble, and temporary
Resolution; and whether you will bring that Resolution under another refining.
I submit it to you, but when it has come under your last hand mould it into a
Cautious, Self-dying, Temporary Vow: You know my Brethren better than I, that
well composed Vows are extraordinarily helpful for the doing of extraordinary
Service, and they are ordinarily blessed with more than ordinary Success, but
the Success depends much upon the manner of their composition. I have named
three Qualifications, which must be inseparable, namely, Cautious, for rash
Vows involve the Soul in dreadful Perplexities, that many gracious Persons
never extricate themselves while they live. And they must not only be Cautious,
but Self-denying. I think I may say it is universally true, without so much as
one exception, that a Self confident Vow is always broken. What we undertake in
our own strength, God not only in Justice, but in Mercy shows us our folly; the
more we live at a Dependence upon God in every thing (in a way of Duty, not of
Sloth) the more infallible is our Success: Add one Qualification more, and that
is Temporary not perpetual; mistake me not, I am not speaking of Baptismal
Vows, or of those that make up (as it were) the Substantials of Religion; but
of prudential Vows, that help us to the better performance of some special
Duties; it is superfluous to speak here against Popish Vows, the word Temporary
excludes them; and well may they be excluded; who exclude all but themselves
from being religious, they call all their own Clergy Secular, i. e. worldly,
that are not under some of their perpetual Vows, to them they appropriate the
Title of Regular, and count their Votaries the only Religious among them; but
all I aim at is this. Many whose hearts are set for God whose Judgments are
newly informed, whose affections are warmly engaged, and whose Consciences are
tenderly convinced that they must do their utmost to get assurance of their own
Salvation, and then their utmost to promore the Salvation of others, and they
would fain have the same Impression abide upon their Spirits without any
abatement; and therefore they bind themselves to such Severities of Religion,
that the Change of Providence render impracticable, and so what they intended
to be a furtherance proves a hindrance of the end they designed: Therefore let
your Vow be Temporary, and do by it, as you do by a Lease near its expiration,
renew it again, with what alteration of Circumstances is necessary, without any
abatement of the substance of your vow.

My Brethren, I pretend not to teach you; this is all I aim at I beg of you to
do something more after the proposing of this Example, than you did before the
proposing of it, what to do, and how to secure the manner and the continuance
of doing it, I leave wholly to your selves, and to the Spirit's direction, I
only beg, that this Example may not be lost to you.

II. To private Christians; so far as what I have offered to my Brethren is
suitable to your Station, make Conscience of it; But add,

1. Improve Ministers while you have them, you cannot but be sensible, God is
removing them apace, and which of you has not said over some Ministers of your
particular acquaintance, had I thought God would have taken them away so soon,
I would have better improved my acquaintance. Do it now with those that remain,
make the best you can of them, all manner of ways. In hearing of them, avoid
two Rocks, be neither wanton, nor censorious; do not swallow all you receive
like Pills without chewing, because you esteem the Preacher, nor Wyer-draw what
is delivered, because of prejudice. Do not refuse wholesome Truths, because
they are not dressed up to your liking: Nor commend what is blame worthy because
it suits your humor. How many better then your selves would welcome what you
nauseate. Many hungry Souls would count your Orts a Feast; in short, if you did
but consider this one thing in Mr. Brand's ordinary composing of his Sermons:
Surely 'twould make you cautious of hearing of Sermons ever after, namely, the
more then ordinary time that he spent in Prayer, methinks it does as it were
naturally prompt you to be proportionably much in Prayer, that the word
preached may be savingly profitable. Christians I propose it to your
Consciences, whether serious praying, secret prayer before and after every
Sermon you hear, would not do much to cure you of your faults of both hearing
and practice. Though we trifle with Men, we dare not do so with God. A few
serious Minutes with God before and after a Sermon, pray, try, whether 'twill
not work Wonders.

2. Acquaint your selves more familiarily with some one, or more Ministers,
that you have or may find specially beneficial to your Soul. Though there is no
sufficient Scripture-warrant for a Popish Confessor to have a Key to your
Conscience for secular Advantage, yet there is sufficient warrant for Christians
to ask and Ministers not to dare to deny particular Advice and Encouragement in
all emergent Cases. Where Pastors and People are duly communicative for ends
purely Spiritual, It Is no small advantage to both: Ministers may learn as much
to help their Preaching, as People may learn to guide their Practice. But,

3. Do not trouble your Ministers with things remote from practical Cases of
Conscience, but about your own present Duty. Christians I would charge you to
weigh every word in this direction; do not trouble your Ministers, by diverting
them and your selves from what is of moment to what is trivial, (unless it be
when it may be a Duty to unbend their Bow, for refreshing their tired Spirits)
however pleasant it may seem to be, 'twill be a Trouble to review. Then let it
be your Ministers, some run up and down, and settle no where, who are at best
but like those Deer that leap over the Pales, who though they meet with better
Pasture then the Park affords, yet they are leaner than those that stay in
their Enclosure. Such planetary Christians, though they converse with worthy
Ministers, yet it is ordinarily about things remote from what is spiritually
profitable, they will ask Problematical Questions, and be sure like the Lapwing
to make the greatest noise far from their Nest; they will not come near any
thing that comes near their Conscience, but all the words they speak are such
as Christ calls unprofitable, Mat. 12.36,37.
i.e. neither they, nor others can profit any thing by them; whereas your
discourse with Ministers should always be of what may properly enough be called
a Case of Conscience; their business, and their very Recreations should be
reducible to Cases of Conscience, and that not only Cases of Conscience, but
practicable Cases of Conscience; not Cases like the Cobwebs of the Schoolmen,
finely spun but of no use, but of those things that concern Duty. Notions will
not save us, we may tower high in Speculation and drop into Hell; it should be
our Ambition to know words and Acts 11.14.
things whereby we may be saved. And it is not enough to know what is Duty; but
what is our own Duty, we are too apt to remember what is said to be others
Duty, and to twit them with the neglect of it, when we neglect our own. Peter
himself said to Christ, when what he spoke should have engrost his thoughts,
about his own greatest concern, Joh. 21.21,22.
Lord, and what shall this Man do? Jesus said unto him, if I will, that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me. Mind your own Duty, to
seek direction how you may direct those that are under your charge to do their
Duty, that is your Duty, but do not concern your selves with that which does
not concern you, as your own Duty; if you do, the least harm it does you, is
the necessitating you to omit your present Duty, you justle out your present
Duty; and that is the last thing I mentioned in this Direction. Let your
Enquiry always be about your present Duty; you will find this to shake off many
Impertinencies; this will contract your work into a narrow compass; this will
facilitate your greatest difficulties; for this you may pray in Faith, for
God's assistance and acceptance; the well discharge of your present Duty, gives
you the fairest hopes, that when that which is your future Duty shall come to
be your present Duty, you shall graciously grow up into a capacity to discharge
it.

I Will name but one thing more;

4. Exercise and evidence your real profiting by the Ministry you sit under, by
discharging all your relations with suitable Godliness. You have now your
liberty to choose what Minister you please; what choice ever you make, let it
not be with the despising of others; bless God for the manifold Gifts and
Graces to his and your Servants, for Christ's sake: Do not confine the Church
of Christ to a Party, His little Flock would be a little Flock indeed, should
all be excluded, that do not worship him the same way. You choose a Pastor [be
sure it be one whom Christ owns as is under Shepherd] you take him to be the
fittest for you (though he is not so to others) do you make it your business to
be the best Christians, the best Husbands, the best Wives, the best Parents,
the best Children, the best Masters and Mistresses, the best Servants, the best
Neighbors, the best Friends, the best Dealers, the best Companions. Dear
Christians be covetous of the best Graces, be ambitious of the best Privileges
to put it beyond doubting, that you are the Son and Daughters of the most high;
you are the Children of Adoption, and Heaven is yours by Inheritance. Col.
2.6,7.
As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.
Root'd and built up in him, and stablished in the Faith, as ye have been
taught, abounding therein with Thanksgiving.

III.
III. To Youth: 'Twas to Young ones Mr. Brand delighted to speak (in some
respect) above all others, to these was his Heart most enlarged, and his Tongue
most fluent, and it is to these my Tongue and Pen are most straightened, my
consciousness to my self of coming short of him in every thing, but most in
this, of his holy Oratory to Youth, that Text almost frights me from saying any
thing, Job 6.15. How forcible are right words? But what does your arguing
avail? Not but that I am willing to imitate him, and wish that my words might
be his Echo, in more then repeating, a little of that he has spoken, and
longer than for a short time, and with more than a vanishing faintness. I
heartily wish that the Spirit of God would bring things to your remembrance;
that you might not only through strength of Memory, but through strength of Grace,
remember the Counsel he gave you; what Questions he put to you upon the
Questions of your Catechism, and what Answers he so prompted you to make, as to
make them your own; what youthful Sins, and Temptations he warned you against,
and how he pressed you to early Piety: How he encouraged you from Christ's being
the Childrens advocate against their captious Accusers, for following him with
Hosannahs, Christ applying that of the Psalmist to them, that Psalm. 8.2.
God by them did still the Enemy and the Avenger, i. e. they did more to the
Detriment of the Devil's Kingdom than most others. I hope you will never
forget, with what evidence of Reason, with what warmth of Affection, with what
conviction of Conscience, he bespoke you for Christ. I hope you cannot but
remember, Here was his Heart, here were his hopes, here was his sleeping,
waking Thoughts, his sleeping thoughts, his last thoughts when he went to
sleep; his waking thoughts, his first thoughts when he waked in the Morning;
here was his plodding, praying thoughts; his plodding thoughts, how he might do
good to the next Generation; his praying thoughts, that God would direct and
bless unwearied his Endeavors. You know how sollicitous he was to give you
suitable Instruction, and how desirous that you might drink it in, as the Earth
the Rain. In short, I cannot express, pray, do you endeavor, that you may
practically conceive, how he did as it were travel over you, that might be the
Comfort of the present, and the Blessing of the next Generation. But now 2
Kings 2.3,9.
God has taken away your Master from your Head this day; you shall never more
skip for joy at his approaching presence; you shall never more be cheared with
his holy Charms; you shall never more be provoked by his irresistible
Persuasion. Methinks you can do no less then cry to God for (what Elisha asked
of Elijah) a double portion of his Spirit, not twice so much as he had (I know
not whether that may be expected on this side Glory) but as the firstborn in
dividing of Inheritances, twice so much as any of the Brethren of the Family,
so, twice so much as those who have not had such helps; You will be great
losers, if your gain be not proportionable to your Talents. Great are our
Expectations from you; if you do not bestir your selves to be exemplary for
Piety and Usefulness; good and bad will justly blame you; the good will
mournfully bewail their disappointment, they are big with hopes, that those who
were the chief of his Care and Charge should stand up in his stead, and make it
their business to do that by many hands, which he did alone, that the Church
may be no loser by his death. The bad will with triumph scorn you (which is a
dreadful way of real blaming of you) as degenerate Plants there needed no such
cost and care to make you like them; How will you bear such dagging
upbraidings? But in short, how will you answer it to my Master? You must give
another kind of account to him, than you did to Mr. Brand; the account he
called you to, was such, that what was faulty might be amended, and what was
defective might be made up: But when Christ shall call you to an account (you
know not how soon that will be) the State of Preparation will be over; there
will be no more (no not a Minutes) space for Repentance; no place of rectifying
Mistakes. Now, now is your time, your only time, your fleeting, perishing,
expiring time. Therefore answer the Convictions of your own Consciences; now
make Conscience of the performing the Promises you have made to God and him:
Now do that in a way of Faith and Holiness, that Christ may say to you, Well
done good and faithful Servants, enter you into the Joy of your Lord.

FINIS.
Elogies were sent, in all the Languages Christ's Epitaph was written, (if I
may so call the Inscription upon his Cross) but I Will only present you with
these;
Upon Reverend Mr. Brand.
T he helpfullest of Ministers and Saints:
H is Work God blessed with Grace, or with restraints.
O n those who felt neither of these effects:
M uch may they fear, their hardening for neglects.
A ll sorts who knew him best, they him most pris'd.
S trangers alone they were who him despised.
B ehold, Report, Admire, never Disdain:
R ead'ly to imitate him Heaven to gain.
A ll worldly Happiness, it shrinks before:
N ever to vy in competition more:
D eath is at hand to open you the Door.
to a Wake, eXhort, proVokes the Use of the Story,
DeCeMber the first he Was taken to Glory.
^. A.

Upon Reverend Mr. Brand.
WHen Primitive Devotion, Zeal and Love
Fled back to the Ark like Noah's weary Dove,
Heaven left some Sparks behind, to let us see
What once we were and still we ought to be;
Some few good Men, and this was one, to save
A sinking World, not only just but brave:
Nobly he stemmed the Tide; vast Seas roll by
And dash the Rock, but could not mount so high:
The firm Foundation could not sink or start,
'Twas deep and sure, a meek and humble Heart.
The noisy Bar the Road to Wealth and Fame
He shuns those gaudy Toys below his aim,
The despised Gospel all his Thoughts did claim:
Nor rashly did the sacred Charge invade,
He chose it as an Office, not a Trade,
Trembling the weighty Task he undertook,
But when engaged did never backward look.
His Zeal alike well placed and well designed;
Neither lukewarm, nor raging, cold nor blind:
Sworn to no Party, in no Interest he
But that of common Christianity.
So sweet, so affable, his Mind, and Face,
He proved, Goodnature was no Foe to Grace.
His Charity, like Heavens, confined to none;
Not, even the worst but shared his Rain and Sun,
Though with a kinder Influence still he viewed
Those few, who spite of the Fashion, dared be good.
Improved even old Disciples, gained the young,
And dropped Instruction from his silver Tongue.
These had his Soul, and his true Friendship tried,
With these he prayed, for these he lived and died.
Loved 'em so well, that when Heaven called away
Almost he is in a strait to go or stay.
Till Meditation did the Clouds remove
And showed the Glories of tho Blessed above.
What Mansions in his Fathers-house prepared,
What Joys by Mortals never seen nor heard:
Then like the Heart whom the hot Chase invades,
Who plunges in the Brook from his loved shades,
His thirsty Soul breaks out with eager have
And finds those Streams of Bliss he died to taste.
S. W.

Upon the Death of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Brand.
I.
DEath Commands silence; but his Death Forbids:
He Dead must Speak by his surviving Deeds;
Whose Life was Action, and his Actions Life;
Purged from Dead Works; in Vital Issues Rife:
When once the Quickening Spirit from above
Breathed in a Living Faith, and Active Love:
But Slew him first; while to his Naked Eye
It did present that Dreadful Majesty,
Which put him to Isaiah's doleful Cry.
His Lips unclean, and Their's amongst whom he dwelt,
Himself undone; till the Live Coal he felt
From off God's Altar, purging Sin away, Isa. 6.

Then answered, Here I am, send me, I pray.
Our Gospel-Altar gave that Holy Fire,
Which to a Gospel-Temple did aspire: Page 7.

That of our Law no longer could content;
Seraphick Love must on God's Work be sent.
And sent he was much like another Paul,
Struck down, he Heard, Revived, Rose at Christ's Call;
Amongst his Brethren Labored more than all.
II.
To's Father's Name, or Church was no Disgrace;
None he would do: Had no desire to Rasel
Whilst Build he might not, in his Father's place:
Who Dignified by her, yet far outvy'd
That Grace, and her more highly Dignified
By such a Son: Whom (ah!) she had not known,
When in a Crowd, she did him too disown:
Had she foreseen, sure, for his sake alone,
Black Barth'l'mew had never Outed one.
But he his Filial Duty never forgot;
No more her Name, than his own Soul would blot:
Strokes, aimed at her, he would with his Peril Ward;
And to her Worthies paid a just Regard;
Nor Bribed; Whilst he with Generous Content
Her Titles mis'st, his own fair Income spent,
Not Held of her; yet Turned to her Use:
For that is True Schism, and the worst Abuse,
Which Vogues Our Church not served, but undone;
When Souls to Christ's by all apt means are wone.
III.
This his grand Project; this his single Aim
Not tied to Party, Interest, or Name:
The Christian Sum with differing side agreed,
In God's Ten Words, Christ's Prayer, the Apostle's Creed:
No Firebrand but a burning, shining Light,
His Love as fervent as his Knowledge bright:
This Pufft not up his Mind; That Edified
His, and who knows, how many Souls beside?
His Tongue, Feet, Hand, and even Purse could Teach:
His Seasoned Speech would daily hourly Preach;
Yet sweetly flowing Charmed, and Chained the Ear,
Whilst he could speak, swift and intent to hear.
What some would stories call, were Parables,
At once to Please and Profit; Sacred Spells,
Could Heaven lure down to Earth, Earth ralse to Heaven:
Such Help to Men; Such Grace to him was given!
Words, backs (and edged) by his rare Bounty, could
From Flint supply the Desert with a Flood.
His wise Reproofs, as Lightning darted in,
Could melt hard Hearts, and never raze the Skin;
No Scar would make will out yet wrought the Cure within.
IV.
His Sermon not a Chance starcht Common place;
But drawn to suit the Peoples studied Case,
From a Tried Word, by Prayer, and searching Thought,
With one days Waiting, Weekly to be Taught
Himself of God to Teach Men, as he ought.
His Text he would follow home, and Hearers too;
What Preaching could not, Conference might do:
On all, and each he would spread the Gospel-Net:
Not only sow at large, but singly set.
He Would plow, or even dig the fallow Soil;
Plant, and then water with incessant Toil:
Would do the Work of an Evangelist,
Humbly Concealed under the Catechist.
V.
A Catechist accomplished every way,
Truth to Commend, as well as to display:
A Master Builder, who could surely lay
The right Foundation against a Trying day.
Loose Truths, he knew less understood, soon lost;
And Pulpit-Summaries too big for most:
An often Rehearsed Scheme they must retain;
Well might conceive, what their own Words made plain:
Hardly could doubt, what they were brought to prove; Page 48.

Or from their undertaken Duty move;
And least of all, when wrought into their Love:
Persons he would singly, Truths conjunctly Teach;
Hearers should speak them; and the People Preach,
Called, and Conducted to a sound Reply
By Questions fitting each Capacity.
And well he knew, under such gentle Rain,
"The leaking Sieve must yet a Dew retain;
"And Fruitless Trees a Leafie Verdure gain.
He taught not Parrots, nor would whisper in
Such sounds, as empty Heads should give again:
Would sense by Words, conveigh with holy slight;
Apt Words suggest by sense conveyed aright.
Mind, Conscience, Will he would thoroughly Catechize;
Yet not Confess the Man; Each power surprise
By Christian Wiles for Christ; with Holy Paul
Would, to save some, become all things to all.
VI.
He far above the World, could yet descry
Wisdom's hid Paths below; But drew the Eye
Still to attend the unerring Pole above,
By which himself did safely, calmly move.
His Morning, Evening-Dews the Word, Praise, Prayer,
(And even these a Heavenly Manna were)
The Happy Horse should with his Closet share;
This knew him early often, long on his Knees,
Constant at study, and to him, who sees
In secret often Fasting, to prepare
The Food of Souls with utmost Pains and Care.
There a John Baptist; Coming thence he would be
Sweet, like his Lord, and innocently free;
Wise to win Souls by Christian Courtesy.
Thrice Happy Orb, where e're this Sun did shine,
Whose Heavenly Course shed Influence divine,
Meted the Hours, and numbered out each Day
For all, that would observe his constant way:
His daily Weekly Motion; yea his Rest
So Measured, they were Measures for the Best
Standing one day, or going back had been
A Miracle, in him was never seen.
Heaven's Kindness in him shone to Good and Bad
Those his Light blessed, and these his Warmth made Glad.
Forth from his Native East this kinder Sun
Rejoiced a large, repeated Course to run;
To barren Climates he would gladly bring
Through smartest Winter-storms a Gospel-spring:
But (ah!) more swift than strong ran out of Breath,
Sunk in a Sea of Tears, that wail his Death;
Yet from his Highest South did not decline;
Set upon Heaven's Prime Meridian Line:
There does, tho Hid from us, more brightly shine.
VII.
But, O the Light dispersed throughout this Land,
(Yea Life conveyed) by his Instructive Hand;
Which rightly found what here he had to do;
Writings, too many were; Readers too few:
There he would Cull out the Best; Here all invite
On Free-cost; or for Color ask their Mite,
Who Starving, yet his Treat accepted not, Page 57, 58.

Till they might seem, at least; to Pay their shot.
Spread thus the Sacred Writ more common grew;
Yet, better known, was held more Sacred too.
None Bought more Truth, or Weightier than he;
None would less Sell, or Give it out more Free.
The Happy Scheme, that Great Assembly drew, Page 46.

By England's public Doctrine wouched True,
By Ireland's Learned Primate voted best,
With Cumber's for the Temple Service dressed,
Sent out by Thousands lodged every where,
Freely to Teach God's Knowledge, and his Fear.
VIII.
That Hundred thousand times repeated [Call,]
Answered by Thousands; yet not heard by all;
[Directions] too, with [Now or Never] pressed,
And many more by [Everlasting Rest]
Commended he from the Great Baxter's Pen
Spread in an Age how blessed with two such Men!
He, at the Head of Twenty thousand [Guides] Page 55.

Drew after those as many more besides;
All Offering Freely, or at lowest Price,
To lead Men to the Heavenly Paradise.
Pink, Caley, Wade, Dent, [ Scudder's Daily Walk] Page 56.

With [ Reyner's Rule] and (to prevent a Balk)
The [Vindication] of that Godliness,
They Teach, some Mock, few Live; tho most profess:
These given to make Men Practically Wise; Page 57.

To such a Word Polemick might suffice;
Pool against that which Most, Worst Errors does comprize.
With more and larger Volumes, showing forth
At once their Authors, and the Donor's worth:
Some in the Plainer Dress of Charity;
Others to Court Acceptance by the Eye:
Here Golden Drops; but there a Learned Shower
Into some Students Laps he would frankly pour.
IX.
His Purse as free, as were his constant Pains;
Souls to deliver from their Captive Chains:
On froward Patients, backward Clients. He
Would rare Advice bind with as rare a Fee,
Answered their Need, or honored their Degree.
Whilst he the Body fed; Twice Welcome Guest,
Whose Soul would Welcome its Presented Feast!
They whom his Cost could fit for an Employ
Civil, or Sacred, were his Crown his Joy.
The Care and Charge of num'cous Churches he
Sustained by Apostilick Charity;
As first he raised the People, Pastor, Place,
Which often his Pains would help, his Presence grace.
The Catechist he planted every where;
And often would be, throughout his ample Sphere.
Hired not a few to Teach, more to be Taught;
Books for the most, and Time for many Bought,
Outdoing Mammer's Pay, the Poor had earned,
While they God's Work (their Christian Calling) Learned:
Conform to Christ, He, to enrich the Poor,
Made himself so; Would still exhaust his store;
As that came on, his Bounty did advance;
Reserving but the Entailed Inheritance,
A Root of Growing Liberality,
Which, whilst he lived, was certain not to Die:
(May but his Spirit with that Mantle go;
And Charity shall never fail below.
His Income, all Returned each Year above,
Put out to Use by Acts of Faith, and Love,
He Is now admiring in its vast Increase,
Made sure for ever, Crowned with joyful Peace.
X.
How Blessed he, who only would receive
Of Heaven's Free Gift, that he might freely give:
God's Almoner, a Bishop tho no Peer,
[To Church, and Poor a Just, kind Overseer.]
He knew his Order free for Marriage-bands;
Was Free in them; they could not Tie his hands:
A Match (for him by Heaven's Care designed)
He found Well-fitted to his Generous Mind:
Thus, Clear of Popish, feigned Chastity,
Did even their Fame of Charity outvy:
Tho (...) can scarce be told, his Right Hand did,
Which from his Left industriously was Hid.
Children he had; Born, not for Earth, but Heaven;
To him, that gave them, so entirely given;
The Covenant for them, so Improved and Pressed,
God took them Early Ripe to Endless Rest.
Thus, was he still Surviving Glorified;
He walk, his lived with God: And when he died,
Left a Name better than of Children here;
Souls Born to God, and Nurtured in his Fear.
XI.
His Care for Heaven was: He Heaven's Care; Page 62, 64.

None should be set; or he escape the Snare:
Once Waylaid, to be seized Hell's Prisoner;
Made Heaven's, at Large, just till the Coast was clear:
'Twas fit His Feet should hold their Liberty;
Whose Tongue, Hand, Purse, to Hell's despite were free
But (Ah!) He spent himself too Lavishy:
His Body ^'d not Respite, scarce Repair;
Souls did so far Engross his Time and Care.
Till, forced less to Work, he seemed Confined;
Earth grew a Prison to his Heavenly Mind:
His Three Years Weakness, and continued Pain
Hung on his active Soul, a heavy Chain;
Fo^'d in the Feverish Fire of Native heat,
By Pious Travel roused, enraged by Damping Wet:
His Legs, now Fettered, Swell; Through every Part
Pain ran, in vain Pursued by Medick Art;
Yea tho it sometimes made a daring Halt,
As from his Side the Vitals to Assault;
Or fixed like (tho since it is fully known
His Temperament had nothing of) the Stone:
An Asthma too Essayed to stop his Breath
What Skill could Loose such Twisted Bands of Death?
XII.
He meekly followed as his Captain Led;
In doing, and by Suffering Perfected:
Sense overwhelmed, Faith was his Ease, and Rest:
His Soul, in Patience quietly possessed,
Humbly adored God's Love and longed to see
The Face so sought by Faith, Hope, Charity
He Greatest in this Greatest of the Three.
Misgiving Fear could not his Torment prove.
Who was even here so Perfect grown in Love:
When Work he might not; Fain he would go to Rest;
Could choose to be Dissolved, as far the Best:
Prepared, as one Wise even to Presage
That Midnight-Cry, which C^'d him off the Stage
Who, like his Savior, (through him Crucified.)
But Easier far, a Bleeding Victor died;
And went in Triumph to Heaven's Wedding-Feast
If Love be Welcome there, a Welcome Guest.
The Honor due to such a Memory
Must lay a Tax on all Posterity:
A Minor Prophet and a far less Poet
For his own Age alone can never show it:
Men, Christians, Ministers, so many Made,
More by his means Improved, yet more Essayed;
With all, who Owe a Service to that Lord
He so well Served; should their best Aids afford,
His Name with just Acknowledgments to Grace.
And with his Virtues fill the vacant Place:
This Composition needs must fall too Law
All I can Pay, is not the Tithe
J. O.

To the READER
On the BOOK.
REad here the Effigies of a lovely Soul,
Composed with a mysterious Harmony
Of what soever was great and good; Behold,
The Parts rude draught the curious Texture, he
Alone that formed it so good
With that same Wisdom understood,
A Soul too pure to act a Body here,
Too great to be confined to a Clod of Earth;
And shackling dull Mortality to bear,
Impatient to be gone as 'twas for birth,
Too resolutely brisk by far
To keep's frail Cottage in repair.
Blessed Martyr (so I dare that Hero call,
As well as those who mount the Heaven by fire,
Who sacrifices quiet Life and all
Pusht on by uncontrollable desire
To serve the Lord) thy Memory shall
(Without our Praises) grateful be till this vast Fabric fall
J. E.

FINIS.

