THE STATE OF His Majesty's Revenue IN IRELAND, As the same was Given in to the
Right Honorable the LORDS COMMISSIONERS of His Majesty's Treasury in England,
By Francis Lord Angier Vice-Treasurer of IRELAND.

AND ALSO, The Humble Proposals OF THE Right Honorable Richard Lord Viscount
RANELAGH Upon the said STATE.

TOGETHER WITH His Majesty's Contract THEREUPON, Concerning His whole Revenue
in IRELAND, BY LETTERS PATENTS Bearing date the 4th of August, 1672.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1673.

FUIMUS
The Right Honble. Charles Viscount Bruce of Ampthill (Son and Heir. Apparent
of Thomas Earl of Ailasbury) and Baron Bruce of Whorleton
woodcut, seal

A STATE of HIS MAJESTY'S YEARLY REVENUE and CHARGE IN IRELAND, From the 25th.
of December 1669, to the 25th. of December 1675, being the time when the
present Farm determines.
From the 25th. of December 1669, to the 25th. of December 1670.
Reven
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, 91500 00 00 Customs, 75000 00 00
Inland Excise, 39000 00 00 Total 205500 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1870
Abatement allowed by the second Contract, 11378 00 00 Salaries of the
Commissioners, 02750 00 00 Interest of the 70000 li. 07000 00 00 Quit-rents
abated to the Duke of Ormond, 05000 00 00 Quit-rents respited and discharged,
and for Lands in the Kings hands, 12929 03 08 Total 39057 03 08 Clear Revenue
payable this year 166442 16 03

His Majesty's Charge.
To the Military List, 155341 13 07 To the Civil List, 16501 11 11 Total
Charge, 171843 05 06 Clear Revenue deduct 166442 16 03 The Charge exceeds the
Revenue this year, 5490 09 02

From the 25th. of December 1670, to the 25th. of December 1671.
Revenue.
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, etc. 091500 00 00 Customs, etc.
075000 00 00 Inland Excise for the first quarter ending 25th. March 1671,
009750 00 00 Inland Excise for the remaining three quarters, 039750 00 00 Total
216000 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1671.
Abatement allowed by the second Contract, 014771 10 00 All the other
Abatements mentioned in the Account of the last year, comes to 027679 03 08
Total 042450 13 08 Clear Revenue payable this year, 173549 06 03

Charge.
The Charge of the Civil and Military Lists, as before, 171843 05 06 Excess of
the Revenue above the Charge, 001706 00 09

From the 25th. of December 1671, to the 25th. of December 1672.
Reven.
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, 091500 00 00 Customs, 075000 00 00
Inland Excise, 053000 00 00 Total 219500 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1672.
Abatement allowed by the second Contract, 015000 00 00 All the other
Abatements amount unto 027679 03 08 Total 042679 03 08 Clear Revenue payable
this year, 176820 16 03

Charge.
The Charge of both Lists, 171843 05 06 Excess of the Revenue above the Charge,
004977 10 09

From the 25th. of December 1672, to the 25th. of December 1673.
Reven.
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, etc. 091500 00 00 Customs, etc.
075000 00 00 Inland Excise, 053000 00 00 Total 219500 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1673.
Allowed the same as the first year, 042679 03 08 Clear Revenue payable this
year, 176820 16 03

Charge.
The Charge of both Lists, 171843 05 06 Excess of the Revenue above the Charge,
004977 10 09

From the 25th. of December 1673, to the 25th. of December 1674.
Reven.
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, etc. 091500 00 00 Customs, etc.
075000 00 00 Inland Excise, 053000 00 00 Total 219500 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1674.
Abatements allowed as before, 042679 03 08 Clear Revenue payable this year
176820 16 03

Charge.
The Charge of both Lists, 171843 05 06 Excess of the Revenue above the Charge,
004977 10 09

From the 25th. of December 1674, to the 25th. of December 1675.
Reven
Hearth-money, Wine-Licences, Quit-rents, etc. 091500 00 00 Customs, etc.
075000 00 00 Inland Excise, 053000 00 00 Total 219500 00 00

Abatements. Anno 1675.
Abatements allowed as before, 042679 03 08 Clear Revenue payable this year,
176820 16 03

Charge.
Charge of both Lists, 171843 05 06 Excess of the Revenue above the Charge,
004977 10 09

So that when the said Farm determines, viz. the 25th. day of December 1675,
the Annual Revenue will exceed the Annual Charge, the sum of 016215 14 07

A STATE of HIS MAJESTY'S DEBTS TO THE CIVIL and MILITARY LISTS, etc.
Due to the Kings Guard of Horse for 12 months pay, ending the last of December
1670, 07677 12 00 Due to 29 Troops more 12 months, ending the last of December
1670, 56935 04 00 Due to 61 Companies of Foot 12. months, ending the last of
December 1670, 53642 08 00 Due to the Regiment of Guards 11. months pay, ending
the 30th of December 1670, 20746 07 04 139001 11 04 Advanced by the new
Farmers, 070000 00 00 Lent by Alderman Bucknall 10000 li. which with interest
at 10 li. per Cent. and Exchange at 5 li. per Cent. comes to 011500 00 00 To
the City of Londonderry, 004000 00 00 For Lands enclosed in the Park, 010000
00 00 Arrears of the Civil List about 004000 00 00 Due for Arms and Ammunition
sent out of England, 006076 00 00 Due to Patrick Archer, 006294 05 00 Due to
the Train of Artillery, 001147 05 02 Insolvent Assignments due to the Army,
010000 00 00 Due to the Earl of Anglesey, to be paid out of forfeited
Recognizances, 002500 00 00 Due to the Lord Arlington, being the remainder of
10000 l. granted to him, 006250 00 00 Part of the 10 months arrear due to the
Army in the Lords Justices time, 040789 18 00 To Colonel Lane's Daughters,
006000 00 00 Total Debt 317558 19 06

Toward the discharging which Debts, there is in prospect these particular
Funds that follow,
The Overplus of the Revenue above the Charge at the end of the Farm, 016215 14
07 Out of the 50000 li. reserved to the King by the Act of Explanation, 010000
00 00 By the Assignment of the Duke of Ormond, to His Majesty out of the years
value, 025000 00 00 In arrear upon Sir Alexander Bence for the Inland Excise,
008000 00 00 By contract with the 49. men out of their share of the years
value, 050000 00 00 Total in view, 109215 14 07 So there remains unpaid, 203343
04 10

To discharge which there is no Fund left of His Majesty's Revenue, but to the
product of the Old Arrears upon the Commission of Inquiry now on foot, and the
casual Revenue; the Quantum whereof cannot be ascertained.

This was given in to His Majesty and the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury,
by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Angier Vice-Treasurer of Ireland.

THE Lord Ranelaghs SHORT PROPOSALS.
I Do Humbly offer to pay Your Majesty's Charge and Debts, mentioned in the
State of Your Revenue, given You in by the Vice-Treasurer, as far as Your
Majesty is obliged.

That the Farmers should continue their Bargain, as now it stands; And that I
would besides, give Your Majesty Fourscore thousand pounds sterling, to be paid
in two years from the end of the Farm, by equal Portions, half yearly.

Your Majesty superceding the Commission of Enquiry lately issued, and
impowering me to Receive the Benefit of all that is, or, shall be due or
payable to You until the 26 of December, 1675. excepting any Addition to Your
Revenue that shall hereafter be made by Act of Parliament, and excepting 7000
l. being the Balance of the Earl of Anglesey's Account; and about 20000 l.
being the Balance of Sir George Carteret's Account.

This I do now Humbly offer to Your Majesty, that my Proposal may not be either
forgotten or mistaken, whilst I am preparing to put it into better form.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY. The Humble Proposals of Richard, Lord
Viscount Ranelagh.
THat the Charge of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, not exceeding what it is
computed to be, in a Paper, styled, The State of Your Majesty's Revenue,
delivered in by your Vice-Treasurer, shall from the 25 of December, 1670. until
the 26 of December 1675. be fully and duly answered and discharged, excepting
what ought to be deducted for Cheques made by your Majesty's sworn Officers.

That all arrears of Pay, due to your Martial and Civil Lists, at, or on the
last day of December last past, according to the establishment; and all other
Debts mentioned in the aforesaid State, which your Majesty is obliged to pay,
shall before the 25 of December 1675. be fully paid and discharged, and that
without any Composition or Defalcation, except the Fees and Cheques, usually
and duly made; and except what shall be found to be still due of the Ten
months Arrears in the Lords Justices time, which has all along been compounded
for one half, and so much every body concerned therein shall have.

That all such Defalcations as shall appear to be justly due unto the late
Farmers of your Majesty's Customs Imported, Inland Excize, Licenses for Ale and
Beer, Licenses for Wine, Aquavitae, and Strong Water, during the two years and
three quarters of the late War with the Dutch, shall be adjusted and settled in
such manner as your Majesty shall be wholly freed and discharged from any
Demand, for or concerning the same.

That the present Farmers of His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland may continue
their Farms under the Articles, Covenants, Conditions, and Provisions mentioned
in their several Grants, and that any pretense of Defalcation by them shall be
solely determined, in such manner as by their several Agreements is, and was
appointed, without any Let or Interruption therein.

That your Majesty shall have and dispose of as you shall think fit, the
Balances of the Earl of Anglesey's Account, and the Balance of Sir George
Carteret's Account being 20000 l. or thereabouts.

That as to any addition which shall hereafter be made to your Majesty's
Revenue by Act of Parliament, the Proposer will in no wise pretend thereunto,
or intermeddle therewith.

That the Proposer, over and above the Payments and Discharges to be made as
aforesaid, will be engaged to pay your Majesty 80000 l. sterling, within the
space of two years, to commence from the 25 of December, 1675. by four equal
Portions, half yearly.

That Your Majesty may continue the Excize of Your Royal Prerogative, and Power
to Suspend, Mitigate, Reduce, or Pardon any Particulars under the survey of the
Greenwax, and any Fines and Forfeitures upon Penal Laws (other then such as
relate to your Revenue) and for appointing Commissioners for reducements
thereof. But that all such Moneys which after such reducements shall be
Payable, Levied, or Received by Your Majesty's Officers, shall belong to the
Proposer.

That as for any payment due to Your Majesty from the Clergy for First Fruits,
or Twentieth Parts, the Proposer will be concluded by such Returns as shall be
made by the Commissioners lately empowered for that purpose, under the Great
Seal of Ireland.

That to the end Your Majesty's Revenue may not be diverted out of its proper
and usual Channel; The Proposer Declares, That all Moneys due and payable to
Your Majesty, whither upon the account of the present Farms, Arrears, or
otherwise, shall be answered and brought into the Receipt of Your Majesty's
Exchequer in the same manner as formerly, to be there ready to answer the Uses
herein undertaken.

That all Warrants for the issuing out of any of Your Majesty's said Revenue,
shall be Signed and Ordered as formerly by your Majesty, or Chief Governor, and
directed to the Proposer, who will forthwith answer the same, according to the
intent of these Proposals.

That the 30000 l. Granted by Your Majesty to the Earl of Suffolk, shall be
satisfied out of the proper Fond whereon it is Charged.

That it is not intended hereby to abridge Your Majesty from Granting, Leasing,
or Confirming unto any Person or Persons, etc. any Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, within Your said Kingdom, which are yet undisposed of; or to
which Your Majesty's Title hereafter shall be made appear; so that the
Quit-Rents, or the Crown-Rents, which shall be found most for Your Majesty's
profit, be reserved, and no Arrears, or mean Profits due thereon, be remitted.

That to prevent and avoid the many and sad consequences which may happen by a
speedy and rigid Levying and bringing in of Your Majesty's Debts and Dues, and
to secure and ease Your Subjects from any unnecessary trouble, unjust
vexations, or double payments.

It is Humbly Proposed.
1. THat all Persons in Arrears for Quit-Rents, shall have the full benefit and
effect of a Covenant for Instalments already made between Your Majesty and the
present Farmers of Your Revenue.

2. That a Power may be given to Your Governors and such others whom Your
Majesty shall think fit to appoint, for Installing all other the Debts,
Arrears, etc. due to Your Majesty, on, or before the 25 of December, 1670.
where they shall see cause, upon consideration had upon every respective Case,
so that none of them be installed for above eight half yearly Payments, of
which, none to extend beyond the 24 day of June, 1675. And that the payment so
Installed, be sufficiently secured; But this Power not to extend to any
Farmers, Receivers, or Collectors, who either are, or have been of Your
Majesty's Revenue; nor to any small or inconsiderable Sums, except the Debtors
be found very unable, nor to any who shall not own the Debts, or will not
consent to secure the Payments thereof, by such Installments, without Suits at
Law.

3. That nothing which is not now in charge, shall be sued for, or Levied,
until satisfaction be first given to the chief Governor, and such others whom
Your Majesty shall please to appoint, that there is good grounds for so doing,
and that Your Majesty is justly entitled thereunto.

4. That the chief Governor may be directed to issue out Proclamations, as
occasion shall require; whereby all Collectors, Receivers, and Accomptants, may
be warned within a reasonable time, to come in and clear their Accounts; And
that all other Your Subjects, who are any ways indebted to Your Majesty, may
have notice of the Favor of Installments intended, and accordingly may take
some effectual course to state and secure their respective Debts and Arrears.

That a just Account shall from time to time be given to Your chief Governor,
and such others whom Your Majesty shall think fit to appoint, of all
proceedings in the management of this undertaking, and any directions from them
which may conduce to the better and more easy carrying on of this work, shall
be most willingly embraced, and that in all matters of Law in which may occur
the Judgments and Decrees of Your Court of Exchequer, shall be conclusive.

As concerning what is to be Granted, Covenanted, and Agreed by Your Majesty,
to, and for the Proposers encouragement it is Humbly tendered.

That the Commission of Enquiry now on foot, may forthwith be Superceded. That
all Respits of Quitrents, and other Sums now due to Your Majesty, be forthwith
determined. That the Composition with the (49) Officers may not be obstructed,
but perfected as intended, and that the benefit arising thereby to Your
Majesty, mentioned in this said State, may belong to the Proposer, for the
carrying on of the Uses undertaken.

That Your Majesty will renew Your Letter to the chief Governor and the
Council, to reapplot the deficiency of the years value; but that therewith, all
Your Majesty's Grace and Favor may be extended to Your Subjects in allowing
them four years for the payment thereof.

That as well the Arrears as growing Rents and Profits of the present Farm of
Your Majesty's Revenue, until the 26 of December, 1675. (including the last
Quarters Rent then due, though not payable) And also all the Moneys now in Your
Majesty's Treasury, or due by Impressed, or otherwise, may be wholly employed to
the uses herein undertaken, and to be from time to time accepted and accounted
as payable for the said Uses.

That Your Majesty will be pleased sufficiently to Commissionate and Empower
such able and fit Persons, as the Proposer shall nominate, and Your Majesty
approve of, to be Your Officers and Ministers, Granting to them such Power and
Authority as shall be thought requisite (without interrupting the present
Farmers, or their Officers, in Collecting, and bringing in the Revenue under
their Charge) in Your Majesty's name, and with the assistance of Your Officers,
to Manage, Levy, Collect, Sue for, Recover, and Receive, all and every Your
Majesty's Revenues, Certain and Casual, Ordinary and Extraordinary whatsoever,
not hitherto remitted or pardoned, as well such, as upon or before the said 25
of December, 1670. were in arrears, and yet unpaid, as such, which, from and
after the said time, until the 26 of December, 1675. including the Rents and
Payments which shall be due for the time preceding, the said day, were or shall
be by any matter of Record or otherwise, howsoever due, owing or payable to
Your Majesty; or which might, or ought to have been, or may, before the 26 of
December, 1675. be Taxed, Levied, Collected, Recovered, Answered for, Paid, or
Payable to Your Majesty, out of, or for all, or any the Estates, Real and
Personal, of any Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, or otherwise,
by reason of any Tax, Subsidy, Assessment, Imposition, Contract, Covenant, and
Agreement, Account, Debt, Sum, or Sums of Money, Matter or Thing Imposed, Made,
Issued, or which did or shall arise, grow due or payable within the said
Kingdom of Ireland, before the said 26 of December, 1675. (excepting the
particulars before proposed to be excepted.)

That the Proposer, and the Persons to be Commissionated as aforesaid, may
Have, Receive, and Enjoy the full benefit and advantage of all Your Majesty's
said Arrears, and growing Revenue now in charge, or that which hereafter may be
in charge, or discovered, and not before excepted, without being Answerable or
Accountable to Your Majesty, after this their undertaking shall be
accomplished, but that the same being accordingly performed by them, they may
Receive, Retain, and Enjoy the whole Surplus of the Revenue, to their own
proper uses, without further Account, and be absolutely discharged as to Your
Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, of and for the same.

That the said Persons may have such farther Power and Concessions, requisite
both to make Your Majesty's Grant herein effectual in Law to them, and for the
better enabling them to perform the said undertaking, as are usual or useful in
cases of the like nature, so that the same extend not to the Demand of any
Defalcations out of the sums hereby undertaken to be paid, other then by reason
of the hand of God, unavoidable necessity, or Your Majesty's own Act.

AN INDEX TO His Majesty's CONTRACT WITH RICHARD Lord Viscount RANELAGH and his
Partners, concerning His Majesty's whole Revenue in IRELAND, dated the 4th. of
August 1671.
PReamble of the Indenture, dated the 4th. of August 1671, Page. 1. Parties to
the Indenture, Page. 1. Recital of a former Indenture or Grant 12. July 1669,
to John Forth and ten others, of the great Branches of the Revenue in Ireland
for seven years, from 25th. December 1675, at 206250 li. for the year ending
the 25th. December 1671, and 219500 li. per annum the remaining four years,
Page. 1. Recital of the Patent of Abatements August 3. 1669, to John Forth and
eight others, whereby the Rent reserved for the year ending the 25th. of
December 1671, will be reduced to 191476 li. 10 s. and to 204500 li. per annum,
the remaining four years, Page. 2. His Majesty taking into consideration the
state of his Revenue, and the Charge of his Government in Ireland, admits and
accepts of Proposals from Richard Viscount Ranelagh, for himself and others,
for the receiving and issuing his whole Revenue, from 25th. December 1670, to
the 26th. of December 1675, Page. 3. The Body of this Indenture, Page. 3. The
Chief Covenants in the present Indenture from His Majesty to the Viscount
Ranelagh and his Partners, and the consideration thereof, Page. 3. From the
4th. of August 1671, to the 26th. of December 1675, all His Majesty's Rents and
Arrears of the great Branches of the Revenue, His Majesty's Treasure and ready
money, which are or shall be in the Treasury, or due by Impressed, or otherwise,
and all other His Majesty's Revenue, during the said time, shall be issued out
and applied only to the uses undertaken by R. Viscount Ranelagh and his
Partners, except what shall be requisite to defray the Charges of this
Undertaking, Page. 4. The Moneys which are or shall be received by His
Majesty's Vice-Treasurer, or paid to any within the Establishment, shall be
accepted as so much of the growing charge of the year commencing from the last
of December 1670, Page. 4. R. V. R. etc. shall not be obliged to defray more of
the first years charge than would remain to be answered if the moneys received
and paid by His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer since the 25th. of December 1670, had
been duly and wholly applied to the necessary charges of the year commencing
from the last of December 1670, Page. 4. V. R. etc. shall have no defalcations
for moneys which from the 25th of December 1670, to the 4th. of August 1671,
have been applied to the uses only before undertaken, Page. 5. Such Commissions
shall be issued under the Great Seal of England or Ireland, and directed to V.
R. etc. or such others as they shall desire, Authorizing them as His Majesty's
Officers, to manage, receive, compound for, and discharge his whole Revenue
(not pardoned or granted away before the 25th. of December 1670) as well in
arrear on or before that day, and yet unpaid, as which shall any way grow due
before the 26th. of December 1675, including the Payments which shall be due
for the time incurred before the said day, though payable after, Page. 5. The
said Powers to such Commissioners, shall not enable them to interrupt the
Farmers of the great Branches in managing the Revenue under their charge, nor
to receive any money which shall be due to His Majesty by any further Act of
Parliament, Page. 6. Neither the lapsed Money, Lands in lieu thereof, or the
30000 li. payable for the same, nor the English arrears, or Lands set out for
the same, nor the Mean Profits due for Lands set out on the Dublin Ordinances,
and already disposed of by the Act of Explanation, shall be comprehended in
these Agreements, Page. 6. The said Commissioners shall receive and enjoy all
the said Arrears and growing Revenue, which is, or shall be in charge, or
discovered, and other the Premises, subject to the Limitations and Restrictions
herein, and no other, Page. 6. The Chief Covenants in this Indenture from R. V.
Ranelagh and his Partners, to His Majesty, and the considerations thereof,
Page. 7. V. R. etc. shall within 14. days after Warrants signed and directed
to them, defray so much of His Majesty's expense of Ireland, which from the
last of December 1670, to the 4th. of August 1671, ought (according to the
Establishment) to have been born by His Majesty if this Indenture had not been
made, Page. 7. V. R. etc. shall from the 4th. of August 1671, to the 26th. of
December 1675, defray all the expense of Ireland, according to the
Establishments, as otherwise, which by His Majesty ought to have been born, if
this Indenture had not been made, and cause the same to be paid by equal
proportions within 40. days after the end of every Quarter, as the same shall
respectively grow due, Page. 7. The Moneys to be paid for such Expenses, are
not in any one year to exceed 171843 li. 5 s. 6 d. (out of which the Fees and
Cheques are to be deducted) And there are to be due and legal Warrants signed
for the issuing thereof, Page. 7. If (after the 25th. of December 1670, and
before the 26th. of December. 1675) any Cheques of pay made by reason of absence,
want, or unserviceableness of Horse or Arms, or neglect of duty, the Chief
Governor may lessen or remit any such Cheques, so the same be done within
three months after the Muster Rolls shall be closed, and before any Warrants
of Pay be issued upon such Muster Rolls, duplicates whereof are to be returned
to V. R. etc. Page. 8. V. R. etc. shall within four years after 25th. December
1671, discharge the Arrears which on the 25th. of December 1670, were unpaid,
according to the Establishment, to any in the Military and Civil Lists, and to
the Train of Artillery, Page. 8. And shall cause due payment to be made of the
said Arrears within the said time, by even and equal portions, without
composition or deduction (the fees and cheques excepted) the first payment
whereof shall begin and be made the 24th. December 1672, Page. 9. His Majesty
shall be discharged from all such Arrear, so as the same (deducting the fees
and cheques) exceed not for the Military List 139001 li. 11 s. 4 d. for the
Civil List 4000 li. and for the Train of Artillery 1147 li. Page. 9. V. R. etc.
shall before 25th. December 1675, discharge (without any Abatement except the
Fees) so much of these sums as on the 4th. of August 1671 shall be unpaid, unto
these persons and uses; li. s. d. The Present Farmers. 70000 Sir William
Bucknall, 11000 Londonderry Customs, 4000 Phoenix Park, 10000 Patrick Archer,
6294 Arms and Ammunition, 6076 Moiety of the Ten Months Arrears, 20394 19 Earl
Anglesey, 2500 Colonel Lane's Daughters, 6000 Earl Arlington, 6250 Michael
Archbishop of Dublin, 2500 Fran. and Eliz. Jones, 3500 John St. Ledger, 400
Rachel Vicountess Falkland, 3000 Page. 9. Whereas the late Farmers of the
Customs, Excise imported and Inland, and Licenses of Ale, Beer, Wine, etc.
demand defalcations, by reason of the war with the United Provinces, during two
years and three quarters of their respective Farms. V. R. etc. shall either
come to an agreement with them for the same, or cause their demands in respect
thereof to be examined and settled, and take upon themselves the whole loss of
the defalcations, which upon such agreement or examination shall be allowed,
and discharge His Majesty from the same, Page. 11. V. R. etc. shall (over and
above the said sums, payments, and discharges) within two years to commence
from the 25th. of December 1675, pay unto His Majesty 80000 li. by four equal
Portions half yearly, Page. 11. Further Covenants from His Majesty, That V. R.
etc. (performing their Covenants) shall enjoy the whole surplus of the Revenue
to their own use, without any further, or other account, matter, or thing, to
be given to His Majesty; and are hereby acquitted and discharged against His
Majesty of all accounts and demands, which can or may be made concerning the
same, Page. 12. The Commission for Enquiry into Arrears due to His Majesty is
superseded, Page. 13. All respits of Quit-rents and other sums of money due to
His Majesty, are declared void and determined, Page. 13. The Composition with
the 49. Officers for the moiety of their 100000 li. payable out of the years
value, shall not be obstructed or delayed, but perfected as begun and intended;
and the whole benefit and advantage thereby to His Majesty, shall be enjoyed by
the said V. R. etc. Page. 13. His Majesty will direct the Chief Governor and
Council in Ireland to reapplot and levy upon the Lands of Ireland, whatsoever
the years value shall be found deficient of the 300000 li. and cause the same
to be effectually done, as by the Act of Explanation is appointed, allowing
four years time for the payment thereof half yearly at Michaelmass and Easter,
the last payment to be made at or before the 29th. of September 1675, Page. 13,
and 14. Provisoes, Limitations, and Restrictions, Page. 14. Nothing herein is
to restrain His Majesty's Prerogative to pardon Offenders, or to remit or
reduce forfeited Recognizances of the Peace, good behavior, appearances, or
other particulars of the Green-Wax, or Fines and Forfeitures, against the Laws,
or Outlawries (other then what relates to the Revenue) unless the duty for
which the same shall happen, with the Costs and Charges be fully satisfied; but
His Majesty may exercise his Royal Authority in such Cases as amply as if this
Indenture had not been made; And His Majesty may issue Commissions for
reducement of such sums of Money as has been accustomed, so as the sums due to
His Majesty after such reducements, or levied by his Officers, shall be paid to
V. R. etc. Page. 14 and 15. His Majesty may demise or grant for any Estate his
Royal Mines, and any Messuages, Houses, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, in Ireland, yet undisposed of, or whereunto His Majesty's Title
shall hereafter appear; so as such Rent be reserved thereupon as may be at
least equivalent to the new Quit-rents, or the ancient Crown-rent, if it exceed
the Quit-rent, and no Arrears of Quit-rent or mean profits be discharged, Page.
15. If His Majesty grant any Lands, etc. to the uses of the Declarations 30th.
November 1660 (other then to such, or in trust to such who formerly received
the issues and profits thereof) the same shall be freed from Arrears of
Quit-rent and mean profits due before 25th. December 1668, and V. R. etc. shall
not molest the Grantees, nor the Lands granted, but may take their remedy for
the same against the former Enjoyers or Pervors of the Profits of such Lands,
etc. Page. 16. Further Covenants from V. R. etc. to His Majesty, Page. 16. The
Farmers of the great Branches of the Revenue, and those concerned in the Patent
of Abatements, and all other Farmers, by virtue of any Grant under the Great
Seal before the 25th. December 1670 may (under their respective Articles,
Covenants, Conditions, and Provisoes) enjoy their several Farms, according to
the tenor thereof, without any let of V. R. etc. Page. 17. V. R. etc. shall
not demand Defalcations for any sums which are or shall be allowed to such
Farmers for the two years ending 25th. December 1670, or for or in respect of
any other matters or things settled and determined before that time, in
pursuance of, and according to such Grants, or for any pretensions of the said
Farmers upon the 9th. of June 1671, depending in the Exchequer at Dublin, for
Defalcations for Lands in Certificate, and not past in Letters Patents, or for
the Composition Rents, which way soever the same shall be determined, Page. 17.
The Defalcations which may hereafter be pretended unto by the said Farmers,
shall be only determined in such way as by their several Agreements is
appointed, Page. 17. V. R. etc. shall allow the usual Enstallments for payment
of First Fruits or Twentieth parts: and will be concluded by the values made or
to be made by the Commissioners, now or hereafter to be appointed under the
Great Seal; and His Majesty in case any defect of the Commissions, will give
Order for renewing and rectifying the same, and for proceeding thereupon in as
ample manner, as His Majesty might have done, if this Indenture were not made,
Page. 18. Further Provisoes, Limitations, and Restrictions, Page. 18. His
Majesty may alter the payments in the Civil and Military Lists of the
Establishments, so as the whole yearly charge do not in any one year exceed
171843 li. 5 s. 6. d. and may appoint the method and precedence of the payment
of His Majesty's debts, so as those for which Interest is payable, be first
satisfied, Page. 18. If His Majesty shall not renew any Pension, or Temporary
Payment in the Establishment, which shall cease, or be determined, V. R. etc.
shall pay His Majesty so much as the same would have amounted unto, if it had
not been determined, Page. 19. His Majesty may dispose of 7155 li. 4 s. 10 d.
due on the Balance of the Earl of Anglesey's Account until second July 1667;
And of 19491 li. 5 s. 4 d. due on the Balance of the Account of Sir Geo.
Carteret, until 20th. January 1669, without allowing of any defalcations for
the same, Page. 19. So much of the 50000 li. payable to the Duke of Ormond by
the Act of Explanation as is yet behind; And the yearly sum of 5000 li. per
annum granted to him out of the Quit-rents for a term unexpired. And 30000 li.
granted to James E. Suffolk, shall be paid unto them respectively out of the
several Fonds, on which the same are charged, as the same would have been if
this Indenture had not been made, without any Defalcations, Page. 19. If His
Majesty remit unto E. Anglesey the mean profits and Quit-rents of the Lands in
Bear and Bantry mentioned in his Certificate, reserving the Ancient Crown
rents, from the date of the Certificate until the 25th. December 1670,
reserving only the yearly Rent of one half penny out of every Acre of the said
Lands V. R. etc. shall have no defalcations for the same, Page. 20. If His
Majesty shall pardon or discharge Sir James Shaene and his Estate, from any
suits or demands concerning any Moneys received from His Majesty toward the
Purchase of the Customs of Londonderry, or any other debts, duties, or
arrearages whatsoever, other then the arrears of Quit-rent, Crown-rent, the
years value, or reapplotment of the deficiency thereof. V. R. etc. shall have
no defalcation in respect thereof, Page. 20. If V. R. etc. shall sue in their
own, or His Majesty's name, and thereupon cause any Lands to be seized, or
extended for the Payment of Arrears, the same shall be so done, that no
interruption shall be given to the present Farmers, contrary to His Majesty's
Covenants with them, and they will bear the whole loss without any defalcations
for the same, Page. 20. His Majesty further Covenants, That all the Moneys
which are or shall grow due, or be payable unto His Majesty before the 26th. of
December 1675, shall during the term be brought into the Receipt of the
Exchequer at Dublin, in the usual manner, to the end the same may be applied to
the Uses herein mentioned, Page. 21. His Majesty will commissionate R. V.
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George
Dashwood, to be His Majesty's Officers and Commissioners, to have the sole
custody of all Moneys so brought in, and sole power to receive, (give
discharges for) and issue the same to the Uses of this Indenture, with clauses
therein totally to prohibit any other from intermedling therein during the said
time, Page. 22. All Warrants for payments of any money from the 4th. of August
1671, to the 26th. of December 1675, shall be so made and signed by the Chief
Governor of Ireland, and directed to the said R. V. R. Sir A. B. Sir J. H. J.
B. and G. D. only to the intent they may wholly apply the same to the Uses of
this Indenture, Page. 22. R. V. R. Sir A. B. Sir J. H. J. B. and G. D. will
during the Undertaking, quarterly, or within 40 days after each Quarter, pay
unto the Vice-Treasurer the usual Fees and Profits for any money paid out, as
the Vice-Treasurer ought to receive if such Warrants had been directed to
himself, Page. 22. Further Covenants from R. V. R. etc. Page. 23. All those
from whom any Arrears of Quit-rents are due, shall have the benefit of a Clause
in the Grant to the Farmers of the great Branches, concerning the levying
thereof, and no prosecution shall be made for recovering thereof otherwise than
His Majesty might do, if this Indenture had not been made, Page. 23. No Arrears
of Quit-rents before the 25th. December 1668, shall be demanded for
unprofitable Lands, Page. 23. His Majesty may authorize the Chief Governor and
others to install any other debts or arrears due before 25th. December 1670, so
the same be not above eight half yearly payments, the first to be made the
25th. of December 1671, and none to extend beyond the 24th. of June 1675, and
so the same be not sufficiently secured, Page. 23, and 24. The Power of
Enstallments not to extend to Farmers or Receivers of the Revenue to small
sums, to such who deny or dispute the debt, or refuse without suit to give
security for payment by Enstallments, Page. 24. No suit at Law shall be made
for any debt which is not of Record, or already charged, unless the Chief
Governor be first satisfied that there are probable grounds, and that His
Majesty is justly entitled, and might have sued for the same if this Indenture
had not been made, Page. 24. The Chief Governor to issue Proclamations for
Accomptants within a limited time to come in and clear Accounts, and declaring
to other debtors the favorable Enstallments intended them, and requiring them
to take effectual course to state and secure their respective debts, Page. 25.
R. V. R. etc. shall give unto the Chief Governor and such others as His
Majesty shall appoint, an account of their proceedings in the management of the
premises, and will observe their directions for the better and more easy
execution of the Powers, and accomplishing the ends of this Indenture, Page.
25. Further Covenants and Powers from His Majesty, Page. 25. The general Clause
concerning Defalcations in case of War, Plague, etc. Page. 25. Full power given
to R. V. R. etc. in their own, or His Majesty's name, to sue for, recover, and
take execution for all Debts and Arrears in any of His Majesty's Courts, as His
Majesty by Law, Prerogative, or otherwise might do, if this Indenture were not
made, and to apply the same to the uses undertaken, and to detain the surplus
to their own use, without any account to be therefore rendered to His Majesty in
any wise, Page. 27. Power to R. V. R. etc. their Deputies, Agents, and
Servants, to view, search, examine, and take Copies of all Records, Books,
Papers, or other Memorials, concerning the Premises, without charge or paying
of any Fee for the same, Page. 27. R. V. R. etc. to be freed from all public
employments, which would hinder their attendance on this service, Page. 28. R.
V. R. etc. may at their own cost and charges, have Constats, Exemplifications,
and Duplicates of this Indenture, without any further Order or Direction, Page.
28. His Majesty commands all his Officers and Ministers to be aiding and
assisting to the said R. V. R. etc. in as ample manner as they ought to do unto
His Majesty, if this Indenture had not been made, Page. 28. His Majesty
commands the Judges of the Exchequer to award Writs, and to cause Process to be
executed concerning the premises, Page. 29. His Majesty will give R. V. R.
etc. such further Covenants and Grants as shall be reasonably advised, for the
full and quiet having and enjoying, and such other Powers and Authorities for
levying and collecting the premises, and such aid and assistance from His
Majesty, his Privy Council, Exchequer, Courts of Justice, and all other his
Officers and Ministers, as any Commissioners, Receivers, Collectors, Farmers,
and other Ministers of His Majesty's Revenue in England or Ireland, ever had,
or ought to have, and as in this case shall be thought fit and reasonable,
Page. 30. This Indenture to be enrolled in Ireland within six months, Page. 30.
His Majesty or Chief Governor will after 25th. December 1675, until 25th.
December 1677, authorize R. V. R. etc. to levy, receive, compound, or discharge
all moneys and arrears comprehended in this agreement, which before 25th.
December 1675, shall be brought in charge upon Record, as amply as His Majesty
might if this Indenture were not made, Page. 30, and 31. This Indenture shall
be construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the said R. V. R.
etc. and for the better enabling them to execute and perform this Undertaking,
Page. 31. His Majesty to one part of the Indenture has affixed the Great Seal
of England, and R. V. R. etc. have put their Hands and Seals to the other part,
Page. 31.
1. THIS INDENTVRE made the fourth day of August in the Three and twentieth
year of the Reign of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, The
Preamble of this Indenture dated the 4th of August 1671.
by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King, Defender of
the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini One Thousand six hundred seventy one. Between
the said Kings most Excellent Majesty on the one part, Parties to the Indenture.
and Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh in the Kingdom of Ireland, Sir Alexander
Bence Knight, Sir James Hayes Knight, John Bence of London Esquire, George
Dashwood Esquire, Joseph Dean Esquire, Robert Huntingdon Esquire, John Stepney
Esquire, and Richard Kingdon Esquire, one other part. Recital of a former
Indenture or Grant 12 July 1669. to John Forth and ten others of the great
Branches of the Revenue in Ireland for seven years from 25th. December 1675. at
206250 li. for the year ending the 25th. December 1671. and 219500 li. per
annum the remaining four years.
WHEREAS the great Branches of His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland (that is to
say) the Customs and Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, the Duties of Excise
for Goods Imported, commonly called the Foreign Excise; the Duties of Excise
arising from Beer, Ale, Strong Water, and other Excisable Liquors, commonly
called the Inland Excise; the Duties arising by Hearthmony; the Duties arising
by Licenses to Retail Wines and Strong Water, and by Licenses for Selling Ale
and Beer by Retail; as also all the new Quit-rent given to His Majesty by the
late Acts of Settlement and Explanation, all Chief-rents, and Feefarm-rents,
all Rents, Service-rents, Charge-rents, Seck-rents, reserved upon Leases for
one and twenty years or more, Assart-rents due for Purprestures arented,
Copyhold-rents, and all other certain and ancient Crown-rents yearly payable to
His Majesty within the said Realm of Ireland under several Reservations,
Limitations, and Conditions, therein mentioned, are now in farm by virtue of a
certain Indenture thereof made by His Majesty unto John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
under his Great Seal of England, and bearing date the twelfth day of July, in
the one and twentieth year of His Mjesties Reign, for the terms thereby
granted, which is not to expire until the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord,
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and seventy
five, by which said Indenture of Lease, there is reserved to His Majesty, Two
hundred six thousand, two hundred and fifty pounds, for the year, ending the
five and twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred seventy one, and
the yearly rent of Two hundred and nineteen thousand and five hundred pounds,
from thence to the end of the said term, which ends the five and twentieth day
of December, One Thousand six hundred seventy five; as by the said Indenture,
relation being thereunto had, more at large appears.

Recital of the Patent of Abatements 3 August 1669. to John Forth and eight
others, whereby the Rent reserved for the year ending 25th December. 1671, will
be reduced to 191476 li. 10 s. and to 204500 li. per annum, the remaining four
years.
AND whereas His Majesty by his Letters Patents, bearing date the third day of
August in the one and twentieth year of his Reign, reciting the said former
Indenture of Demise, and the several Rents therein reserved, did for the
considerations therein expressed, Give and Grant unto the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breeden, James Hayes,
Dannett Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors and Assigns
these Sums following (that is to say) out of the Rent payable between the five
and twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
sixty eight, and the five and twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord
One thousand six hundred sixty nine, the sum of Six thousand two hundred fifty
two pounds; and out of the rent payable between the five and twentieth day of
December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty nine, and the
five and twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred and seventy, the sum of Eleven thousand, three hundred seventy eight
pounds; And out of the rent due between the five and twentieth day of December
in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and seventy, and the five and
twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy one, the sum of Fourteen thousand seven hundred seventy three pounds
and ten shillings; And out of the rent due betweeen the five and twentieth day
of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy one, and
the five and twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred seventy five, for every year during the said four last mentioned years,
the yearly sum of Fifteen thousand pounds: By reason of which last mentioned
Grant the rent expressed to be reserved to His Majesty by the said former
Indenture of Demise, will in effect be reduced to One hundred ninety one
thousand four hundred seventy six pounds and ten shillings, for the year ending
the five and twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred seventy one, and for the four years thence next ensuing, the rent
payable by the said Farmers, is in effect reduced to the yearly sum of Two
hundred and four thousand and five hundrd pounds, as in and by the said last
recited Indenture, relation being thereunto had, more at large appears.

AND whereas His Majesty having taken into his Princely consideration the state
of his Revenue in Ireland, His Majesty taking into consideration the state of
his Revenue, and the charge of his Government in Ireland, admits and accepts of
Proposals from Richard Viscount Ranelagh, for himself and others, for the
receiving and issuing his whole Revenue, from the 25th of December 1670; to the
26th of December 1675.
and the charge of his Government there in the Payment of the Civil and
Military Lists according to the several Establishments, together with the great
debts now owing by His Majesty in that Kingdom, as well for the arrears upon
the several establishments, as otherwise, was pleased to admit of such
Proposals to be made to him, as might tend to the advancement and furtherance
of his service there; Whereupon the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, on
behalf of himself and of Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard
Kingdon, did humbly propose to His Majesty that they might be admitted to
receive all His Majesty's certain and casual Revenue in Ireland, Ordinary and
Extraordinary whatsoever, as well in arrear, as what shall any way grow due to
His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, until the six and twentieth day of
December, which shall be in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred
seventy five, including the last rents due for any part of the said Revenue,
for the time then incurred, though not payable till afterward; and that in
consideration thereof they would undertake to defray all His Majesty's growing
charge of his said Kingdom of Ireland, and moreover would pay all the arrears
of the Establishment there, and certain other debts owing by His Majesty in
that Kingdom, hereby agreed to be by them paid and discharged. 2.
And also would pay unto His Majesty for his own use, over and besides the
Undertaking aforesaid, the full sum of Fourscore thousand pounds in such manner
and form, and with such Limitations and Restrictions as are herein after more
particularly expressed and declared; All which His Majesty has thought fit to
accept, and does by these Presents declare his gracious acceptance thereof, and
agreement thereunto, to the end therefore that the said Proposal and Agreements
may attain their full and due effect.

Now this Indenture witnesses, The Body of this Indenture. The chief Covenants
in the present Indenture from His Majesty to the Viscount Ranelagh and his
Partners, and the consideration thereof.
That it is covenanted and agreed by and between the parties to these Presents:
AND FIRST His Majesty in consideration of the Covenants and Agreements,
Provisoes and Exceptions, herein after mentioned, and on the part of the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, to be done and performed, And to the end the same may be the
better performed and brought to their due effect; and for several other good
causes and considerations His Majesty thereunto especially moving; of his
especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, is graciously pleased to
covenant and agree, and by these presents, for Himself, his Heirs and
Successors, does covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
and every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators in manner following (that is to say) That from and after the
date of these presents, From the 4th of August (71) to the 26th of December
(75) all His Majesty's Rents and Arrears of the great Branches of the Revenue,
His Majesty's Treasure and ready Money, which are or shall be in the Treasury,
or due by Impressed or otherwise, and all other His Majesty's Revenue during the
said time shall be issued out and applied only to the uses undertaken by R. V.
Ranelagh and his Partners, except what shall be requisite to defray the charges
of this Undertaking.
and during and until the six and twentieth day of December, which shall be in
the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred and Seventy five, all and every
the arrears of Rent reserved upon the present Farms, or Demises of the great
Branches of His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, or any of them, and all and every
the growing Rents, which upon or before the said Five and twentieth day of
December, in the year of our Lord One Thousand six Hundred Seventy five, shall
or may grow due or payable, including the last Rents and Payments for the said
Revenue, which shall incurr and grow due during the said Term, though not
payable till after the end of the said Term; And all and every the Rents and
Sums of Money, which by virtue of the said present Farms or Demises, His
Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, is, or at any time hereafter can, or may be
entitled unto; And also all His Majesty's Treasure and ready Money, which upon
the day of the date of these presents is, or at any time after the date of
these Presents, and during the term aforesaid shall be found in His Majesty's
Treasury in Ireland, or shall be any ways due and owing to His Majesty in that
Kingdom by Impressed or otherwise; And all other His Majesty's Revenue in
Ireland Certain and Casual, Ordinary and Extraordinary, shall from time to time
during the term aforesaid, be Issued out, and applied to such Uses, Intents,
and Purposes, and in such order and manner, and at such times only, as the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, Have herein after Covenanted, Agreed, and Undertaken to see
done, executed and performed, and to no other uses, intents, or purposes
whatsoever, except what shall be fit and requisite to defray the necessary
Charges and Expenses of this Present Undertaking. The Monyes which are or shall
be received by his Majesty's Vice-Treasurer, or paid to any within the
Establishment shall be accepted as so much of the growing charge of the year
commencing from the last of December (70)


AND, If any Sum or Sums of Money have been, or shall be received by His
Majesty's Vice-Treasurer of Ireland, on or since the Five and twentieth day of
December last past before the date hereof, or have been, or shall be on or
after the said Five and Twentieth day of December, issued and paid out to any
person or persons comprehended within the Martial or Civil Lists, according to
the several and respective Establishments, all Payments so made or to be made,
and all Moneys so received and issued out shall be deemed and taken, and so are
hereby declared to be accepted, as Moneys issued out for the discharging and
answering so much of the growing charge of this present year, R. V. R. etc.
shall not be obliged to defray more of the first years charge then would remain
to be answered if the Moneys received and paid by His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer
since the 25th of December (70) had been duly and wholly applied to the
necessary charges of the year, commencing from the last of December (70)
commencing upon the last day of December last past; And the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
shall not be obliged to answer and defray any more of the charge of this
present year commencing as aforesaid, then what will remain to be answered and
defrayed, if the Moneys received and paid by His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer since
the Five and twentieth day of December last past, had been duly and wholly
applied to the necessary charges of this present year commencing as aforesaid,
nor shall they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence,
Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, V. R. etc. Shall have no
defalcations for Moneys which from the 25th of December (70) to the 4th of
August (71) have been applied to the uses only before undertaken.
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or any of
them, or any Person or Persons claiming by, from, or under them, or any of
them, ask, demand, or have, any Defalcation, or abatement of the Sums agreed
to be paid by these Presents, for, or in respect of any Sums of Money which
since the five and twentieth day of December now last past, and before the date
of these presents have been applied to such uses, intents, and purposes only,
as are herein before undertaken to be performed.

And, His Majesty, for Himself, His Heirs, and Successors, does further
Covenant, Grant, and Agree to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh,
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney and Richard Kingdon, and every of them,
their and every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these
Presents, that there shall be from time to time, such and so many Commissions
issued out under His Majesty's Great Seal of England or Ireland, Such
Commissions shall be issued under the great Seal of England or Ireland, and
directed to V.R. etc. or such others as they shall desire, Authorizing them as
his Majesty's Officers to manage, receive, compound for, and discharge his
whole Revenue (not pardoned or granted away before the 25th of December (70) as
well in arreare, on, or before that day, and yet unpaid, as which shall any way
grow due before the 26th of December (75) including the payments which shall be
due for the time incurred before the said day, though payable after.
and directed to them the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors, or Survivor of
them, or the Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, or such other
able, discreet, and fit persons, as they shall humbly desire, which Commissions
so to be issued out, shall sufficiently Authorize, and Empower the persons
therein to be named, to act as His Majesty's Officers, as shall be found
necessary to be done in the managing, and for the better and more speedy
Levying, Collecting, Suing for, Recovering and Receiving, or otherwise
Compounding for, and Discharging of all and every His Majesty's Rents,
Revenues, Profits, Duties, Incomes, Certain and Casual, Ordinary and
Extraordinary whatsoever in the Kingdom of Ireland, not remitted or Pardoned,
or otherwise granted away and disposed before the Five and Twentieth day of
December now last past, as well such as upon or before the said Five and
twentieth day of December now last past were in arreare and are yet unpaid, as
such as from and after the said time until the Six and Twentieth day of
December which shall be in the year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Seventy and Five, were or shall be by any matter of Record or otherwise
howsoever due, owing or payable to His Majesty, or which might or ought to have
been, or may before the said Six and Twentieth day of December, in the year of
our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy Five, be Taxed, Levied, Collected,
Recovered, Answered for, Paid or Payable to His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors out of, or for any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in Ireland, or
all or any the Estates, real, or personal of any person or persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, or otherwise by reason of any Tax, Assessment, Subsidy,
Impositions, Contract, Covenant, Agreement, Account, Debt, Duty, Sum or Sums of
Money, matter or thing imposed, made or issued, or which did, or shall arise or
grow due within the said Kingdom of Ireland before the said six and twentieth
day of December, in the year of Our Lord, one Thousand six Hundred Seventy
Five, including the Rents, Duties and Payments which shall be due for the time
incurred before the six and twentieth day of December One thousand Six hundred
seventy Five, though the same may be payable, or Installments made, or time
given for the Payment thereof after that day.

The said Powers to such Commissioners shall not enable them to interrupt the
Farmers of the great Branches in mannaging the Revenue under their charge, nor
to receive any Money which shall be due to His Majesty by any future Act of
Parliament.
PROVIDED always that the Powers and Authorities to be given unto such
Commissioners so to be nominated, shall not enable them to give any disturbance
or interruption unto the present Farmers of the great Branches of His Majesty's
Revenue herein beforementioned, or unto any of their Officers or Servants in
the Collecting and bringing in those parts of the Revenue which are under their
charge; nor to receive any sum or sums of Money, or other Annual Rent or
Payments, which by virtue of any Act of Parliament to be passed after the date
of these Presents, and before the said six and twentieth day of December in the
year of our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Seventy Five, shall, or may grow due
or payable to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors. All which Sums of Money
last mentioned must be understood, and so are hereby declared to be out of the
Covenants and Agreements herein contained wholly excepted and foreprized.

3.
PROVIDED also, that neither the Moneys called Lapsed Moneys, Neither the Lapsed
Money, Lands in lieu thereof, or the 30000 l. payable for the same, nor the
English arrears, or Lands set out for the same, nor the mean profits due for
Lands set out on the Dublin Ordinances, and already disposed of by the Act of
Explanation, shall be comprehended in these Agreements.
nor the forfeited Land in lieu thereof, nor the Thirty Thousand pounds payable
by the Roman Catholics of Ireland for the same, nor the Moneys called the
English-Arreares, nor the Land set out for the same, nor the Arreares, nor
Meane-Profits due for Land set out upon the Dublin-Ordinances, and already
disposed by the late Explanatory Act, shall be comprehended in these Covenants
or Agreements, nor any defalcation allowed for, or in respect of the same.

The said Commissioners shall receive and enjoy all the said arrears and
growing Revenue, which is, or shall be in charge, or discovered, and other the
premises, subject to the Limitations and restrictions herein expressed, and no
other.
AND His Majesty for Himself, His Heirs and Successors, does further Covenant
and Grant to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and every of them, their and
every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators by these Presents, that the
said Commissioners so to be nominated and appointed as aforesaid, shall and may
have, receive, take, and enjoy the full benefit and advantage of all the said
Arreares now due to his Majesty, and all the growing Revenues now in Charge, or
which hereafter may be in charge or discovered, and other the Premises subject
to such Limitations and Restrictions, as are herein expressed and no other.

And this Indenture further Witnesses, The chief Covenants in this Indenture
from R. V Ranelagh, and his Partners, to his Majesty, and the considerations
thereof.
That in consideration of the Covenants and Agreements herein before mentioned,
and on the part of his Majesty to be done and performed; It is Covenanted,
Granted, Concluded, Condescended, and Agreed by and between the Parties to
these Presents.

AND the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, for themselves, their Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them do Covenant, Grant and Agree, to and with His
said Most Excellent Majesty, His Heirs and Successors in manner and form
following; V. R. etc. shall within 14 days after Warrants signed, and directed
to them, defray so much of His Majesty's expense of Ireland, which from the
last of December. (70) to the 4th of August (71) ought (according to the
Establishment to have been borne by His Majesty, if this Indenture had not been
made.
that is to say, that they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, shall within the space of
fourteen days after Warrants duly signed, and to them directed, fully and
duly answer, defray, satisfy, discharge and Pay, or cause to be fully and
duly answered, defrayed, satisfied, discharged, and paid, so much of His
Majesty's whole charge and expense of the Kingdom of Ireland, which from the
last day of December last past, unto the day of the date of these presents,
ought according to the Establishment to have been born and discharged by His
Majesty, if this present Indenture had not been made.

AND MOREOVER, shall and will from time to time, VR. etc. shall from the 4th of
August (71) to (26) of Dec. (75) defray all the Expenses of Ireland, according
to the Establishments, as otherwise which by His Majesty ought to have been
borne, if this Indenture had not been made, and cause the same to be paid by
equal proportions within 40 days after the end of every Quarter, as the same
shall respectively grow due. The Moneys to be paid for such expenses, are not
in any one year to exceed 171843 l. 5 s. 6 d. (out of which the Fees and
Cheques are to be deducted) And there are to be due and legal Warrants signed
for the issuing thereof.
and at all times from and after the date of these Presents until the six and
twentieth day of December, which shall be in the Year of our Lord One thousand
Six hundred Seventy Five, fully and duly answer, defray, satisfy, discharge
and pay, or cause to be fully and duly answered, defrayed, satisfied,
discharged and paid all and singular the Charges and Expenses of His Majesty's
said Kingdom of Ireland, as well in the Payment of the Civil and Military
Lists, there, according to their several and respective Establishments, which
are, or shall be made by His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, as otherwise
which by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors ought to have been borne,
defrayed and discharged, if this present Indenture had not been made, and shall
cause the same from time to time, to be satisfied and paid by equal
Proportions, within forty days after the end of every Quarter, as the same
shall respectively grow due; and the Payments thereof to be made in good,
lawful, and current money of England, or such lawful and current money in
Ireland as may be equivalent in Ireland to so much English money as shall then
be due, so always that the money to be paid and Issued out for such Charges
and expenses as aforesaid, do not in any one year exceed the sum of One
Hundred Seventy one thousand eight hundred forty three pounds five Shillings
and six pence, out of which the Fees and Cheques are to be deducted, and so as
that there be due and legal Warrants signed for the issuing and payment
thereof from time to time

If (after 25th. December 1670, and before 26th December 1675, any Cheques of
Pay made or to be made by reason of absence, want, or unserviceableness of
Horse or Arms, or neglect of duty, the Chief Governor may lessen or remit any
such Cheques, so the same be done within three months after the Muster Rolls
shall be closed, and before any Warrants of Pay be issued upon such Muster
Rolls, Duplicates whereof are to be returned to V. R. etc.
PROVIDED always that if at any time after the five and twentieth day of
December now last past, or before the six and twentieth day of December which
shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five, any
Cheques of Pay have been or shall be made by His Majesty's sworn Officers, for
or by reason of the absence of any Officer or Soldier from his Command, want of
Horse or Arms, or by reason of their being unserviceable or otherwise
neglecting their duties, then and in every such case, it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors
of Ireland for the time being, from time to time, and as often as he or they
shall see cause to reduce and lessen, or otherwise totally to remit, any
Cheques of Pay which have been or shall be made for any the causes aforesaid,
so as such reducement, lessening, or remission, be within the space of three
months next after the Muster Roll are or shall be closed, and before any
Warrants of Pay be made or issued upon such Muster-Roll; Duplicates whereof are
from time to time to be returned unto the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh,
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, who shall pay and
satisfy to every Soldier or other, so much pay as by virtue of the said
Military List he ought to receive after such reduction or remission, made, any
thing herein before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

AND the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, for themselves, their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and every of them, have covenanted and granted, and by these
presents do covenant and grant to and with our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, that they the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney and Richard Kingdon, or the
Survivors or Survivor of them, V. R. etc. shall within four years after 25th
December 1671, discharge the Arrears which on the 25th of December 1670, were
unpaid according to the estab^ishment, to any in the Military and Civil Lists,
and to the Train of Artillery.
or the Heirs, Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall and
will within the space of four years, to commence from the five and twentieth
day of December next ensuing the date of these presents, fully discharge,
satisfy and pay, or cause to be fully discharged, satisfied, and paid, all and
every the Arrears of Pay which at or upon the five and twentieth day of
December last past, before the date hereof were behind and unpaid to any person
or persons comprehended in the Martial or Military List, according to the
Establishment.

AND also all and every the Arrears of Pay, Wages, Sallary, or Pension then due
to any person or persons comprehended within the Civil List, according to the
said Establishment.

AND also all Arrears whatsoever then due to His Majesty's Train of Artillery
in Ireland, and shall cause due satisfaction and payment thereof to be made
within the time aforesaid, And shall cause due payment to be made of the said
Arrears within the said time by even and equal portions, without composition or
deduction (the Fees and Cheques excepted) the first payment whereof shall begin
and be made the 24th of December 1672.

His Majesty shall be discharged from all such arrear, so as the same
(deducting the Fees and Cheques) exceed not for the Military List, 139001 li.
11 s. 4 d. for the Civil List 4000 li. and for the Train of Artillery 1147 li.


and by even and equal portions, and in good, lawful, and current English
money, or so much lawful and current money of Ireland, as shall be equivalent
in Ireland to English money, without any composition, defalcation, or other
deduction whatsoever (the usual Fees and Cheques only excepted) the first
payment whereof shall begin and be made at or before the four and twentieth day
of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy and two.
AND His Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors shall be for ever acquitted, and at
all times hereafter exonerated and discharged of and from all such Arrears then
due upon the said Civil and Military Lists, according to their several and
respective Establishments, and of and from every part and parcel thereof, so as
such Arrears of Pay then due upon the Military List, and to be hereafter
satisfied and discharged within the time, and according to the proportions
aforesaid, do not in the whole exceed the sum of One hundred thirty nine
thousand and one pound, eleven shillings and four pence, deducting the Fees and
Cheques, and so as the Arrears then due upon the Civil Lists, as aforesaid, do
not in the whole exceed the sum of Four thousand pounds, and so as the Arrears
then due to the Train of Artillery, do not in the whole exceed the sum of
Eleven hundred forty seven pounds.

4.
AND MOREOVER the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, V. R. etc. shall before 25th December 1675, discharge
(without any abatement except the Fees) so much of these sums as on the 4th of
August 1671 shall be unpaid unto these persons and uses; li. The present
Farmers, 70,000. Sir William Bucknall, 11,500. Londonderry Customs, 4000.
Phoenix Park, 10,000. Patrick Archer, 6294. Arms and Ammunition 6076. Moiety
of the Ten months arrears, 20,394. 19 s. Earl Anglesey, 2500. Coll. Lanes
Daughters, 6000. Earl Arlington, 6250. Michael Archbishop of Dublin, 2500.
Fran. and Eliz. Jones, 3500. John St. Ledger 400. Rachell Vicountess Falkland,
3000


George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard
Kingdon, for themselves, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every
of them, have covenanted and granted, and by these presents do further covenant
and grant to and with our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, that they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of
them, or the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall
and will before the five and twentieth day of December, which shall be in the
year of our Lord One thousand six hundred and seventy five, fully and truly
discharge, satisfy, and pay all and every the debts, duties, and sums of money
hereinafter mentioned, or so much thereof as on the day of the date of these
presents shall be behind and unpaid; that is to say, the Seventy thousand
pounds advanced by the present Farmers of the great Branches of His Majesty's
Revenue in Ireland, herein beforementioned; And also the moneys lately lent
unto His Majesty by Sir William Bucknall Knight, and secured by a Patent
bearing date at Westminster the five and twentieth day of November in the one
and twentieth year of his Reign; so as the same for Principal and Interest do
not exceed the sum of Eleven thousand and five hundred pounds; And also the
Four thousand pounds due from His Majesty for the purchase of the Customs of
Londonderry; And also the moneys due for the purchase made by His Majesty of
certain Lands lately enclosed in the Park called the Phoenix Park, so as the
same do not exceed the sum of Ten thousand pound; And also the Six thousand two
hundred ninety four pound due to Patrick Archer; And also the Six thousand
seventy six pound due for Arms and Ammunition sent from England unto Ireland;
And also that Moiety of the ten months Arrears due to the Army in Ireland,
during the time of the Government of the late Lord Justices, that is to say,
the late Lord Chancellor Eustace, the Earl of Orrery, and the late Earl of
Mountrath, so as the said moiety of ten months Arrears do not in the whole
exceed the sum of Twenty thousand three hundred ninety four pounds and nineteen
shillings; And also the Two thousand and five hundred pounds due to the Earl of
Anglesey out of forfeited Recognizances; And also the sum of Six thousand pound
due to the Daughters of Colonel Lane; And also the sum of Six thousand two
hundred and fifty pounds, being the remainder of Ten thousand pounds heretofore
granted by His Majesty unto Henry Lord Arlington, one of His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State; which said sum of Six thousand two hundred and
fifty pounds is to be fully and effectually paid unto the said Henry Lord
Arlington, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, without any abatement or
defalcation; And also the sum of Two thousand five hundred pounds unto Michael
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, and Lord Chancellor of Ireland; And also the sum of
Three thousand and five hundred pound unto Francis and Elizabeth Jones,
Grandchildren of Roger, late Viscount Ranelagh, to be equally divided between
them; And also the sum of Four hundred pound unto John St. Ledger Esquire, which
last sum of Four hundred pound is to be paid out of the moneys remaining due
upon the Balance of George Carletons account, late Clerk of the Hannaper in
Ireland; And also the sum of Three thousand pound granted by His Majesty unto
Rachell Vice-Countesse of Falkland out of the Prize-goods

of all and every which debts and sums of money herein beforementioned, due
payment and satisfaction is to be made in good and lawful money of England, or
such lawful and current money of Ireland, as may in Ireland be equivalent
thereunto, and that without any composition, abatement, defalcation, or other
deduction whatsoever, the usual Fees therefore payable only excepted.

AND His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, shall be for ever acquitted and at
all times hereafter exonerated and discharged, or otherwise saved harmless and
indempnified, of and from all and every the said Arrears, debts, and sums of
money herein beforementioned, and of and from every part and parcel thereof,
and of and from all defalcations out of the sums herein agreed to be paid unto
His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for or by reason thereof.

AND WHEREAS the late Farmers of His Majesty's Customs in Ireland, and of the
Excise there for goods imported, Whereas the late Farmers of the Customs,
Excise, imported and Inland, and Licenses of Ale, Beer, Wine, etc. demand
defalcations, by reason of the war with the United Provinces, during two years
and three quarters of their respective Farms, V. R. etc. shall either come to
an agreement with them for the same, or cause their demands in respect thereof
to be examined and settled, and take upon themselves the whole loss of the
defalcations, which upon such agreement or examination shall be allowed, and
discharge His Majesty from the same.
and also of the Excise arising upon Beer, Ale, and other Excisable Liquors,
and of all other the Foreign and Inland Excise there, and of the Revenue
arising by Licenses to retail Ale and Beer, and Licenses to retail Wine, Aqua
vitae, and Strong Water there, were very much interrupted and hindered from
receiving the benefit of their respective Farms, during two years and three
quarters of their several Leases, by reason of the late war with the States of
the United Provinces, which continued during all that time, and do therefore
demand several abatements and defalcations of rent in respect thereof,

NOW the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have covenanted and granted, and by these
presents, for themselves, their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and every
of them, do further covenant and grant to and with His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, that they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of
them, shall and will forthwith either come to an agreement with the said late
Farmers touching the premises, or cause all and every the demand of the said
late Farmers touching or concerning the defalcations, as aforesaid, to be
examined, answered, adjusted, and settled; And shall and will take upon him or
themselves the whole loss and damage of such defalcations, which upon such
agreement or examination shall be thought fit to be allowed, and thereof, and
of every part and parcel thereof, and of all claims and demands, for or
concerning the same, shall and will from time to time and at all times
hereafter, for ever acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or otherwise save
harmless and indempnifie His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and every of
them.

AND MOREOVER the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, V. R. etc. shall (over
and above the said sums, payments, and discharges) within two years, to
commence from the 25th of December. 1675, pay unto His Majesty 80000 li. by four
equal portions, half yearly.
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and every of them,
have covenanted, granted, and agreed, and by these presents for themselves, and
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators,
for the causes and considerations aforesaid, do covenant, grant and agree, to
and with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, and every
of them, that they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of
them, or the Heirs, Executors, or Administrators of the Survivor of them, over
and above all and every the debts, duties, and sums of money herein before
covenanted to be paid, and over and above all and every the payment and
discharges herein before covenanted to be made, shall and will also within the
space of two years to commence from the five and twentieth day of December,
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five,
satisfy and pay, or cause to be satisfied and paid unto our said Sovereign
Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, at his or their Receipt of Exchequer at
Dublin, the full sum of Fourscore thousand pound, by four equal portions half
yearly, that is to say, at or before the four and twentieth day of June in the
year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy six, the full sum of Twenty
thousand pounds; And at or before the five and twentieth day of December in the
year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy six, the further sum of
Twenty thousand pounds more; And at or before the four and twentieth day of
June in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy seven, the
further sum of Twenty thousand pounds more; And at or before the five and
twentieth day of December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy seven, the further sum of Twenty thousand pounds more, in full of the
whole Fourscore thousand pounds, so covenanted and agreed to be paid as
aforesaid.

Further Covenants from His Majesty, That V. R. etc. (performing their
Covenants) shall enjoy the whole surplus of the Revenue to their own use,
without any further, or other account, matter, or thing, to be given to His
Majesty; and are hereby acquitted and discharged against His Majesty of all
accounts and demands, which can or may be made concerning the same.
AND they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the
Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, well and truly performing,
fulfilling, doing, and executing all and singular the Covenants and Agreements
in these presents contained, which on the part and behalf of them the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of the Survivor of them 5.
ought to be done, performed, fulfilled, and executed, shall and may have,
hold, receive, retain, keep, and enjoy, the whole surplus and residue of all or
any the said Revenues, Profits, sums of money, and other the premises so as
aforesaid to be collected and received to their own sole and proper use and
behoof, without any further or other account, matter, or thing, to His Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, to be therefore rendered or given, but shall be, and
hereby are fully and clearly and absolutely acquitted, exonerated, and
discharged against His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, of and from, and
concerning all accounts or other demands whatsoever, which can or may be made
touching or concerning the same.

AND His Majesty for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, does further covenant,
grant, and agree, to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, The Commission for
Enquiry into arrears due to His Majesty, is superseded.
THAT WHEREAS a Commission under His Majesty's Great Seal of England has
lately issued, and is still depending, impowering certain Commissioners therein
named, to proceed in the enquiry into all arrears now due and owing to His
Majesty, that all further Proceedings upon the said Commission shall be stayed,
and the Commission it self shall be and is hereby declared to be superseded.

AND His Majesty, for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, All respits of Quit
rents and other sums of money due to His Majesty, are declared void and
determined.
does further covenant with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, that whereas diverse
Quit-rents and other sums of money due and payable to His Majesty, have by
Order of His Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Dublin, or by Order of the
Council Board there, or otherwise been respited, that all such Respits
howsoever granted, shall cease; and are hereby declared to be void and
determined.

AND His Majesty for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, The Composition with
the 49 Officers for the moiety of their 100000 li. payable out of the years va
ue, shall not be obstructed or delayed, but perfected as begun and intended,
and the whole benefit and advantage thereby to His Majesty, shall be enjoyed by
the said V. R. etc.
does further covenant, grant, and agree, to and with the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
That whereas also the Commissioned Officers who served His Majesty or His Royal
Father before the year One thousand six hundred forty nine, are by virtue of
the Act of Explanation entitled to the sum of One hundred thousand pound,
therein mentioned and charged upon a Fond, commonly called the years value,
which said Officers have by themselves or their Agents, begun and entered into
a Treaty of Composition with His Majesty, thereby offering to assign unto His
Majesty one half of the moneys to them respectively due, in hope of a better
and more speedy payment of the other half; that the said Composition shall in
no sort be interrupted, hindered, obstructed, or delayed by Him or any of his
Officers or Ministers, but perfected as begun and intended; and that the whole
benefit or advantage which can or may pertain, arise, or accrue to His Majesty
thereby, shall be received, taken, held, and enjoyed by them the said Richard
Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard
Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of the Survivor.

AND WHEREAS also in and by the said Act of Explanation it is provided, that if
the moneys to be raised as aforesaid, His Majesty will direct the Chief
Governor and Council in Ireland to reapplot and levy upon the Lands of Ireland
whatsoever the years value shall be found deficient of the 300000 li. and cause
the same to be effectually done, as by the Act of Explanation is appointed,
allowing four years time for the payment thereof half yearly at Michaelmas and
Easter, the last payment to be made at or before the 29t^ f September 1675.
should fall short of Three hundred thousand pounds, then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors,
and Council of Ireland, for the time being, to tax and assess upon all the
Lands in Ireland, so much more money as together with what has been before
raised and allowed by virtue of the said Act, should make up the full and just
sum of Three hundred thousand pound Sterling; since the passing of which Act,
it has been found by experience, that the Three hundred thousand pounds so
appointed to be raised, is not nor ever can be raised without a general
Taxation and Assessment of and upon all the Lands there.

IN ORDER whereunto His Majesty has heretofore by his several Letters directed
unto the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor and Council of Ireland (for
the time being) commanded them to proceed in the speedy rating and assessing
all the Lands in Ireland, that so the full sum of Three hundred thousand pounds
might be raised and completed, as by the said Act is directed. His Majesty
does hereby, for Himself, His Heirs and Successors, further covenant and agree,
to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Robert Huntingdon, Joseph Deane, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and every of them, that His Majesty shall and
will forthwith renew and direct other Letters unto the Chief Governor or
Governors, and Council of Ireland, thereby commanding them forthwith to
reassess, reapplot, and levy upon the Lands of Ireland, whatsoever shall be
found deficient of the Three hundred thousand pounds, so as aforesaid appointed
to be raised, and to cause the same effectually to be done, as by the said Act
is appointed; Nevertheless with this moderation and clemency toward his said
Subjects, and with this Declaration of his grace and favor to them, That they
may and shall be allowed Four years time for the payment thereof at every
Michaelmas and Easter during the said four years, by even and equal portions,
the last payment whereof to be made at or before the nine and twentieth day of
September One thousand six hundred seventy five.

Provisees, Limitations, and Restrictions.

Nothing herein is to restrain His Majesty's Prerogative to pardon Offenders,
or to remit or reduce forfeited Recognizances of the Peace, good behavior,
appearances, or other particulars of the Green-wax, or Fines and Forfeitures
against the Laws, or Outlawries (other then what relates to the Revenue) unless
the (...) for which (...) same shall ^^^pen, with the c^st^ and charges be
fully satisfie^) but his Majesty may exercise hi^ Royal Authority in such C^s^^
as amply as this Indentur^ had not been made, And His Majesty may issue
Commissi^n^ for reducement of such sums of money as has be (...) accustomed,
(...) as the sums due to His Majesty after such reducements, or levied by his
Officers shall be paid to V. R. etc.


PROVIDED always, and so it is hereby declared and agreed, that nothing in this
present Indenture contained, shall be expounded or taken, or shall any way
extend to hinder, weaken, lessen, or restrain His Majesty's Royal Authority,
Power, and Prerogative, of pardoning any Offender or Offenders Criminal or
Capital, or in the remitting, releasing, reducing, or otherwise suspending or
mitigating any forfeited Recognizances concerning the Peace or good Behavior,
or concerning appearances or any other Particulars under the Survay of the
Green-wax; or in the remitting, pardoning, or discharging any Fines or
forfeitures whch are or shall be incurred, for or by reason of any offense
committed, done, or suffered against the Penal Laws or Statutes of His
Majesty's Realm of Ireland, or against the Common Laws of the Land, or in the
remitting, pardoning, and discharging of any Outlawries which already are, or
hereafter shall be incurred, or any Forfeitures or Penalties by reason thereof,
other then such Outlawries, Penalties, and Forfeitures, as are or shall be
incurred, or due by reason or occasion of any Suit commenced, or to be
commenced, touching or concerning any matter or thing relating to any part of
His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland; or in the remitting, pardoning, or
discharging any of those Outlawries, Penalties, or Forfeitures which have been
or shall be incurred for matters concerning His Majesty's Revenue as aforesaid,
from and after such time as the Duty, for non-payment whereof any such
Outlawry, Penalty, or Forfeiture did or shall happen, together with the Costs
and Charges expended in the prosecution thereof, shall be fully satisfied and
discharged, but that it shall and may be lawful to and for His Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors to use and exercise his and their Power, Prerogative, and
Authority Royal in all and every the Cases aforesaid, as fully and amply, as he
or they might have done if this present Indenture had never been had nor made,
any thing herein before contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also, and so it is hereby declared and agreed, that it shall and may
be lawful to and for His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, at any time or
times after the date of these presents, to issue out such and so many
Commissions unto such person and persons as shall be thought fit, thereby
impowering and authorizing them to make such reducements and abatements of the
sums of money owing, or which hereafter shall grow due unto His Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, as they shall think fit, and has formerly been accustomed
in like Cases; so always that all and singular such sum and sums of money which
from and after such reducement shall be due and payable to His Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or which after such reducements or other lawful deductions
and allowances made, as aforesaid, shall be levied or received by any of His
Majesty's Officers, shall forthwith be answered and paid over unto the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors or
Administrators of the Survivor of them, any thing herein before contained to
the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

PROVIDED also, and so it is hereby declared and agreed, His Majesty may demise
or grant for any Estate his Royal Mines, and any Messuages, Houses, Manors,
Castles, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in Ireland, yet undisposed of, or
whereunto His Majesty's Title, shall hereafter appear; so as such rent be
reserved thereupon as may be at least equivalent to the new Quit-rents, or the
Ancient Crown Rent, if it exceed the Quit-rent, and no arrears of Quit-rent or
mean profits be discharged.
that it shall and may be lawful to and for His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, from time to time and at all times hereafter, to give, grant,
demise, lease or confirm, unto any person or persons, all and every or any of
His Majesty's Royal Mines within the said Kingdom of Ireland, 6.
and also any Messuages, Houses, Manors, Castles, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments within the Realm of Ireland, which are yet undisposed, or
whereunto His Majesty's Right and Title shall at any time hereafter be made to
appear, for such Estate or Estates as His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
shall think fit, whether the same be an Estate of Inheritance, Freehold, or
term of years, or any other less Estate, so as upon every such Gift, Grant,
Demise, Lease, or Conformation, such Rents may always be reserved, as may be
at least equivalent and proportionable to the new Quit-rents, which by the late
Acts of Settlement and Explanation are payable by Adventurers and Soldiers, or
to the Ancient Crown Rents therefore payable, where the Ancient Crown Rents
shall exceed the proportion of the new Quit-rents, and so also that no arrears
or mean profits due thereupon, be any way remitted, released, or discharged,
any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: If His
Majesty grant any Lands, etc. to the uses of the Declaration 30th November
1660, (other then to such, or in trust to such who formerly received the issues
and profits thereof) the same shall be freed from arrears of Quit-rent and mean
profits due before 25th December 1668, and V. R. etc. shall not molest the
Grantees nor the Lands granted, but may take their remedy for the same against
the former Enjoyers or Pervors of the profits of such Lands, etc.
And if His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall at any time hereafter, for
the better promoting the uses, intents, or purposes of His Majesty's late
gracious Declaration of the Thirtieth of November in the year One thousand six
hundred and sixty, give, grant, or demise, any Messuages, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, to any person or persons, other then to such
person or persons, their heirs or assigns, or to any in trust for him or them,
or to his or their use who formerly received the issues and profits thereof;
Then and in every such case all and every the Messuages, Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, so to be given, granted, demised, or disposed, as
aforesaid, shall be freed, exonerated and discharged, of and from all
arrearages of Quit-rent and mean profits grown due, incurred, or accrued upon
or before the Five and twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred sixty eight.

AND the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, nor the Survivors nor Survivor of them, nor the
Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, shall in any sort vex or
molest or disquiet any such person or persons, to whom any Lands or Tenements
shall be granted or disposed as aforesaid, nor the Lands or Tenements so
granted or disposed, for or in respect of any such arrears of Quit-rents or
mean profits, but shall and may pursue and take such other remedy for recovery
thereof, in His Majesty's Name, or in their own Names, against the former
Tenants and Enjoyers of the said Lands and Tenements, or the Pervors of the
profits thereof, as they shall be advised, and by their Council learned in the
Law, Further Covenants from V. R. etc. to His Majesty.
shall be thought expedient; And the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have covenanted and
granted, and by these presents, for themselves and every of them, their and
every of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, do covenant, grant, and
agree, to and with our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, That all and every the Farmers of the great Branches of His
Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, The Farmers of the great Branches of the Revenue,
and those concerned in the Patent of Abatements and all other Farmers, by
virtue of any Grant under the Great Seal before 25th. December 1670, may (under
their respective Articles, Covenants, Conditions, and Provisoes) enjoy their
several Farms, according to the tenor thereof, without any let of V. R. etc.
by virtue of a Lease thereof made the twelfth day of June, in the One and
twentieth year of His Majesty's Reign, and herein beforementioned; And also
such of the said Farmers who are again mentioned in His Majesty's Letters
Patents bearing date the third day of August, in the said One and twentieth
year of His Majesty's Reign, herein before recited; and all other Farmers, by
virtue of any Grant under the Great Seal of England or Ireland, before the five
and twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
and seventy, shall and may under the Articles, Covenants, Conditions, and
Provisoes mentioned in their several Grants, peaceably and quietly have, hold
and enjoy their several and respective Grants and Farms, according to the tenor
and purport thereof, and the full benefit of all sums of money therein granted
and demised, without any let or interruption of them the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
or any of them, or of any other person or persons claiming by, from, or under
them. And further, V. R. etc. shall not demand defalcations for any sums which
are or shall be allowed to such Farmers for the two years ending 25th December.
1670, or for or in respect of any other matters or things settled and determined
before that time, in pursuance of, and according to such Grants, or for any
pretensions of the said Farmers upon the 9th of June 1671, depending in the
Exchequer at Dublin for defalcations for Lands in Certificate and not past in
Letters Patents, or for the Composition Rents, which way soever the same shall
be determined.

The defalcations which may hereafter be pretended unto by the said Farmers,
shall be only determined in such way as by their several Agreements is
appointed.


that neither they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, nor any of them, nor any other
person or persons claiming or to claim, by, from, or under them or any of them,
shall or will at any time or times hereafter, ask, demand, receive, or have any
Abatement or Defalcations, for or in respect of any sum or sums of money which
are or shall be allowed or given to such Farmers, by virtue or color of such
Leases or Grants, for or in respect of the two years ending the five and
twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred and seventy, or for or in
respect of any other matters or things settled and determined before the said
time, in pursuance of, and according to such Grants respectively, or for or in
respect of any pretensions of the said Farmers, upon the ninth day of June, One
thousand six hundred seventy one, depending in the Court of Exchequer at
Dublin, for Defalcations for Lands in Certificate not passed in Letters
Patents, or for the Composition Rents, which way soever the same is or shall be
determined; And moreover all and every the Defalcations which may hereafter be
pretended unto by the said Farmers or any of them, shall be solely and only
determined, in such way and manner as by the several agreements relating
thereunto, was and is appointed, any thing in these presents, before or after
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

V. R. etc. shall allow the usual Enstallments for payment of First Fruits or
Twentieth parts; And will be concluded by the values made, or to be made by the
Commissioners, now or hereafter to be appointed under the great Seal; And His
Majesty, in case any defect of the Commissions, will give order for renewing
and rectifying the same, and for proceeding thereupon in as ample manner as His
Majesty might have done, if this Indenture were not made.
AND the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, for themselves and every of them, their and every
of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, do further covenant and agree,
to and with His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by these presents, that they
and every of them, and all others claiming, by, from, or under them, shall and
will in all Cases where any payments are or shall be due from any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Persons in Ireland, for or in respect of any First Fruits or
Twentieth parts, permit and allow all and every such persons, to have, receive,
and enjoy the full use and benefits of such Enstallments for the payment
thereof, as by Law or the usual Course and Practice in such Cases, is or has
been allowed, they doing and performing on their parts what in like Cases has
been accustomed; And also shall and will accept of, and be contented with, and
concluded by such values of the First Fruits and Twentieth Parts, due from, and
payable by the said Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Persons as shall appear upon
the returns thereof made or to be made, by such Commissioners who now are or
hereafter shall be in that behalf authorized and appointed under His Majesty's
Great Seal of Ireland.

NEVERTHELESS if any defect is or shall be found in the Commissions, which now
are or hereafter shall be issued out, His Majesty is pleased to covenant and
agree by these presents, That upon humble Petition to him made by the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, or such as do or shall claim by, from, or under them, or any
of them, effectual Order shall be forthwith given for the rectifying and
renewing of such Commissions, and for the proceeding thereupon, in as full and
ample manner as His Majesty could or might lawfully have done, if this present
Indenture had not been made.

Further Provisoes, Limitations, and Restrictions.

His Majesty may alter the payments in the Civil and Military Lists of the
Establishments, so as the whole yearly charge, do not in any one year exceed
171843 li. 5 s. 6 d. and may appoint the method and precedence of the payment
of His Majesty's debts, so as those for which interest is payable, be first
satisfied.


PROVIDED ALSO and it is further concluded and agreed, and so is hereby
declared, that it shall and may be lawful to and for His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, to alter, reduce,
change, or increase any of the Wages, Sallaries, Pensions, Payments, or other
Entertainments whatsoever mentioned in the several and respective
Establishments of the Civil and Military Lists, so as the whole yearly charge
thereby made, do not in any one year exceed the sum of One hundred seventy one
thousand eight hundred forty three pounds five shillings and six pence, and
also where any Annuity, Pension, or Temporary Payment, now comprehended in
either of the said Lists, shall cease or determine, to renew the same and make
it payable to such other person or persons, and for such further time as His
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors shall think fit, and also to regulate, settle,
and appoint the Method, Order, and Precedence of the payment of all or any of
His Majesty's said Debts, so always, that such debts, for which Interest is,
or shall be payable, be satisfied and paid in the first place, and before any
other debts, for which no Interest is, or shall be due, or payable, any thing
herein before or after contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That if any Pention, Annuity, If His Majesty shall not renew
any Pention, or Temporary payment in the Establishment which shall cease, or be
determined V.R. etc. shall pay His Majesty so much as the same would have
amounted unto, if it had not been determined.
or Temporary payment, so as aforesaid determined, shall not be thought fit to
be renewed, that then, and in every such case, the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and all and
every Person and Persons claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, 7
shall pay or cause to be paid unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, so
much Money over and above all the sums and payments herein before agreed to be
paid, as the said Annuity or Pention so as aforesaid determined, would have
amounted to, and in such manner and form, and at such times as the same
Annuity or Pention should have been paid if it had not been determined, any
thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, And it is further Concluded and Agreed, His Majesty may dispose
of 7155 l. 4 s. 10d. due on the Balance of the Earl of Angleseys account,
until 2d. July, (67). And of 19491 l. 5 s. 4 d. due on the Balance of the
Account of Sir George Carteret, until 20 January (69) without allowing of any
Defalcations for the same.
and so is hereby declared, That it shall and may be lawful to and for His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to have, receive and dispose of the full
benefit and advantage of Seven thousand one hundred fifty five pounds four
shillings ten pence half penny, remaining upon the balance of the Earl of
Angleseys account, until the second day of July One thousand six hundred sixty
seven, and also of the sum of Nineteen thousand four hundred ninety one pounds
five shillings and four pence remaining due upon the balance of the Account of
Sir George Carteret, until the twentieth day of January One thousand six
hundred sixty nine, without making or allowing any Defalcations or abatements
therefore out of the said Eighty thousand pounds, or any other the sums of
money herein before agreed to be paid to or for His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and it is further concluded and agreed, So much of the 50000 l.
payable to the Duke of Ormond by the Act of Explanation as is yet behind, And
the yearly sum of 5000 l. per annum, granted to him out of the Quit-rents for a
term unexpired. And 30000l. granted to James E. of Suffolk, shall be paid
unto them respectively out of the several Fonds on which the same are charged,
as the same would have been if this Indenture had not been made, without any
Defalcations.
and so is hereby Declared, that the sum of Fifty thousand pounds payable to
James Duke of Ormond, or his Assigns by the Act of Explanation, or so much
thereof as is yet behind and unpaid, and also the yearly sum of Five thousand
pounds per annum granted by His Majesty to the said James Duke of Ormond, out
of the Quit-rents for a term of years yet unexpired; And also the sum of
Thirty thousand pounds granted by His Majesty unto James Earl of Suffolk,
shall remain and continue payable, and be duly satisfied and paid unto the
said James Duke of Ormond, and James Earl of Suffolk respectively, and to
their several and respective Executors, Administrators and Assigns, out of the
several and respective Fonds whereon the same are charged by such person and
persons, and with such preferences, and in such order, manner and form as the
said several and respective sums would, or ought to have been paid, if this
present Indenture had not been made, deducting only thereout the due Fees and
Charges therefore payable, without making or allowing any Defalcations or
Abatements therefore out of the said Eighty thousand pounds, or any other the
sums of Money herein before agreed to be paid, to or for His Majesty, His Heirs
or Successors, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding,

If His Majesty remit unto E. Anglesey the Meane-Profits, and Quit-rents, of
the Lands in Bear and Bantry mentioned in his Certificate, reserving the
ancient Crown-rents; from the date of the Certificate until the 25th December,
(70) reserving only the yearly rent of one half penny out of every Acre of the
said Lands. V.R. etc. shall have no defalcations for the same.
Provided also, and it is hereby further agreed, and so declared, That if His
Majesty shall graciously please to grant, pardon, remitt, and discharge unto
Arthur Earl of Anglesey, all and every, or any the Meane-profits and Quit-rents
due on, out of, or for the Lands in the Barrony of Bear and Bantry, in the
County of Cork, mentioned in his Certificate, reserving only the ancient
Crown-rents from the date of the said Certificate, until the Five and
twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred and seventy, reserving only
the yearly Rent of one halfpenny out of every Acre of the said Lands; that
then, and in such case the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, nor any of them, nor any
claiming under them, or any of them, shall have any Abatement or Defalcation in
respect thereof, out of the said Eighty thousand pounds, or any the sums of
Money herein Covenanted, or undertaken to be discharged and paid by them, any
thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. If His
Majesty shall pardon, or discharge Sir James Shaen, and His Estate, from any
Suites or Demands concerning any Moneys received from His Majesty toward the
Purchase of the Customs of Londonderry, or any other debts, duties, or
arrearages, whatsoever other then the arrears of Quitrent, Crown rent, the
years value or reapplotment of the deficiency thereof. V. R. etc. shall have no
defalcation in respect thereof.

If V. R. etc. shall sue in their own or His Majesty's name, and thereupon
cause any Lands to be seized, or extended for the Payment of Arrears, the same
shall be so done, that no interruption shall be given to the present Farmers
contrary to His Majesty's Covenants with them, and they will bear the whole
loss without any Defalcations for the same.




Provided likewise, That if His Majesty shall graciously please to remit,
pardon, release, or otherwise discharge Sir James Shaen Knight and Baronet, his
heirs, executors, or administrators, or any of them, their, or any of their
Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, of and from any Suits and Demands touching
or concerning any sums of Money received from His Majesty for and toward the
payment of, and for the Purchase of the Customs of Londonderry, or any other
Debts, Duties, or Arrearages whatsoever, other then the Arrears of Quit-rents,
Crown-rents, the Years-value, or Reapplotment of the deficiency thereof, that
then and in such case the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, nor any of them, shall have any
Abatement, or Defalcation whatsoever, for, or in respect of any such Release or
Discharge, any thing herein before contained to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

AND the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have covenanted and granted, and by these
presents for themselves, their heirs, executors, and administrators, and every
of them, do further Covenant and Grant, to, and with His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, that if they, or any of them, or any claiming by, from, or
under them, or any of them, shall, at any time hereafter sue, and prosecute in
His Majesty's Name, or in their own names, and upon such Suit or Prosecution,
shall cause any Lands to be seized, or extended, for the payment and
satisfaction of any the arrears, which they, or any of them, or any person or
persons, claiming by, from, or under them, ought to receive; that then, and in
every such case, the said Suites, Prosecutions, Seizures and Extents, shall be
in such manner and form, that thereby no interruption or disturbance may be
given to the present Farmers of His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, contrary to
the tenor and effect of His Majesty's Covenants with them; nor they thereby
become entitled to any Defalcation from His Majesty, but the whole Loss and
Damage of such Defalcations, if any shall be thought fit to be allowed, for, or
in respect of such Suites, Prosecutions, Seizures or Extents, shall be
sustained and born by the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, the survivors and survivor of
them, or the Executors or Administrators of the Survivor of them, and His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, shall be thereof, and of every part and
parcel thereof, from time to time, and at all times hereafter acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise saved harmless and indempnified.

AND HIS MAJESTY for Himself, His Majesty further Covenants.
His Heirs and Successors, does further Covenant, Grant and Agree, to and with
the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes,
John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, and every of them, their, and every of their Executors, All
the Moneys which are, or shall grow due, or be payable unto His Majesty before
the 26th of December (75) shall, during the term be brought into the Receipt
of the Exchequer at Dublin in the usual manner, to the end the same may be
applied to the uses herein mentioned.
Administrators and Assigns, that all and every the sums of Money now due, or
which any time after the date of these presents, and before the six and
twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy five, shall grow due, or payable to His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, whether for Rent reserved upon the Farm of the great Branches of
His Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, or for any Arrears or otherwise howsoever,
shall from time to time, during the said term, be answered, and brought into
His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin, in such manner as the same were
heretofore used to be paid, and would and ought still to be paid, if this
present Indenture had not been made, to the end that His Majesty's Treasure so
brought in, and remaining in His Majesty's Exchequer there, may from time to
time be issued out from thence, and applied to such uses, intents, and
purposes, as are herein beforementioned, and by this present Indenture are
undertaken to be done, executed, and performed.

His Majesty will Commissionate R. V. Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood, to be His Majesty's Officers and
Commissioners, to have the sole custody of all Monys so brought in, and sole
power to receive (give discharges for) and issue the same to the uses of this
Indenture, with clauses therein totally to prohibit any other from intermedling
therein during the said time.
AND, That for the better effecting hereof, and more orderly and legal
proceeding herein, His Majesty shall and will forthwith, and in due form of
Law Constitute, Authorize, Commissionate and Appoint them the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George
Dashwood, to be His Majesty's Officers or Commissioners, and to have the sole
care and Custody of all Monyes so brought in, and the sole Power to receive the
said Monyes from time to time, and to give Acquittances and Discharges for the
same, and to issue out the said moneys and pay the same to the ends and uses in
this present Indenture mentioned, with such clauses to be inserted therein, as
may be sufficient totally to prohibit and restrain any other person or
persons, from Acting, or any way intermedling therein, upon any other pretense
of Authority whatsoever, during the continuance of this present undertaking.

AND, His Majesty does further Covenant, Grant and Agree to and with the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelgah, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, and George Dashwood, that all Orders, Warrants, Directions, and
Commands, which at any time after the date of these presents, All Warrants for
Payments of any Money from the 4th of August (71) to the 26th of December, (75)
shall be so made and Signed by the Chief Governor of Ireland, and directed to
the said R. V.R. Sir A. B. Sir I.H. I. B. and G. D. only to the intent they may
wholly apply the same, to the uses of this Indenture.
and before the six and twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred seventy five, shall be 8
made and signed touching or concerning the issuing out of any Moneys, or
paying any part of His Majesty's Revenue, shall be so made and Signed by the
Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being, and be directed unto them the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood, only to the
intent that they may wholly apply the said Moneys to the uses and intents of
this present Indenture, and to the execution and performance of the undertaking
herein before mentioned; And yet nevertheless the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, and George
Dashwood, have Covenanted and Granted by these presents for themselves and
every of them, their, and every of their Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
do Covenant and grant to and with His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, that
they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, and George Dashwood, or the survivors or survivor of them,
shall and will from time to time, during the continuance of this present
undertaking, Quarterly, or within Forty days after each Quarter, R. V.R. Sir
A.B. Sir I. H. J. B. and G. D. will, during the undertaking, Quarterly, or
within 40 days after each Quarter, pay unto the Vice-Treasurer the usual Fees
and Profits for any Money paid out, as the Vice-Treasurer ought to receive, if
such Warrants had been directed to himself.
well and truly pay, or cause to be paid, unto His Majesty's Vice-Treasurer of
Ireland for the time being, all and every the usual and accustomed Fees and
Profit, for, or in respect of any sums of Money by them to be issued and paid
out as aforesaid, as such Vice-Treasurer for the time being, could, or ought to
have received if such Warrants had been directed unto, or such payments had
been made, by the said Vice-Treasurer himself for the time being, any thing
herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND BECAUSE a rigorous and speedy Collection levying and bringing in of such
debts, arrears, and other sums of money as are now due and owing to His
Majesty, would in all probability be attended with many evil consequences and
inconveniences to His Majesty's Government; therefore for the prevention
thereof, and for the better securing all His Majesty's Subjects in Ireland,
from all unnecessary trouble, unjust vexation or double payments, the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, have covenanted and granted, Further Covenants from R. V. R.
etc.
and by these presents for themselves and every of them, their and every of
their Executors and Administrators, do covenant and grant, to and with His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, All those from whom any arrears of
Quit-rents are due, shall have the benefit of a clause in the Grant to the
Farmers of the great Branches, concerning the levying thereof, and no
prosecution shall be made for recovery thereof, otherwise than His Majesty
might do, if this Indenture had not been made.
that whereas in His Majesty's Letters Patents herein before mentioned, bearing
date the third day of August, in the one and twentieth year of his Reign,
amongst other things therein contained, there is a Covenant on the part of His
Majesty, That His Majesty shall not in any one year, during the term of seven
years therein mentioned, collect or receive, or suffer to be collected or
received from any person or persons, above the seventh part of any arrear of
Quit-rents, by them or any of them then due and in arrear, that all and every
person and persons from whom any arrear of Quit-rents is now due and payable,
shall have the full benefit, ease, and effect of the said Covenant, and that no
prosecution shall be had or made for the recovery of any arrears of Quit-rents,
otherwise, or in any other manner than His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
could or might have prosecuted, if this present Indenture had not been made,
without breach of the said Covenant; but that His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, shall be from time to time saved harmless of and from all Breaches
of the said Covenant, which may happen, and of and from all Defalcations which
can or may be demanded by the said Farmers, for or by reason thereof; and
moreover, No arrears of Quit-rents before 25th December 1668, shall be demanded
for unprofitable Lands.
that no arrears of Quit-rents issuing out of, or due or payable, for or in
respect of any unprofitable Lands, upon or before the five and twentieth day of
December, in the year of our Lord one thousand six hundred sixty eight, shall
at any time hereafter, be sued for, prosecuted, or any way demanded.

AND FURTHER that it shall and may be lawful to and for His Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, His Majesty may authorize the Chief Governor and others to
install any other debts or arrears due before 25th December. 1670. so the same be
not above eight half yearly payments, the first to be made the 25th of December
1671, and none to extend beyond the 24th of June 1675, and so the same be not
sufficiently secured.
from time to time and at all times hereafter, to give full power and authority
to the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and
such other person and persons as His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall
think fit to appoint to order the payment of any other debts or arrears, which
upon or before the five and twentieth day of December now last past, were due
and owing to His Majesty, by such leasurely and proportionable payments and
Enstallments as they in their wisdoms shall think just and equitable, upon
consideration had of each several and respective Case, so always that none of
the said debts or arrears so to be installed, be installed for any other or
longer time then eight equal half yearly payments, the first whereof to begin
and to be made upon the five and twentieth day of December now next ensuing,
and no allowance of time or Enstallment hereafter to be made, do extend beyond
the four and twentieth day of June, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred seventy-five, and so also as that the payment so to be installed, be at
the time of the installment thereof sufficiently secured.

The power of Enstallments not to extend to Farmers or Receivers of the
Revenue, to small sums to such who deny or dispute the debt, or refuse without
Suit to give security for payment by instalments.
NEVERTHELESS IT IS hereby declared, That the Power and Authority so to be given
as aforesaid, shall in no sort extend to the installing of any debts or arrears
due, or to be due, from any Farmers, Receivers, or Collectors, of any part of
His Majesty's Revenue, nor to the enstalling of any small or inconsiderable
sums, except the debtors thereof shall be found to be very poor and unable, nor
to give any benefit or ease of payment to such person or persons, who shall
deny, or any way contest or dispute the debt in demand, and will not own or
acknowledge the same, or shall refuse to give security for payment thereof by
such Enstallments as shall be allowed, without any further Process or Suit of
Law.

AND for the further prevention of all disquiet or vexation, which can or may
happen to any of His Majesty's Subjects in Ireland, by reason or occasion of
this present undertaking, the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, for themselves and every
of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, No Suit
at Law shall be made for any debt which is not of Record, or already charged,
unless the Chief Governor be first satisfied that there are probable grounds,
and that His Majesty is justly entitled and might have sued for the same, if
this Indenture had not been made.
do further, covenant, grant, and agree, to and with His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, that no Suit, Process, or other proceeding at Law whatsoever, shall
at any time hereafter be commenced or prosecuted, by them the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
or any of them, or any claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, either
in His Majesty's name, or in their or any of their own proper names, for the
recovery or bringing in of any debt now due or owing to His Majesty, which is
not a debt of Record, or already charged, unless the Lord Lieutenant or other
Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, shall be first made acquainted
therewith, and shall be satisfied that there are good, reasonable and probable
grounds for such proceeding, and that His Majesty is justly entitled thereunto,
and might have sued for the same, if this Indenture had not been made.

AND to the end that all His Majesty's Subjects of Ireland may the better take
notice of the provision hereby made on their behalfs, and for their ease and
benefit, The Chief Governor to issue Proclamations for Accomptants within a
limited time to come in and clear Accounts, and declaring to other Debtors the
fav^urable Installments intended them, and requiring them to take effectual
course to state and secure their respective debts.
His Majesty is pleased to declare, That the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, shall be directed to
issue out from time to time, and as occasion shall require, such Proclamations
as shall be necessary, thereby warning and requiring all Collectors, Receivers,
and Accomptants, within some reasonable time therein to be prefixed, to come in
and clear their Accounts, and declaring and publishing to all others His
Majesty's Subjects, who are any way indebted to His Majesty, the favorable
Enstallments of their debts hereby intended to them, and requiring them and
every of them, within the time therein to be limited, to take some speedy and
effectual course for the stating and securing their respective Debts and
Arrears, that so they may be capable of the favor and grace hereby intended
toward them; R. V. R. etc. shall give unto the Chief Governor and such others
as His Majesty shall appoint, an account of their proceedings in the management
of the premises, and will observe their directions for the better and more
easy execution of the powers and accomplishing the ends of this Indenture.
And the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, for themselves and every of them, their and every
of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, do farther covenant, grant, and
agree, to and with His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, that they the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, and every of them, and all and every other person and persons
claiming or to claim, by, from, or under them, or any of them, shall and will
from time to time, as often as they shall be thereunto required, give unto the
Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being, and to such others as His Majesty shall thereunto authorize and appoint,
a just and true Account of all and every their proceedings in and about the
premises, and the management thereof; And also shall and will from time to
time observe such Orders and directions as they shall receive from such Lord
Lieutenant or other Chief Governor, and other Persons as aforesaid, for the
better and more easy execution 9.
of the Powers and Authorities, and accomplishing and fulfilling the ends,
intents and purposes of this present Indenture.

AND HIS MAJESTY for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, Further Covenants and
powers from His Majesty.
has covenanted and granted, and by these presents does covenant, grant,
declare, and agree, to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, their Executors,
Administrators and assigns, by these presents, The general clause concerning
defalcations, in case of war, plague, etc.
That if at any time or times before the six and twentieth day of December in
the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five, any spreading
infection of Plague or Pestilence, or other great Mortality, or any
Depopulation, or destruction of Houses by Fire, or otherwise, or any Public
open War, or Domestic Rebellion or Insurrection, or any other unavoidable
Calamity, shall be, or happen within the said Realm of Ireland, or any the
Counties, Cities, Towns or Places, of, or within the same; or if hereafter
during the said term any General Act of Pardon, or Oblivion, or other Act or
thing shall be done, or Passed by Authority of Parliament; Or if His Majesty,
His Heirs or Successors, shall at any time before the said six and twentieth
day of December, in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five,
make any particular Pardon, or Release, or since the five and twentieth day of
December now last past has done, or before the six and twentieth day of
December in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five, shall
cause to be done any other Act or thing whatsoever; or if any Proclamation, or
other Act of State shall issue, whereby, or by reason, or occasion whereof, any
of the Revenues, Rents, Profits, Sums of money, Debts, or Arrears, which ought
to be received and applied as aforesaid, or any part thereof shall be pardoned,
suspended, lessened, diminished, discompted, reckoned, extinguished, or taken
away, other then such part thereof which is herein before excepted, or whereof
they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James
Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, have herein before undertaken to bear the loss,
and to Indemnifie His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors from any Defalcation,
or whereby or by means whereof they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh,
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or the survivors
or survivor of them, or the Executors or Administrators of the survivor of
them, shall, or may be hindered, or obstructed in having, receiving, collecting,
and levying the said Rents, Revenues, Debts and Arreares except as aforesaid.

THEN THEY, The said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
shall from time to time, and in every or any of the said cases, have such
proportionable respit, forbearances, abatements, defalcations, and allowances,
out of the sums hereby undertaken to be paid, as upon Consideration had of the
Damage sustained, and of the Proofs thereof made shall be thought reasonable,
the said allowances to be made by and with the approbation and order, in
writing, of the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them,
whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland
to be always one or more; and the said Richard Lord Ranelagh, or any other
person concerned in the present undertaking, is always to be excluded from any
Vote herein; and these Presents, or the Enrollment thereof, shall be to them
and every of them a sufficient Warrant and Authority, without any other or
further Warrant, or Declaration of the Pleasure of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors in that behalf to be obtained.

AND HIS MAJESTY, For Himself, Full Power given to R. V. R. etc. in their own,
or His Majesty's Name, to sue for, recover, and take Execution for all Debts
and Arrears, in any of His Majesty's Courts, as His Majesty by Law,
Prerogative, or otherwise might do, if this Indenture were not made, and to
apply the same to the uses undertaken, and to detain the surplus to their own
use, without any account to be therefore rendered to His Majesty in any wise.
His Heirs and Successors, has Covenanted and Granted, and by these Presents
does further Covenant and Grant, to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, that they,
and every of them, their, and every of their Executors and Administrators,
shall have full power and authority, either in their or any of their name or
names, or in the name of His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or any of them,
and at their own proper cost and charges to implead, sue and prosecute as well
all and every person and persons, their heirs, executors and assigns, and
every or any of them, as shall or may by any means be found not to have paid,
or be indebted, charged, or answerable to His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, for any the Rents, Revenues, Profits, Debts, Sums of Money, or
Arrears herein before mentioned; or for any part or parcel thereof, either in
His Majesty's Court of Exchequer at Dublin, or in any other Court of Record
whatsoever, either in England or Ireland, in as full and ample manner, as His
Majesty might lawfully have done if this present Indenture had not been made;
and to take execution of all and every the sums of money so to be recovered,
and the same to have and receive, and apply to the uses, intents and purposes
herein before undertaken to be performed, and the surplus thereof, if any shall
remain after the said undertaking duly satisfied and performed, to retain and
keep to his and their own proper uses, without any account or other matter or
thing to be therefore rendered to His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors in any
wise, and to proceed, sue and prosecute, in, for, and concerning the premises,
as fully and amply, and in such and the like manner and form as our said
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, His Heirs or Successors of His or their
Regal Power, Prerogative and Authority, or by the Laws of His Majesty's Realms
and Dominions should or might have done, if this Present Indenture had not been
made.

AND, These Presents, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be to all and every our
Officers whom it shall or may concern, Power to R.V.R. etc. their Deputies,
Agents, and Servants, to view search, examine, and take copies of all records,
books, papers, or other memorialls concerning the Premises, without charge, or
paying of any fee for the same.
a sufficient Warrant and Authority in that behalf.

AND HIS MAJESTY DOES hereby straightly charge and command all and every the
Officers and Ministers of His Courts, and all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, in whose custody any Rolls, Records, Books, Papers, or
other memorialls whatsoever, touching or concerning the Premises, either in
England or Ireland, do, or shall remain; that they, and every of them, do,
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the continuance of this
present Undertaking, permit and suffer the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh,
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and all and every
their Deputies, Agents and Servants, to view, inspect, search and examine the
said Rolls, Books, Papers and Records, and to take Copies of the same, the said
Copies to be made by the respective Officers in whose Custody the same do or
shall remain, or by their Clerks or Servants, without any Fee or other charge
to be paid for the same.

AND HIS MAJESTY is well pleased, and does by these Presents for Himself, R.
V.R. etc. to be freed from all Public employments, which would hinder their
attendance on this service.
His Heirs and Successors, Covenant, Grant and Agree, to and with the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, and every of them, and wills and ordains that they and
every of them, and all and every of their Deputies, Agents, Officers, and
Servants, as much as His Majesty may lawfully, and by the Orders and Customs
of those Places, where they, or any of them, or any of their Deputies, Agents,
Officers or Servants, shall inhabit, tolerate and dispense with, shall be
freed and discharged from all public Offices and Services, which would require
their or any of their personal attendance, and might withdraw them, or any of
them from their necessary attendance in and upon the Execution of their present
service herein before undertaken to be performed.

AND HIS MAJESTY is pleased further to Covenant and Agree, R. V. R. etc. may at
their own Cost and Charges have Constats, Exemplifications, and Duplicates of
this Indenture, without any further order or direction.
that they the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and every of them, their, and every of their
Executors and Administrators, shall, and may, at their proper cost and charges,
have as many Constats, Exemplifications and Duplicates of these Presents, or of
any Covenant, Article or Sentence therein contained, and of every and such Part
and Parcel of the same, and when, and as often, as to them, or any of them
shall seem meet; And, these Presents, or the Enrollment of the same shall be to
the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of Ireland for the time being,
10
As also to the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, and to
all and every Officer and Minister in England or Ireland, to whom it shall or
may appertain, a sufficient Warrant and Authority, for allowing, granting, and
passing the same, and that without any further or other Grant or Warrant from
His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, to be had, procured, or obtained in that
behalf.

AND OUR SAID SOVEREIGN LORD the Kings Majejesty, His Majesty commands all His
Officers and Ministers to be aiding and assisting to the said R. V.R. etc. in
as ample manner as they ought to do unto His Majesty, if this Indenture had
not been made.
does by these Presents, for Him, His Heirs, and Successors, straightly Charge
and Command all and every Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables and Head-borroughs, and other Officers of, and within every City,
Borrough, Town within the Realm of Ireland, and all other His Majesty's
Officers and Ministers whatsoever, whether Civil or Military, that they and
every of them be from time to time aiding and assisting unto the said Richard
Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence,
George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard
Kingdon, and every of them, their, and every of their Executors,
Administrators, Deputies, Factors and servants, in the due Execution of all and
every the aforementioned Premises, according to the true intent and meaning of
these Presents, whether it be in, and about the levying, or recovering any of
the Rents, Revenues, Debts, or sums of Money herein beforementioned, or the
arreares thereof by distress, seizures, entries, and due proceedings thereupon,
or otherwise in the due recovering thereof, or any part thereof, in as large,
ample, beneficial, and diligent, wise order and manner whatsoever, as they and
every of them should, or ought to have been recovered to our said Sovereign
Lord the King, His Heirs or Successors, by any manner of means, if this
present Indenture had never been had nor made, upon pain of His Majesty's
indignation and displeasure, and of such further pains, penalties and
imprisonments, as by the Laws and Statutes of the said Realm, can, or may be
inflicted upon them, for their negligence and contempt in that behalf.

AND His Majsties will and pleasure is, His Majesty commands the Judges of the
Exchequer to award Writs, and to cause Process to be executed concerning the
premises.
That the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer
there for the time being, or any three or more of them, whereof the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor, or Chief Baron of the Exchequer for the time being to be
one, shall have by force of these presents full Power and Authority to make
forth and award Writs under the Seal of the said Court of Exchequer for that
purpose, according to the Order and Course of the said Court, and the
Contemners of the said Writs to punish in such sort as by the course of the
said Court has been accustomed.

AND in an especial manner His Majesty's will and pleasure is, That the Lord
Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of his Exchequer there, or
any three of them, whereof the said Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, or
Chief Baron to be one, do strictly require and enjoin all and every the
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers, who are or shall be
authorized, employed, or directed, to levy any the said Rents, Revenues, Debts,
Sums of Money, or Arrears, or any of them, or otherwise to execute any Process
concerning the same, that they do in their several places from time to time
with diligence and faithfulness do and perform the same without partiality and
delay, and after execution or receipts otherwise thereof, either make speedy
returns of such speedy payment thereof as they ought, and as shall be in that
behalf requisite.

His Majesty will give R. V. R. etc. such further Covenants and Grants as shall
be reasonably advised, for the full and quiet having and enjoying, and such
other powers and authorities for levying and collecting the premises, and such
aid and assistance from His Majesty, his Privy Council, Exchequer, Courts of
Justice, and all other his Officers and Ministers, as any Commissioners,
Receivers, Collectors, Farmers, and other Ministers, of His Majesty's Revenue
in England or Ireland, ever had or ought to have, and as in this case shall be
thought fit and reasonable.
AND HIS MAJESTY does hereby declare and agree, That He, his Heirs and
Successors, shall and will from time to time, upon humble suit on that behalf
made, give such further Covenants and Grants for the full and quiet having and
enjoying the premises, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, as shall be in that behalf reasonably advised, and such other power
and authority for levying and collecting the premises, and such aid and
assistance from His Majesty and his Privy Council, His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer, and the Officers thereof, and all other His Majesty's Courts of
Justice, and all other his Officers and Ministers whatsoever, as any
Commissioners, Receivers, Collectors, Farmers, and other Ministers, of any part
of His Majesty's Revenue in England or Ireland, ever had, or ought to have, and
as in this Case shall be thought fit and reasonable.

This Indenture to be enrolled in Ireland within six months.
PROVIDED ALWAYS, That if the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir
Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane,
Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or some of them, shall
not within the space of six months next ensuing the date hereof, cause this
present Indenture to be enrolled in His Majesty's High Court of Chancery in
Ireland, and in the Office of His Majesty's Remembrancer there, that then and
in such case, and for every such default, the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, their
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, shall forfeit and lose unto
His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the sum of One hundred pounds for each
month after the said six months expired, wherein the said Indenture shall
remain and continue without enrollment thereof made in manner and form
aforesaid.

His Majesty or Chief Governor will after 25th. December. 1675, until 25th.
December 1677, authorize R. V. R. etc. to levy, receive, compound, or discharge
all moneys and arrears comprehended in this agreement, which before 25th.
December 1675, shall be brought in charge upon Record as amply as His Majesty
might if this Indenture were not made.
AND MOREOVER HIS MAJESTY for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, does covenant
and grant to and with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander
Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert
Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, and every of them, their and
every of their Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, That His Majesty, his
Heirs and Suceessors, or the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy, or other Chief
Governor or Governors, of the said Kingdom of Ireland for the time being,
shall and will after the five and twentieth day of December One thousand six
hundred seventy five, and until the five and twentieth day of December One
thousand six hundred seventy and seven, from time to time sufficiently
authorize the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir
James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John
Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, or such as they shall nominate and appoint, as
far as the Laws and Statutes of Ireland will permit, to demand, levy, collect,
recover, receive, and take, or otherwise compound for and discharge all sums of
money, and the arrearages thereof, which after the date of these presents, and
before the five and twentieth day of December One thousand six hundred seventy
and five, shall be ascertained and brought into charge upon Record; and which,
if they had been duly collected and levied during the said term, should and
ought to have been answered and paid unto them the said Richard Lord Viscount
Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood,
Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, in as full
and ample manner as His Majesty could or ought to have collected or levied the
same, if this present Indenture had never been had or made.

AND LASTLY HIS MAJESTY is hereby graciously pleased to declare and grant, This
Indenture shall be construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the
said R. V. R. etc. and for the better enabling them to execute and perform this
undertaking.
That these His Letters Patents and the Covenants and Agreements on the part of
His Majesty, herein contained, shall be construed, adjudged, deemed, and taken,
in all and every His Majesty's Courts of Record and elsewhere, within his said
Kingdom of Ireland, most favorably and beneficially for the said Richard Lord
Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George
Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon,
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and for the better enabling them
to execute and perform the said undertaking.

In witness whereof, to the one part of this Indenture, His Majesty to one part
of the Indenture has affixed the Great Seal of England, and R. V. R. etc. have
put their hands and seals to the other part.
remaining with the said Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence,
Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon,
John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty
has caused the Great Seal of England to be affixed, and to the other part of
this Indenture remaining with our said Sovereign Lord the King, the said
Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and
Richard Kingdon, have set their hands and Seals the day and year first
above-written, Annoque Domini 1671.

August 1671. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli 2. Vicessimo tertio.
HIs Majesty's Covenants and Agreements with Richard Lord Viscount Ranelagh,
Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John Bence, George Dashwood, Joseph
Deane, Robert Huntingdon, John Stepney, and Richard Kingdon, whereby in
consideration of their undertaking to defray His Majesty's growing Charge in
Ireland, and to pay the Arrears of the Establishments there, and other debts
owing by His Majesty, and Fourscore thousand pounds more to his Majesty, His
Majesty is pleased to covenant that all the Arrears of Rent reserved upon the
Farm of the Revenue in Ireland, and all the growing Rents until the 25th. of
December 1675, and all his Majesty's Treasure and ready money in Ireland due or
owing to his Majesty by Impressed or otherwise, and all his Majesty's Revenue
certain and casual, shall during the said Term be applied to the uses by them
undertaken, and that they shall have the Surplus to their own use; but all
Revenue arising by new Acts of Parliament, and hereafter to be passed, and the
lapsed moneys the 30000 li. payable by the Roman Catholics, the English
Arrears and the Profits of doubling Ordnance Lands are excepted: The Lord
Viscount Ranelagh and the rest covenant with his Majesty to defray his
Majesty's whole Charge of the Kingdom of Ireland from the 25th of December
1670, unto the 25th of December 1675, not exceeding 171843 li. 5 s. 6 d. in any
one year, and all Arrears of Pay due to the Military List upon the last of
December 1670, not exceeding 139001 li. 11 s. 4 d. and to the Civil List not
exceeding 4000 li. and to the Train of Artillery not exceeding 1147 li. and the
70000 li. advanced by the Farmers, the moneys lent by Sir William Bucknall, not
exceeding 11500 li. the Customs of Londonderry not exceeding 4000 li. the money
due for Phoenix Park not exceeding 10000 li. to Patrick Archer 6294 li. for
Arms and Ammunition sent from hence 6076 li. The moiety of Ten Months Arrears,
not exceeding 20394 li. 19 s. 00 d. To the Earl of Anglesey 2500 li. To the
Lord Arlington 6250 li. To the Daughters of Colonel Lane 6000 li. To the Lord
Archbishop of Dublin 2500 li. To Francis and Elizabeth Jones 3500 li. To John
St. Ledger Esquire 400 li. out of the Balance of Sir George Carletons Account,
and to the Lady Faulkland out of the Prize Goods 3000 li. They are also to save
his Majesty harmless from all Defalcations to be demanded by the Farmers, and
to pay his Majesty 80000 li. for his own use within two years after the 25th.
of December 1675; and that the Duke of Ormond shall receive 50000 li. and the
Earl of Suffolk 30000 li. out of the proper Fonds whereon they are charged; and
that his Majesty shall have the disposal of 7155 li. due on the balance of the
Earl of Angleseys Account; and 19491 li. due on the balance of Sir George
Carterets Account; His Majesty does hereby covenant that the Commission of
Enquiry now on foot, shall be forthwith superseded; That all respits of
Quit-rents and other sums due to his Majesty, shall be forthwith determined;
That the Composition with the Commission Officers shall not be obstructed, but
perfected as begun and intended, and the Grantees to have the benefit thereof;
That his Majesty will forthwith renew his Letters to the Chief Governor and
Council of Ireland, to re-applot the deficiency of the years value, allowing
his Subjects four years time for the payment thereof, with several Provisoes,
Restrictions, and Qualifications herein particularly expressed; viz. (inter
alias) That his Majesty notwithstanding may pardon Criminal or Capital
Offenses, forfeited Recognizances, Fines, or Forfeitures upon Penal Laws or
Outlawries; That his Majesty may appoint Commissioners for Reducements as
formerly, but the moneys due thereupon to belong to the Grantees: That his
Majesty may let Leases of any his Royal Mines, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments in Ireland, yet undisposed, or to which his Majesty's Title
hereafter may be made appear, under such Rents as shall be equal to the
Quit-rents payable by Adventurers, or else the Old Crown Rents; and in case his
Majesty dispose of any his Lands to the uses of his Declaration of the 30th. of
November 1660, to any but such, their heirs or assigns who received the profits
thereof, then the arrears of Quit-rents due thereupon before the 25th. of
December 1668, not to be charged on the Lands, but to be recovered of the
former Enjoyers and Pervors of the Profits thereof; That the present Farmers of
his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland, may continue their Farms without interruption
by the Grantees, who are to have no abatement for Defalcations to be allowed
the said Farmers for the years ended the 25th. of December 1670, and the
Defalcations hereafter to be made, the said Farmers to be determined only as
by the several agreements relating thereunto is appointed. That the Grantees
upon payments of First Fruits and twentieth parts by the Clergy, shall allow
usual installments, and be concluded by the returns of the Commissioners for
that purpose, but if their Commissions shall be found defective, his Majesty
covenants to give order for the rectifying thereof; That his Majesty may renew,
alter, or increase any annuity, temporary payments, or entertainments in his
Majesty's Establishments, so as the yearly charge exceed not 171843 li. 5 s. 6
d. and also regulate and appoint the method of payment of his Majesty's debts,
so as such for which Interest is payable, be first satisfied; That if his
Majesty shall not think fit to renew any such annuity or payment, the Grantees
to pay his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, such sum as the same will come to
over and above the payments aforesaid; All moneys are to be brought into the
Treasury, and the Lord Ranelagh, Sir Alexander Bence, Sir James Hayes, John
Bence, and George Dashwood, are to be commissionated to have the sole Custody
thereof during the continuance of their Undertaking: All Warrants for issuing
out of moneys, are to be directed to them, and they covenant with his Majesty
to pay the Vice-Treasurer for the time being his usual Fees quarterly, or 40
days after; The Covenants with the Farmers for installment of arrears of
Quit-rents, are to continue, and the Chief Governor of Ireland, and such
others whom his Majesty shall appoint, are to have power to enstall any other
debts or arrears under certain qualifications; Nothing which is not now in
Charge on Record, can be sued for without first satisfying the Chief Governor
of Ireland of the grounds of the proceedings. A just account is to be given
from time to time of all the proceedings in the managing of the Revenue, and
the directions of the Chief Governor to be observed. No Defalcation is to be
expected for any pardon or release which may be made to the Earl of Anglesey or
Sir James Shaen. In case of Plague, War, Fire, or other unavoidable Calamity
there is to be defalcation, and they are to be enabled to levy what shall
appear due upon Record at any time within two years after the term expired; and
the Patent is to be expounded most beneficial for the Undertakers, and to
enable them to perform their Contract: And these are the Clauses of Assistance,
and other beneficial Clauses fit and proper. Subscribed by Mr. Attorney
General, by Warrant under his Majesty's Sign Manual, and Procur' by Mr.
Secretary Trevor.

LETTERS PATENTS GRANTED BY HIS MAJESTY: CONTAINING A Demise of His Revenue OF
IRELAND FOR SEVEN YEARS, Bearing Date the Twelfth day of July 1669.

AS ALSO, LETTERS PATENTS Granted by His MAJESTY, CONTAINING AN ABATEMENT OF
RENT, Bearing Date the Third day of August 1669.

TOGETHER WITH MARGINAL NOTES and an ALPHABETICAL TABLE.

Prospere succedant Regi Vobisque.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, 1672.

THIS INDENTURE made the Twelfth day of July, An. Dom. 1669. and in the One and
twentieth year of the Reign of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. BETWEEN the said Kings Most Excellent Majesty on
the one part, and John Forth Alderman, and now one of the Sheriffs of the City
of London, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, and John Breedon
of the City of London Esquires, James Hayes of Lincoln's Inn in the County of
Middlesex Esquire Dannet Forth and George Dashwood of the City of London Esquires,
William Muschamp and Humphry Tailor of Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland
Esquires, and Ralph Bucknall of the City of London, Esquire on the other part.
WHEREAS in our Parliament begun and held at Dublin upon the eighth day of May,
in the thirteenth year of His Majesty's Reign, and there continued by several
Proroguations unto the twenty sixth day of October, in the seventeenth year of
His Majesty's Reign, several Acts of Parliament were passed during the several
Sessions of the said Parliament, for the better ascertaining, settling,
establishing and declaring of His Majesty's Revenue in His said Kingdom of
Ireland; and amongst others, one Act was passed, Entitled, A recital of the
Acts touching the Kings Revenue in Ireland, from the 8. of May in the 13, to
the 6th of Octo. in the 17 year of His Reign.
An Act for settling the Subsidy of Poundage, and granting a Subsidy of
Tunnage, and other sums of Money unto His Royal Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors; the same to be paid upon Merchandises imported and exported into,
or out of the Kingdom of Ireland, according to a book of Rates hereunto
annexed: And also one other Act, Entitled, An Act for the settling of the
Excise or New Impost upon his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, according to
the book of Rates therein inserted: And also one other Act, Entitled, An Act
for the Improvement of his Majesty's Revenues upon the granting of Licenses for
the selling of Ale and Beer: And also one other Act, Entitled, An Act for
establishing an additional Revenue upon his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
for the better support of his and their Crown and Dignity: And also one other
Act, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better ordering and collecting the
revenue arising by Hearth-mony: And also one other Act, Entitled, An Act for
the better ordering the selling of Wines, and Aqua-vitae, together with all
sorts of Strong Waters by retaile: And also one other Act, Entitled, An Act
for the better Execution of his Majesty's Gracious Declaration for the
settlement of his Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the several Interests
of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other His Subjects there: And also one other
Act, entitled, An Act for the explaining of some doubts arising upon an Act
entitled, An Act for the better Execution of His Majesty's gracious
Declaration for the settlement of his Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of
the several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other his subjects there,
and for making of some alterations of, and additions unto the said Act, for the
more speedy and effectual settlement of the said Kingdom. And whereas also His
Majesty is pleased to demise, and to farm let all and every the Branches of
his Revenue herein before mentioned, and all other Branches of his Revenue of
that nature, whether the same do arise by virtue of all, every, or any the Acts
aforesaid, or by virtue of any other Act, Statute, Custom, or Prerogative
Royal, or whatsoever, touching or concerning the premises, or any other part
thereof, together with several other duties and payments herein after
mentioned. And whereas also the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphry Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, have offered to
farm of His Majesty the Branches of his Revenue aforesaid, and other the duties
and payments hereafter mentioned, and to take a Lease of so much thereof as is
now out of Lease, for the term of seven years, beginning at the Feast of the
Nativity of our Lord now last past before the date hereof; and to take a Lease
of the residue thereof as soon as the respective Leases now in being shall
expire, during the residue of the said seven years; and to pay for the same
during the first year, in consideration of the Quit-rents, Hearth-mony,
Wine-licenses, and such other Revenue as shall be enjoyed during that year, the
Rent of fourscore and eleven thousand and five hundred pounds; and from thence
during the second year, to pay a further increase of Rent of seventy five
thousand pounds more, A Recital of the Rents during the whole Lease.
in consideration of the Customs and Imported excise, which during that year
will come into possession; in all, during that year, one hundred sixty six
thousand and five hundred pounds; and during the third year, to pay two hundred
and six thousand two hundred and fifty pounds; that is to say, forty one
thousand six hundred twenty five pounds, part thereof at our Lady Day one
thousand six hundred seventy and one, and the residue thereof at the three
following quarter-dayes of that year, that is to say, on each quarter-day fifty
four thousand eight hundred seventy five pounds, in consideration of the Inland
Excise, and Ale and Beer Licenses, which on the twenty fifth day of March 1671
will come into possession: And also to pay during the four last years for the
whole, two hundred and nineteen thousand and five hundred pounds yearly by
quarterly payments: and to pay down by way of Advance the sum of threescore and
ten thousand pounds in manner following, That is to say, upon every first
Monday in every Month after the sealing of these presents, to pay down by way
of advance into His Majesty's Exchequer at Dublin, the full sum of ten thousand
pounds per mensem, over and above the Rent by these presents reserved, until
the whole sum of threescore and ten thousand pounds shall be fully paid in and
advanced, as a security for the better payment of the Rent herein reserved; and
to let the same remain in His Majesty's hands during the first four years of
the said Term, at ten pounds per Cent. according as Interest is payable by the
Laws of Ireland; so as after the first four years they might have liberty to
reimburse themselves, by way of retayner, out of their rent, as much of the
said seventy thousand pound as they shall think fit; they first giving unto His
Majesty such sufficient security for the payment of the rents herein reserved,
during the residue of the said seven years, as the Lord Lieutenant, or other
chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being shall think fit to
accept and allow of; so as the interest thereof at the rate of ten pounds per
Cent. so long as the same shall remain in His Majesty's hands, may be paid
quarterly by way of deduction out of the Rent hereby reserved. Which said
offers and proposals having been made to the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, their Lordships upon due consideration
hereof had, did represent the same unto His Majesty in Council; and afterward,
by virtue of, and in pursuance of an Order made by His Majesty in Council,
bearing date the eleventh day of November now last past, did proceed to a full
and final agreement and conclusion touching the same.

Now this Indenture Witnesses, That the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for, and
in consideration of the sum of seventy thousand pounds so as aforesaid to be
advanced and paid in, which said sum of seventy thousand pounds, they the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphry Tailor,
Ralph Bucknall, and every of them, do Covenant to pay unto our Sovereign Lord
the King at his Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin, over and above the Rents herein
aforementioned, by the proportion of ten thousand pound per men's. until the
whole be advanced and paid in; the first payment of the said ten thousand pound
per men's. to begin in the first month after the date of these presents; and
that the whole seventy thousand pounds be left in His Majesty's hands for four
years, and from thence until the end of the term, unless other sufficient
security for payment of the rent be given in lieu thereof, according to the
intent and meaning of the said proposal aforementioned. And also for and in
consideration of the yearly rents herein and hereby reserved, and of other the
Covenants, Provisoes, Conditions, and Agreements herein after-mentioned, on the
parts and behalfes of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphry Tailor, Ralph Bucknall, to be paid, done and
performed; and for diverse other good causes and considerations His said Majesty
thereunto especially moving, HAS, by and with the advice of the Lords
Commissioners of His Treasury, and others of His Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, and of His especial Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
demised and granted, and to farm letten, and by these Presents for His
Highness his heirs and Successors, does demise, grant, and to Farm let unto
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Phillip Iemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, all that the Annual rate, duty, charge, or
imposition of two shillings sterling by the year, due and payable to His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for, or in respect of any Fire-hearth, or
other place used for Firing and Stoves, within any House or Edifice, and which
at any time after the Feast of the Nativity now last past, unto the Feast of
the Nativity which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy five, shall or may from time to time, during the term aforesaid,
become due and payable, or are appointed to be paid unto His Majesty, His
Heirs and Successors, by virtue of the said late Act Entitled, An Act for
establishing an Additional Revenue upon His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
for the better support of His and their Crown and Dignity; And of the said
other Act, Entitled, An Additional Act for the better ordering and collecting
the Revenue arising by Hearth-Money or otherwise howsoever; And also all and
every the powers, liberties, privileges, profits and advantages, in and by the
said Acts, or either of them, vested in His Majesty; and also all those Rates,
Charges, Duties, Impositions, Payments, and Sums of Money due and payable to His
Majesty, by such person or persons who now are, or at any time before the Feast
of the Nativity, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1675, shall be licensed
to utter and sell, by way of Retaile, in their respective houses, any Wine, or
Aqua-vitae, Vsquebagh, Brandy, Balkan, or any kind of distilled strong water
or spirits; and all other duties and sums of Money of that nature, which by
virtue of the said late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the better
ordering the selling of Wines, and Aqua-vitae, together with all sorts of
strong water by retaile, or otherwise howsoever, have grown due, or shall or
may at any time after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord now last past, unto
the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord which shall be in the year of our Lord
1675 inclusive grow due and renew, or from time to time during the term
aforesaid, ought to become due and payable, and are appointed to be paid to His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, or any of them; and all other the benefits,
profits and advantages of the said Act; and also all those annual Quit-rents,
and payments of three pence per Acre, yearly, for every acre of English measure
within the Province of Leinster in the Realm of Ireland, and of two pence
farthing per acre yearly for every acre of English Measure within the Province
of Munster in the Realm of Ireland, and of one penny half penny per acre yearly
for every acre of English measure within the Province of Connaught in the Realm
of Ireland, and of two pence per acre yearly for every acre of English measure
within the Province of Ulster in the Realm of Ireland, and of one shilling six
pence yearly out of every twenty shillings Rent for which any Houses or
Tenements in any the Corporations in Ireland which have been allotted to any
person or persons, their heirs or assigns, in or toward satisfaction of any
arrears due to any Commissioned Officers who served his Majesty or his Royal
Father in the Wars of Ireland, upon or before the fifth of June, 1649, have
been or shall be let or demised: And all and every the Annual Quit-rents, and
payments of that nature, which by virtue of the said late Act, entitled, An
Act for the better execution of his Majesty's Gracious Declaration for the
settlement of his Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the several Interests
of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other his Subjects there; And of the said other
Act, Entitled, An Act for the explaining of some doubts arising upon an Act,
Entitled, An Act for the better execution of his Majesty's Gracious
Declaration for the settlement of his Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of
the several Interests of Adventurers, Soldiers, and other his Subjects there;
and for making some Alterations of, and additions unto the said Act, for the
more speedy and effectual settlement of the said Kingdom, or by any other Act
of Parliament whatsoever, or otherwise howsoever, From Christmas last, until
Christmas 1675, inclusive.
shall or may at any time after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God now
last past, and before, and until the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1675 inclusive, grow due and payable, or
from time to time during the term aforesaid ought to become due and payable,
and are appointed to be paid unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or
any of them, by or from all, every, or any of the Adventurers or Soldiers,
their Heirs or Assigns, settled in any Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments by
virtue of the two Acts of Parliament last before mentioned, or either of them,
and by or from all and every person and persons restored unto, and reprized for
his and their estate and estates, and by virtue of both or either of the Acts
aforesaid, and by or from such Commissioned Officers who served his Majesty or
his Royal Father in the Wars in Ireland at any time before the fifth of June
1649, their heirs or assigns respectively, and by or from any other person or
persons whatsoever. All which said annual quit-rents and payments are by the
latter of the said two Acts of Parliament last mentioned, commonly called the
Explanatory Act, charged upon, and enacted to be issuing out of all Lands
whatsoever, which by the said Explanatory Act, or by the said former Act,
commonly called the Act of Settlement, were vested in his Majesty, or restored
by any Decrees in the said Explanatory Act confirmed or settled, or mentioned to
be disposed, restored, confirmed, or settled unto or upon any person or persons,
bodies politic or corporate, by virtue of any clause in both or either of the
said Acts contained, and not particularly by plain and express words excepted
from quit-rents in the same clause, and no other person or persons, bodies
politic or corporate whatsoever; and out of all and singular the Lands
appointed to be set out for augmentation of Bishoprics, for endowment of
Parochial Churches with Gleabe, for the better support of the Provost, or of
the Provost and Fellows of the College of Dublin, for the maintenance of the
Fort at Duncannon, and the benefit of the Corporation at Bandon Bridge; and out
of all the Lands enjoyed by transplanted persons in the Province of Connaught,
or the County of Clare; and out of all other the Lands seized, sequestered, or
set out by reason of, or upon account of the late Rebellion or War, (the Lands
of James Duke of Ormond, Elizabeth Lady Duchess of Ormond, the Earl of
Burlington and Cork, the Earl of Roscomon, and other the Protestants of Ireland
heretofore sequestered, only excepted.)

AND His Majesty of his further especial grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, HAS demised and granted, and by these presents for his Highness, his
heirs and successors, does demise and grant unto the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphry Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
all and all manner of chief-rents, rents service of Inheritance, rents of
Assize, And also all other rents.
rents charge, rents seck or dry rents, fee-farm rents, rents reserved upon
Leases which were made for 21 years or more, Assart rents, rents due for
Purprestures arented, Copyhold-rents, and all other certain and ancient
Crown-rents yearly payable unto His Majesty his Heirs or Successors within the
said Realm of Ireland, and which at any time after the Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord now last past, and before, Payable to His Majesty His Heirs and
Successors, from Christmas last to Christmas 1675.
or until the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord which shall be in the year of
our Lord God 1675 inclusive, shall or may grow due and payable, or from time to
time during the term aforesaid of right ought to be paid unto his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, by any person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, by
reason of any Tenure, Charter, Patent, Lease, Demise, or Grant made for the
Term of 21 years or more, or to be made of any Messuages, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, or of any Rights, Royalties, Liberties,
Privileges, Except all annual quit-rents, whereof any grant or release has
been made by His Majesty, bearing date before Michaelmass last past.
Franchises and Immunities whatsoever. Except and always reserved out of this
present Demise, all and every such annual quit-rents and payments of three
pence per acre in the Province of Leinster, two pence farthing per acre in the
Province of Munster, two pence half penny per acre in the Province of Connaught,
and two pence per acre in the Province of Vlster, and of one shilling six pence
out of every 20 shillings yearly, for which any Houses in Corporations which
have been allotted toward satisfaction of any arrears due to any Commissioned
Officers who served His Majesty or His Royal Father before the 5 of June 1649
in the Wars of Ireland, have been or shall be let or demised, whereof any Grant
or Release has been made by His Majesty to any person or persons by virtue of
any Letters patents under the Great Seal of England, or under the Great Seal of
Ireland, bearing date before the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel now last
past, and next and immediately preceding the date of these presents. And also
except and always reserved out of this present Demise, all and every the
yearly rents, duties, and sums of money heretofore reserved, and which of right
still are and ought to be due and payable unto His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for or in respect of one or more Lease or Leases heretofore made,
and yet in being, of all and singular the Customs and Subsidies of Tonnage and
Poundage; And the present farm of the Customs.
and all other sums of Money due and payable in lieu of Custom, and of all
those Rates and Duties of Excise due and payable to His Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, for or by reason of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises imported into
the Realm of Ireland. And also for and in respect of one or more Lease or
Leases heretofore made, and still in being, of all and singular the Rates and
Duties of Excise due and payable to His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, And
also of the Excise.
for or by reason of any Beer, Ale, Aqua-vitae, and other liquors Exciseable,
for or by reason of any Goods, Wares, Merchandises, or other commodities, of
the growth, production, or manufacture of the Realm of Ireland, commonly
called, The Inland Excise: And of all other rates and duties due and payable
unto His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for or in respect of any Licenses
granted or to be granted for selling of Ale and Beer by retaile: all which
rates and duties, And Ale and Beer Licenses.
or the rents thereupon reserved, during the continuance of the said several
and respective terms and Leases, shall remain and be payable unto His Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors; any thing herein before contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

TO HAVE AND TO HOLD all and every the Rates, Charges, The Habendum.
Duties and Impositions of two shillings sterling by the year, which by virtue
of the said late Act for the establishing an additional Revenue upon His
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for the better support of His and their
Crown and Dignity; and by virtue of the said late additional Act for the better
ordering and collecting the Revenue arising by Hearth-mony, are due and
payable, or may grow due and payable unto His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
for or by reason of any Fire-hearth, or other place used for firing and Stoves,
within any House or Edifice, or other place within the Realm of Ireland (except
before excepted:) And also all those Rates, Charges, Duties, Impositions, and
sums of Money which by virtue of the late Act for the better ordering the
selling of Wines and Aqua-vitae, together with all sorts of strong waters by
retaile, are due and payable, or may grow due and payable by such person or
persons who now are, or hereafter may be licensed to utter or sell by way of
Retaile in their respective houses any Wine, Aqua-vitae, Vsquebagh, Brandy,
Balkan, or any kind of distilled strong water or spirits, (except before
excepted) and also all and every the several and respective annual Quit-rents
and payments of three pence per acre for every Acre in the Province of
Leinster, and two pence farthing per acre for every acre in the Province of
Munster, and one penny halfpenny per Acre for every acre in the Province of
Connaught, and two pence per acre for every acre in the Province of Vlster, and
of one shilling and six pence yearly for every twenty shillings rent, for which
any houses in any Corporation in Ireland allotted to any person, his heirs or
assigns, in satisfaction of any arrears, has been or shall be let or demised;
and all other the annual Quit-rents and payments which by virtue of the said
two late Acts of Parliament, commonly called, The Act of Settlement, and The
Act of Explanation, or either of them, are or may grow due and payable unto his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, and are charged upon and made to be issuing
out of the several and respective Lands therein specified and declared (except
before excepted) and also all manner of chief rents, rents service of
Inheritance, rents of assize, rents charge, rents seck, or dry rents,
fee-farm-rents, and all other ancient Crown-rents yearly payable unto his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, within the Realm of Ireland (except before
excepted) and all other the premises herein before mentioned, with their and
every of their appurtenances, whereof no estate is already limited by these
presents (except before excepted) unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Phillip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from the Feast Day of the Nativity of our
Lord now last past, for, during, From Christmas last for seven years.
and until the full end and term of seven years from thenceforth next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended: TO the only proper use, benefit and behoof
of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
without any account, matter, or other thing to be yielded, made, or done for
the same, other then the rents and sums of money, and other things hereafter in
and by these presents reserved, covenanted or agreed to be paid or performed;
and in as large, ample and beneficial manner as his Majesty may, might or ought
to have, take or enjoy the same, by force or virtue of any Statute or Statutes,
Act or Acts of Parliament, Custom, Use, Usage, or Prescription; and as
largely, amply, and beneficially as his Majesty may demise or grant the same,
or any part thereof, or as the same are hereby mentioned, meant, or intended to
be demised or granted; Notwithstanding the clause in the Act for Hearth-mony.
any Law, Statute, Act or Acts of Parliament, and more especially the clause in
the late Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for establishing an Additional
Revenue upon his Majesty, his heirs and successors, for the better support of
his and their Crown and dignity: Which enacts, That all the Revenues arising by
the said Act shall be duly and constantly paid into his Majesty's Courts of
Exchequer, and shall not be charged or chargeable with any Gifts, Grants or
Pensions whatsoever; and that all and every such grant, and all and every such
Clause of non obstante therein contained, should be utterly void; and all and
every persons to whom such grants should be passed, should be accomptants to
his Majesty for all Moneys received by pretense of such Grants: And also all
and every Ordinance, Order, Custom, Proclamation, Letters Patents, Provision,
Restraint, or any other matter or thing had or made, or to be had or made to
the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And the Farmers covenant to pay.
YIELDING and PAYING therefore, and the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, for them
and every of them, their and every of their heirs, executors and
administrators, and every of them, do by these presents Covenant to and with
our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors, to yield and pay
unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, his heirs and successors, yearly and
every year, during the said term of seven years mentioned in this present
demise, at or into his or their receipt of the Exchequer at Dublin, or by such
other payments, and with such deductions, Ninety one thousand five hundred
pounds.
abatements, and allowances, and in such manner as in and by these presents is
mentioned, the full sum of fourscore and eleven thousand and five hundred
pounds sterling, of lawful money of England, or so much other lawful and
current money of Ireland as shall be Equivalent to fourscorce and eleven
thousand and five hundred pounds of lawful English money; At or before four the
most usual Feasts: That is to say, the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, Quarterly.
The Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, The Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel, and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, by even and equal
portions; the first payment thereof to begin and to be made upon the Feast of
the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary now last past before the date of
these presents.

AND for the better enabling the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Covenants of the first
demise.
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies and Assigns, to have,
enjoy, collect, levy, and receive the said Annual Rents, Payments, Rates,
Duties of Hearth-money, Duties arising by Licenses for retailing Wine and
Strongwaters, Revenues, Profits, and other the Premises hereby demised,
according to the true intent and meaning hereof; His Majesty does by these
presents, as much as in him lies, and as far as the Laws and Statutes of
Ireland will permit, nominate, constitute and appoint the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Officers, Deputies, Substitutes,
Agents and Assigns, and no other person or persons whatsoever, to be his
Majesty's Officer and Officers, from and after the Commencement, and during the
continuance of this present demise, for the receiving, The Farmers made the
Kings Collectors.
collecting and answering the said Annual rents, as also the Duty arising by
the Fire-hearths and Stoves, by virtue of the said several Acts in that behalf,
or any of them; and for viewing and numbering of the several Chimney-hearths
and Stoves, and other firing-places mentioned in the said Acts; and for the
inspecting and examining the several Rolls, Certificates and Returns thereof,
With power to do those things which the Kings Officers are enabled to do.
made and to be made from time to time into His Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
in pursuance of the said Act or Acts, or any other things belonging to the
same; and to do and execute all and every other the matters and things touching
or concerning the Revenues, Duties, Profits, or other the premises herein
demised, which are directed and authorized to be done and executed by the said
Acts, by Officers to be thereunto lawfully appointed: And further, that the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphry
Tailor, Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, Agents and
Assigns, shall and may Collect, Receive, Levy and enjoy, to their own use and
benefit, such sum and sums of Money, or part or parts of the said Rate, Duty
and Premises hereby demised, as by and according to the purport, intent, and
true meaning of these presents shall have accrewed due and payable to them, at
or before the end or expiration of the term or time of seven years hereby
granted, Although this present Demise, and the said term of seven years shall
be expired and determined. And His said Majesty does hereby give and grant unto
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or their
Deputy and Deputies, Officer and Officers, Substitute and Substitutes, Agent
and Agents, from time to time, and at all times after the Commencement, and
during the continuance of this present demise, full power and authority to do,
perform, and put in execution all and singular the powers and authorities in
the said several Acts or any of them mentioned, Power to put the Acts in
execution.
for the receiving and collecting the Duty arising by the said Annual Rents,
Fire-hearths and Stoves, and other the duties and premises; and to do, execute,
and put in Execution all and every other the matters and things any way
belonging to or concerning the same, directed and appointed by the said Acts or
any of them, to all Intents or purposes whatsoever. And that they the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or their Deputy and
Deputies, Substitute and Substitutes, Agent or Agents, and other Under-Officer
or Officers, shall and may from time to time, and at any time and times during
the Continuance of this present demise, have power to search, view, take Notice
and Copies of all Returns, Duplicates and Records whatsoever, in his Majesty's
Exchequer, or in the hands of any Clerk of the Peace, or Custos Rotulorum of
any particular County, And to search Books and Papers, to take Copies of
Records, and the Custody of Returns, etc.
City or Place, or elsewhere, or in the hands of any other person or persons,
touching or concerning the premises, or any way relating thereunto; or for the
Examination, finding out, and discovering of Parishes, Villages, Places, and
Names of Persons, for the better improving and managing the hereby demised
premises. And all and every His Majesty's Officer and Officers whom the same
does or may concern, are hereby strictly Commanded and Required to take notice
hereof, and permit the same to be done accordingly; As also to examine,
compare, attest and sign such Constats, and Copies of any of the said Records
in their respective Custodies, as shall be prepared and offered unto them by
the said John Forth, Returns and Duplicates to be signed without Fee.
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies and Assigns, and that
without Demanding any Fee, Reward, or Recompense for any such search, perusal,
taking of Notes or Copies to be written by the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, Agents, or Assigns, and without any
other Warrant or Authority in that behalf, and without any let, delay, denial
or interruption in or about the same.

AND His Majesty is graciously pleased, and by these presents, for himself, his
Heirs and Successors, does will, command and require, that all and singular
the said Returns and Records of and concerning the said annual payments and
duties of Hearth-money, The said Returns and Records.
and other the premises already returned, and also those that shall hereafter
from time to time be returned into the Court of Exchequer, To be placed and put
in the Farmers Head-Office.
during the Continuance of this present demise, shall be placed and put in such
house or place as the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns shall from time to time have and appoint for their
chief Office, in or near the City of Dublin, for the ordering and mannaging all
the matters and things for or any way concerning the Collecting and Levying of
the Duties aforesaid: And that the Returns and Records so remaining in the
said chief Office, shall be in the possession and under the care and inspection
of His Majesty's Remembrancer, his deputy or deputies; Yet so, as that the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, Geeorge Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, The Farmers may search, and take Copies of
the same.
Administrators and Assigns, for their more speedy, convenient, and perfect
managing of the several annual payments, Rates, duties and premises hereby
demised, may from time to time during the Continuance of this present demise,
have liberty to view, inspect, search and examine, and take Copies of the same;
the same Copies to be made by such person or persons, Which Copies are to be
made by such persons as the Kings Remembrancer shall allow without Fee.
as His Majesty's Remembrancer, or his Deputy for the time being shall allow
of, without any Fee or other Charge to be paid for the same: And that all and
every the Returns and Records of and concerning the premises, which do, or
shall hereafter remain in the hands of the respective Clerks of the Peace,
Recorders of Cities, or Town-Clerkes respectively, shall be placed and kept in
such convenient house or place in every respective County, City or Town, where
every Vnder-Farmer, Deputy or Officer of the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, So also of Records and returns in the
hands of the Clerks of the Peace, Recorders, Town-Clerks etc. without Fee.
for the same County, City, Town or Place, may have access to the same, to
view, search, examine and take Copies of them: and that both the said Records
in the chief Office and respective places where the Records shall be kept by
the Clerks of the Peace, Town-Clerks, and Recorders of every County, City, Town
or Place, they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of their Vnder-farmers, Deputies and Agents as they
shall appoint, shall have Free access to the same at all reasonable and
convenient times for the purposes aforesaid, without any Fee or Fees, or other
charge for the same.

AND for the better enabling the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to pay the said Rents, and to execute
and discharge the Trusts and Powers by these presents committed and granted
unto them; they are hereby authorized and empowered to demand, take, receive
and keep all and every other Books, They are further to ask, demand, and
receive, all other Books, Returns, etc. in whose hands soever they be, except
the Records in the Office of the Remembrancer, Clerks of the Peace, and
Town-Clerks.

And all persons are commanded to deliver the same, except such as have not
finished their Accounts.

A discharge for the delivery of the said Accounts, Books, etc.


Returns, Duplicates, Rolls, Accounts and VVritings, any way relating unto the
Revenue of the Hearth-money, in whose hands soever they be, for His Majesty's
use and service, other then such as are to remain as Records in the Office of
his Majesty's Remembrancer in the Exchequer, or with the respective Clerks of
the Peace, Recorders or Town-Clerks as aforesaid; and the same to lodge and
dispose of where they may be most conveniently made use of for the said service
in the said chief Office or Vnder-Offices respectively. And all or any person
or persons now or formerly employed in and about the said Revenue, and others
who have any of the said Writings in their Custody and keeping, are hereby
commanded and required to deliver up the same accordingly (saving only such
persons who have not finished their Accounts, may have the use thereof for the
perfecting of their Accounts, and obtaining their discharges respectively) and
the Receipt or Receipts of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors or Assigns, or any one of them, shall be to such Officer or
Officers, and other persons, for their so doing, a sufficient Warrant and
discharge.

AND our said Sovereign Lord the King does hereby, for Himself, his Heirs and
Successors, Covenant, promise and grant to and with the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph
Bucknal, No persons to intermeddle in the Ordering, Collecting, or receiving of
the Duties demised, besides the Farmers, and who they shall appoint.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner following (that is to
say) that neither his said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, nor his
Lieutenant or other chief Governor of Ireland and Council there, shall or will
at any time or times during the said term (unless at their instance and
desire) authorize and appoint any other person or persons whatsoever besides
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, in
any wise, during the Continuance of this present demise, to act or intermeddle
in the ordering, collecting and receiving, levying and managing of the said
annual payments, Rates, Duties, and premises hereby demised, or mentioned to be
demised, or any part or parts thereof.

AND his Majesty is pleased further to covenant, and by these presents, for
himself, his Heirs and Successors, does covenant, grant, and agree to and with
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and
every of them, that if at any time during the continuance of this present
Term, any of the Duties arising by Hearth-money, Duties arising by Licenses
for selling Wine, Aquavitae or Strong Water by Retayle, Feefarme-rents,
Quit-rents, Rents reserved upon Leases, or any other Annual rents, Payments or
Duties hereby demised or granted, or mentioned, meant or intended to be demised
or granted, shall happen to be paid into His Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer at
Dublin; If any of these Duties shall be paid into the Exchequer, it is to be
accepted in part of the Rent, if any due.
that then, and in every such Case, His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
shall and will be pleased to accept of the sums of Money so paid in, and to
retain the same in part of payment of the Rents reserved by these presents, if
any shall then be due; and if no part of the Rents reserved by these presents
shall then be due and owing, or not so much as the sums so paid into His
Majesty's Receipt shall amount unto, It shall and may be lawful to and for the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, And if no rent be due, or not so much as is paid
in, the Farmers are to have the same out of the Exchequer without Fee.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, to ask,
demand, have and receive, to their own use and behoof, all and every such
Duties, Rents and Sums of Money which are hereby demised, and at the time of
such demand shall have been paid into His Majesty's Receipt as before, and
shall be found to exceed the sums of money then due and owing to His Majesty
for Rents, without any Fee, gratuity, reward, or other charges whatsoever to be
paid for the same.

AND His Majesty does hereby strictly charge and command the Lord Treasurer and
Vice-treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of His said Court of Exchequer, and all
other the Officers and Ministers of his Revenues now and for the time being,
that they, and every of them, upon the sight of these presents, or the
Enrolment thereof, do forthwith pay and deliver, or cause to be paid and
delivered unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, to their own use, Without further VVarrant.
and without any other or further Account, all and singular the Duties, Rents
and Sums of Money which by virtue of this present demise they ought to have,
and which at the time of their or any of their demand shall be found to be, or
have been paid unto His Majesty's Receipt as aforesaid, over and above the Rent
then due to His Majesty: And for so doing, these presents, or the Inrolment
thereof, shall be to them and every of them a sufficient Warrant and Discharge
in that behalf. And if any Act done, or to be done by His Majesty, his Heirs
or Successors, or by the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors
of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or by the Lord Treasurer, the
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, or by any other
Officers or Ministers of His Majesty's Revenue there now and for the time
being, or by any of them, If the Farmers are or shall be obstructed in having
these Duties.
shall be any obstruction or hinderance unto them the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in the having and receiving the
full and entire sums of money, so as aforesaid paid into His Majesty's Receipt
over and above the Rent then due unto His Majesty: They are to have defalcation
by retainer.
Then His Majesty is pleased that there shall be an Allowance and Defalcation
made by way of Recouper and Retayner of so much of the Rent by these presents
reserved, as may be sufficient to give recompense and satisfaction for the
same, together with damages and interest at 10 per cent. from the time of
detaining thereof. With interest and damages.
And his Majesty does hereby authorize the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, and any
six or more of them, Lord Lieutenant, etc. upon proof to allow the same.
whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland
for the time being to be always one, or more, upon due proof of such
obstruction or hinderance made by any Order or Declaration of Council to be
made in Council, and signed with their hands, to allow the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to retain and keep in
his and their hands so much of the Rents by these presents reserved, as may be
sufficient to recompense the loss or damage which shall or may be suffered by
not receiving the Duties, Rents and Sums of Money so as aforesaid paid into his
Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin, or by any obstruction or hinderance
therein as aforesaid. And His Majesty does hereby require and command the
Barons of His Court of Exchequer, The Barons, etc. commanded also to permit and
allow the same.
and all other the Officers and Ministers of His Revenue there, that they
permit and allow the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to have the full benefit of such order of
defalcations; and for so doing, these presents, or the enrolment thereof, shall
be to them and every of them a sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

AND whereas in and by the said Act, entitled, An Act for the better ordering
the selling of Wines and Aqua-vitae, together with all sorts of Strong Water
by Retayle, it is among other things provided, That every person licensed to
Retaile, according to the form of the said Act, should pay the sums appointed
by the said Act to be paid in manner following, that is to say, one moiety
thereof before the person so to be licensed take out his license, and the other
moiety thereof at the end of six Months after the date of such license, into
the hands of Collectors to be appointed for that purpose, of which Collectors
the Commissioners for granting the said licenses are to take Recognizances with
good security, with condition for payment duly into the Receipt of His
Majesty's Exchequer all such sum and sums of money which in respect of the said
licenses shall be received by him: And in case the said Recognizances shall be
forfeited, the Commissioners are to return the same into His Majesty's said
Court of Exchequer. And the Commissioners are farther appointed to take Bonds
of the parties licensed for their respective second payments; As by the said
Act more at large appears. And whereas also his Majesty is informed that
several Receivers of his Majesty's Fee-farme-rents, and other the Annual rents,
duties and payments hereby demised, have entered into several Bonds and
Recognizances for the due payment unto his Majesty of all such Rents, Duties
and Sums of money which they shall respectively receive; His Majesty is hereby
graciously pleased to covenant and agree, And by these presents, for himself,
his Heirs and Successors, does covenant and agree to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, If any Securities given by persons
licensed to retaile VVines and Strong Water, or by any Collectors of those
Duties, or by any Receivers of the Fee-farme-rents, etc. shall become forfeited.
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, that if at any time after the
commencement of this present term, any such Bonds or Recognizances entered into
by Collectors, Retaylors, Receivers, or their sureties, shall happen to be
forfeited, for, or by reason of the non-payment of any rent or sum of money
which they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns ought by virtue of these presents to have had and enjoyed to their
own use, if the same had been duly paid; or if at any time during the
continuance of this present term, any other Bonds or Recognizances of that
nature shall be entered into, and also forfeited to His Majesty during the
continuance of the said term; That then, and in every such case, it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, to have, hold, take,
receive and enjoy, to their own proper use, benefit and behoof, without any
Account or other matter or thing to be therefore paid or rendered, other then
the rents by these presents reserved, The Farmers are to have the benefit of
those forfeitures, and of all Executions thereupon.
the whole forfeiture and benefit that shall be raised, gotten or had by all
and every such Bonds, Recognizances and Securities, and of all Judgments,
Executions and Extents thereupon, and Compositions for the same: And that it
shall be lawful for them, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, in the name of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Sucessors, and at their own proper
costs and charges, to sue, prosecute and implead in His Majesty's Court of
Exchequer all and every person and persons by whom any such Obligation or
Recognizance shall be forfeited, Power to sue such securities in the Kings name.
and his and their Sureties; and in the name or names of him, His Heirs or
Successors, to procure Judgment, and sue forth Execution of and for all and
every the penalties and forfeitures in the said Obligations or Recognizances
contained. And our said Sovereign Lord the King does hereby command the Lord
Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Court of Exchequer for
the time being, that when and as often as any of the said penalties and
forfeitures of the said Obligations or Recognizances shall be levied or paid
into the Court of Exchequer, And when the forfeitures are levied, they are to
be delivered to the Farmers without further account.
so often all and every the said penalties and forfeitures be delivered unto
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
their only use and benefit, without any other or further account; And, for so
doing, these Presents, And the Officers discharged.

Commissioners for licenses to sell Wine, etc. not take Securities, but such
as they will answer for, without the Farmers consent.


or the Enrolment thereof, shall be to them and every of them, and to all other
Officers and Ministers to whom it shall appertain, a sufficient Warrant and
Discharge in that behalf. And our said Sovereign Lord the King does further
charge and command all and every the Commissioners for granting of Licenses to
persons to sell Wine, Aquavitae, or Strong Water by Retaile, that they presume
not to take any Bonds or Recognizances by virtue of the said Act, but of such
sufficient persons for whom they will undertake if the parties prove unable,
unless the said Bonds and Recognizances be taken with or by the consent and
good liking of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Under their hands, or the hands of some of them.
Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, or some of them thereunto first had by writing under their or some of
their hands; And that they do not deliver, cancel, or make void the said Bonds
or Recognizances, or any of them, unless it be after notice first given to, and
with the consent and good liking of the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, in writing first had
and obtained. And if any act done or to be done by His Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or by the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or by the Lord Treasurer, the
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, or by any other
Officers or Ministers of his Majesty's Revenues there for the time being, or by
any of them, shall be any obstruction or hinderance unto them the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, If they are hindered in
receiving the forfeitures, (Fees of the Court excepted) they are to have
Defalcation by retainer.
Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, in the having or receiving the full benefit of such forfeited
Obligations, and the penalties thereof, or of the Judgments and Executions
thereupon had (the due and lawful Fees of the Officers of the said Court only
excepted) Then his Majesty is pleased that there shall be an allowance and
Defalcation made by way of recouper and retainer of so much of the rate by
these presents reserved as may be sufficient to give recompense and
satisfaction for the same. And his Majesty does hereby authorize the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, Which the Lord
Lieutenant, etc. upon proof are to allow of without further VVarrant.
and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the
Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being to be always one or more, upon due proof thereof made, to grant unto
them an Order in writing for the allowance of such Defalcations, without any
other or further Warrant from his Majesty to be therefore had or obtained.

And his Majesty, for himself, his Heirs and Successors, is further pleased to
covenant and grant to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, and every of
them, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, from time to
time and at all times during the continuance of this present Demise, to sue
for, distreyne, levy, prosecute and recover all and every the Quit-rents and
Annual payments hereby demised, Power to sue in the Kings name, and to have the
benefit of all Process, seizure, execution, etc. of which all Judges and
Officers are to take notice.
and the arrearages thereof, in his Majesty's name, or in their own names, as
they shall be advised; And further, that they and every of them, shall have the
full benefit and advantage of all such Process, seizure, execution, power and
prerogative as his Majesty might have used and exercised for the due and legal
recovery of the premises or any part thereof, if this present Demise had not
been made. And hereof all Judges, Officers and Ministers of His Majesty's
revenue are required to take notice, and to be aiding and assisting to them
accordingly.

And his said Majesty does hereby further, for him, his Heirs and Successors,
covenant, promise and grant to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that if any Lands, tenements or
hereditaments within the said Realm of Ireland, charged or chargeable with any
Rents, If Rents by the Kings seizing of Land.
Quit-rents, or other payments hereby demised, shall at any time hereafter come
into the possession of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, by virtue of any
Grant, Surrender, or other Conveyance, or of any Attainder of Treason,
Misprision of Treason, Felony, Praemunire, or otherwise howsoever, whereby, or
by reason whereof any of the Rents, Quit-rents or other payments hereby
granted, or any of them, shall cease, determine, or otherwise be extinguished;
or if any Judgment has been, or shall hereafter be given in his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, or any other of his Courts at Dublin, whereby any Lands
which were vested in his Majesty, or restored by any Decrees which are
confirmed by the Explanatory Act, or settled by any Clause or Proviso, without a
particular exemption from Quit-rents in the same clause expressly mentioned,
shall be discharged from payment of quit-rents, the quit-rents of all such
Lands, whether they be the Lands of innocent Papists, or others, being hereby
intended to be demised; then in all and every such case and cases, the said
Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council
there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being
to be always one or more, shall have full power and authority by these
presents, by their order in writing, and in manner and form aforesaid, upon
the humble Petition of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Iemmet, Upon the Farmers petition to the Lord Lieutenant, etc.
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, to make unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Aministrators and Assigns, such reasonable recompense and
defalcation out of the yearly rent hereby reserved for and in respect of such
rents so happening to extinguish or cease as aforesaid, immediately from and
after the time that such Rents shall happen to extinguish or cease as
aforesaid, They are to have Defalcation from the time that such Rents shall
cease.
for and during such cesser and extinguishment, as to them or any six or more
of them respectively as aforesaid shall be thought meet and expedient: And that
these presents, or the Enrolment or Exemplification thereof, shall be a
sufficient warrant and discharge to the said Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any
six or more of them (whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being to be always one or more) to make the
said recompense and defalcation in that behalf accordingly.

And whereas many rents due and payable to his Majesty have been of long time
concealed, and are not, neither have been put in charge in His Majesty's Court
of Exchequer in Ireland since His Majesty's Restoration; the discovery and
prosecution whereof, and the causing the same to be put in charge in his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer for the future, must of necessity occasion great
expense and trouble; His Majesty therefore, for the better encouragement of the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
undertake the discovery and prosecution of all such Concealements at their own
proper costs and charges, is graciously pleased to covenant, And by these
presents, for himself, his Heirs and Successors, does covenant, grant, and
agree to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, that if any concealed Rents other then the new
Quit-rents made payable to his Majesty by the late Acts of Parliament commonly
called the Act of Settlement, and the Act of Explanation, Concealed Rents other
then the new Quit-rents, and such rents as shall be discovered within two years.
which shall not within the space of two years next ensuing the date of these
presents be otherwise discovered, shall at any time during the continuance of
this present grant be discovered by the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, and at their or any of
their proper costs and charges in Law, shall be so far prosecuted in His
Majesty's name, that they shall be duly recovered and put in charge in his
Majesty's Court of Exchequer; that then, and in such case, they the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall have and
receive to their own use and behoof out of the arrears of the rents so to be
recovered, and not otherwise, so much money as three years arrearages of the
Rents so to be discovered and put in charge shall amount to, The Farmers are to
have three years value of the same to be paid out of the arrears of such
concealed Rents.
without any Account or other matter or thing to be therefore rendered. And all
Officers and Ministers of his Majesty's Revenue are hereby required to cause
the said three years arrearages to be from time to time paid out accordingly;
And for so doing, these presents, or the Enrolment hereof, shall be to them and
every of them a sufficient Warrant and Discharge.

CUSTOMS AND Imported Excise.
AND His Majesty of His more abundant special Grace, certain knowledge and mere
motion, Has further Demised, Granted, and to Farm letten, and by these
Presents for His Highness, his Heirs, and Successors, for and in consideration
of the sum of 70000 l. so as aforesaid advanced, and of other the Covenants and
Agreements hereafter mentioned, does further Demise, Grant, and to Farm let
unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, all Customs, Subsidies and Impositions,
or Sums of Money taken or known by the name, or in lieu of Customs, Subsidies,
and Impositions, Payments, Duties, and Sums of Money; And all manner of
Subsidies of Tonnage or Poundage, The Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, and
the duties of Excise for goods imported and demised.
now or heretofore taken or known by the name of Tonnage or Poundage, and all
other Subsidies and Imposts, sums of Money, rights, payments and duties which
at any time or times after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ now
next ensuing unto the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ, which shall be
in the year of Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five inclusive, shall,
may, or ought to happen, come, arise, grow, renew, be due or payable, From
Christmas next to Christmas 1675.
or are appointed to be paid to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, or to any of them by the said late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An
Act for settling the Subsidy of Poundage, and granting a Subsidy of Tonnage and
other sums of money unto his Royal Majesty his Heirs and Successors, the same
to be paid upon Merchandise imported and exported into or out of the Realm of
Ireland, according to a Book of Rates hereunto annexed, According to the late
Act, or by reason of any Custom, usage or prescription, or otherwise.
or by any other the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Realm of Ireland, or
any of them heretofore made or established, or by reason of any Custom, usage,
or prescription, or in right of his Prerogative Royal, or by any other ways or
means whatsoever established, for Customs, Subsidies and Imposts, or in lieu
of Customs, Subsidies, and Imposts, and other Payments and Duties, of, for, or
by reason of all and all manner of Wines, Wares, Goods and Merchandises
whatsoever, of whatsoever nature, kind, quality or condition they are or shall
be; as well those which at any time or times after the Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord next ensuing, unto the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, which shall
be in the year of our Lord 1675 inclusive, shall be conveyed, imported, or
brought into the Realm of Ireland, or any Port, Haven, Harbor, Creek, Road, or
Place thereunto belonging, or duly entered in any Custom-house there, or shall
be brought into any Warehouse or other places belonging to them, or any of them
from any foreign Island, Collony or Plantation whatsoever, heretofore made or
planted, or hereafter to be made or planted, or from any other parts beyond the
Seas and Realms of England or Scotland, or any of them, by way of Merchandise,
Provision, Prize taken from Pirates or Enemies, or other ways howsoever; As
also those which at any time or times between the said Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord, now next ensuing, and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, which
shall be in the year of Lord, One Thousand six hundred seventy five, inclusive,
shall be conveyed, exported or carried by way of Merchandise out of the said
Realm of Ireland or any part thereof, or Shipped or put into any Boat, Lighter,
Gabbard, Wherrey, Crayer, Ship, or Vessel, or any Boats, Gabbards, Wherreys,
Crayers, Lighters, Ships or Vessels, within any of the Ports or places of or
within the Realm of Ireland, or any of them, or within any Havens, Creeks,
Roads, or Places, or members of, or belonging to the said Ports or Places, or
any of them, with intent to be from thence carried or conveyed by way of
Merchandise out of the said Realm of Ireland into any parts or places beyond
the Seas, or into the Realms of England or Scotland, or either of them, or any
part of either of them: And also All Customs, Subsidies, and Imposts, Payment,
and Duties, which at any time or times within the term aforesaid shall grow or
be due or payable to His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, As also the
Customs for the Overlengths of all Woollen Clothes which shall be transported.
for the Overlengths of all woollen Clothes or Kerseys which shall be
transported from the Realm of Ireland into any parts beyond the Seas, or put
into any Ship, Boat, or other Vessel, with intent to be transported or conveyed
into parts beyond the Seas. And moreover our said Sovereign Lord the King, for
him, his Heirs and Successors, Does also grant and agree, to and with the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by these
presents, that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, shall have, take, and enjoy to their own proper
uses and behoofes, All and all manner of Customs, Subsidies and Imposts, or
sums of money, Duties or payments commonly called, known, or payable, as, or in
lieu of Customs, Subsidies, and Imposts, or any of them; and for all Goods,
Wares, and Merchandises whatsoever, which at any time or times between the
feast of the Nativity of our Lord, And also the Custom of Goods brought into
Ireland by any Ships of His Majesty.
now next ensuing, and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord which shall be in
the year of our Lord God 1675. inclusive, shall be brought into the said Realm
of Ireland, in or by any the Ships or Fleets of his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or any other Ships, or Vessels employed, or to be employed in the
service of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, Or by His Authority by
Letters of Marque, or for Pirates Goods, or goods taken from Pirates.
or by the Ships or Vessels of any other by Authority from or under his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, by Letters of Marque or by any other ways
whatsoever, or for Pirates Goods, or Goods taken from Pirates, or Enemies,
which by any means within the times or terms aforesaid shall come into the
said Realm of Ireland, as if the same Wares, Merchandises and Goods, or any of
them had been brought into the said Realm of Ireland by any of his Majesty's
Subjects by way of Merchandise, for or upon all or any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises whatsoever, as well exported as imported, or which shall become
forfeited to his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors by virtue of, and according
to the late Act of Parliament for the encouraging and increasing of Shipping
and Navigation, or any the Powers or Clauses therein contained: And to the
intent that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns may justly and truly receive, have, take, and enjoy the said
Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Payments, Duties, or sums of money in lieu of
Customs, Subsidies, and Imposts of all such Goods, Wares and Merchandises,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, It is Covenanted
and agreed, and also our Sovereign Lord the King for Him, His Heirs and
Successors does straightly charge and Command, and by these presents does
ordain, That no part of any such Goods be unladen or any way disposed of, That
no goods be unladen till a true Entry he made as well by His Majesty's Officers
as the Farmers.
until a true Entry be taken and made of all such Goods, as well by His
Majesty's Officers in those ports where such Goods shall be brought in, as by
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, their
Deputies and Agents, or some of them: And our said Sovereign Lord the King, for
him, his Heirs and Successors, and of his more especial Grace, certain
knowledge and mere motion, does further Demise and grant unto the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall all and all manner of Rates, Charges, Impositions, sums of
Money, payments, and other Duties of Excise whatsoever, which at any time or
times, and from time to time after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord now
next ensuing, unto the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, Foreign Excise
demised.
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1675. inclusive, shall, may, or ought
to happen, come, arise, grow, renew, be due, or payable, or are appointed to be
paid unto our said Sovereign Lord the King his heirs and successors or any of
them, for or in respect of any Goods, Wares or Merchandises, which within the
times aforesaid shall be brought in, and imported into the Realm of Ireland
from any parts beyond the Seas, and for which a Duty or payment of Excise is of
right belonging to his Majesty, his heirs and successors, by virtue of the said
late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for the Settling of Excise or new
Imposts upon his Majesty, his heirs and successors, according to the Books of
Rates therein inserted, Except the Alnag^ and such other duties of Excise as
may hereafter be imposed beyond the present rates.
and all other the Duties of Excise whatsoever commonly called or known by the
name of the foreign and imported Excise: excepted always, and foreprized, and
reserved out of this present Demise and Grant the Duty and Subsidy of Alnage;
And all and all manner of Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, sum and sums of Money,
Excizes, Duties, and payments whatsoever, which at any time hereafter by any
Act or Acts of Parliament to be made, and of force and effect in Ireland, or by
any Letters, Patents, Commission, or otherwise shall be granted, set, or
imposed upon, or otherwise grow due or payable more and other then the Rates,
Duties and Payments now imposed, set, or in being for any foreign Commodities,
Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever, of what nature or kind soever, imported from
any parts beyond the Seas into the Realm of Ireland, And all other kinds or
branches of Revenue, and all improvement or increase of any part of the Revenue
demised by Act of Parliament hereafter to be made.
or into any the Roads, Ports, Creeks, or places thereunto belonging, And also
except all new and other kinds or Branches of Revenues, and Improvement or
increase of any part of the Revenue hereby demised, which by virtue of any Act
of Parliament hereafter to be made shall grow due and payable to his Majesty,
his heirs or Successors within his or their Realm of Ireland.

AND also excepted and foreprized out of this present Grant and Demise, all and
all manner of Customs, Subsidies, sums of Money, and other Duties whatsoever
to be perceived, taken and had, or which shall, may, or ought to happen, come,
arise, grow or be due, or chargeable, or payable, to our said Sovereign Lord
the King, his heirs or successors, Except also Bullion to be imported.
or to any of them, of, for, or by reason of all and all manner of Bullion
whatsoever imported into Ireland; And also excepted and foreprized out of this
present Grant and Demise all and all manner of Customs, Subsidies,
Impositions, Forfeitures, and other Duties, or Sums of Money whatsoever, due or
payable, or to be due or payable to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his
heirs or successors, of, for, or by reason of all and all manner of Allomes,
and liquors of Allomes, As also Allome, Smaults, Saffers.
Smaults, Saffers, and all matters and things which shall be necessary for the
making of Smaults, of what nature or by what name or names soever the same be
or shall be called, or known; And which during the term hereby granted shall
be brought from any parts beyond the Seas into the Realm of Ireland: And also
excepted, and foreprized, out of this present Grant all Prizage and Butlerage
of and for all and all manner, Also the Prizage and Butlerage.
and whatsoever sort of Wines, of what nature, kind, or quality, or by what
name or names soever the same be, or shall be known, and also excepted and
fore-prized out of this present Grant and Demise, all and all manner of
Customs, Subsidies of Poundage, Sums of Money, and other Duties whatsoever,
which at any time or times during the term of and in the Customs and Subsidies
hereby granted, shall be due or payable to his said Majesty his Heirs or
Successors, for or by reason of the Importation of any Logwood alias Blockwood
As also Logwood and Blockwood forfeited.
into the said Realm of Ireland; And all and all manner of Logwood alias
Blockwood whatsoever that shall happen to be forfeited to his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or any of them, for or by reason of the non-payment of
Customs, Subsidies, or Imposts due, or to be due and payable to his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, of and for the same, or any part or parcel thereof;
And all penalties, forfeitures and benefits, which shall or may happen to come,
grow or arise to his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, for the non-payment of
the Customs and Subsidies due and payable, or to be due or payable for the
same, or that may be forfeited for the Importation thereof, contrary to a late
Act of Parliament for the Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and
Navigation: And all and every sum and sums of money, and other Duties, which
shall, may, or ought to happen, come, arise, renew, or be due, chargeable, or
payable to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or any of them, at any time
or times during the said term, of or for all, or any of the said Logwood, alias
Blockwood; And also except the duty commonly called or known by the name of
Port-Corn; Port-Corn also excepted, and five shillings per Tonn upon French
Shipping.
And also except the Imposition, Duty, or Sum of five shillings per Tonn, which
by virtue of the said late Act for Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and
Navigation, and of one other late Act passed in Ireland touching the Rates of
Merchandises, and the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage is imposed or set upon
any Ship or Vessel belonging to any of the Subjects of the French King, which
shall come into any Port, Harbor, or Road of Ireland, and shall there lade or
unlade any Goods or Commodities, or take in, or set on shore any Passengers
whatsoever.

To Have, hold, receive, ask, demand, take, levy, perceive, retain, The
Habendum.
use, exercise, and enjoy, All and singular the said Customs, Tonnage,
Poundage, Subsidies, Imposts, Payments, Duties and Sums of Money in lieu of
Customs, which by virtue of the said late Act of Parliament touching or
concerning Tonnage or Poundage, or otherwise howsoever are due and payable to
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; And also all and singular the Rates,
Charges, Impositions, Payments, and other Duties of Excise, which by virtue of
the said late Act of Parliament touching or concerning Excise, are due and
payable unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for or in respect of any
Goods, Wares, or Merchandises imported into Ireland, and all other the Duties
of Excise whatsoever, commonly called or known by the name of the Foreign and
Imported Excise (except before excepted) unto the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty
and nine, From Christmas 1669, for 6 years from the date hereof.
for, during, and until the term of six years, from thenceforth next ensuing,
and fully to be complete and ended, to the only proper use, benefit and behoof
of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
without any account, matter, or other thing to be yielded, made, rendered, or
done for the same, other then the rents and sums of Money, and other things
hereafter in and by these presents reserved, and Covenanted or agreed to be
paid or performed, and in as large, ample, and beneficial manner as his Majesty
may, might, or ought to have, take, or enjoy the same, by force or virtue of
any Statute or Statutes, Act or Acts of Parliament, Custom, Use, Usage, or
Prescription, and as largely and beneficially as His Majesty may Demise or
Grant the same, or any part thereof, or as the same are hereby mentioned, meant
or intended to be Demised or Granted, any Law, Statute, Act or Acts of
Parliament; and more especially the Clause in the said late Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for settling the Excise, Non obstante any Law, and more
especially the Clause in the Act for Excise.
or New Impost upon His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, according to the
Book of Rates therein inserted, which prohibits any Lease to be thereof made,
for and during the space of seven years next ensuing the said Act, or after the
said seven years without the Advice of the chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and six more of the Council of that Kingdom, and reserving the highest
rent which in any one of the seven years next succeeding the said Statute was
yielded and paid unto His Majesty, and which Declares any Lease made contrary
to the said Act to be void; And also all and every Ordinance, Order, Custom,
Proclamation, or Letters Patents, provision, restraint, or any other matter or
thing had or made, or to be had or made to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding: Yielding and Paying, Yielding and Paying therefore yearly.
and the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and every of them do by these presents,
Covenant to and with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, to yield and pay unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, His Heirs
and Successors, yearly, and every year during the said term of six years,
mentioned in this present Demise, at or into his or their receipt of Exchequer
at Dublin, or by such other payments, and with such Deduction, Abatements and
Allowances, and in such manner as in and by these presents is mentioned, the
full sum of threescore and fifteen thousand pounds The Sum of threescore and
fifteen thousand pounds.
of lawful money of England, or so much other lawful and current money of
Ireland as shall be equivalent to threescore and fifteen thousand pounds of
lawful English money, at or before the days and times, and according to the
several and respective proportions herein after mentioned, That is to say, at
or before the last day of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord God
1669. the sum of 3000 l. And at and before the 14th. day of February, By
monthly payments.
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1669. the sum of 3000 l. And at or
before the 28th day of February, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1669.
the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th. day of March, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1669. the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day of
March, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at
or before the 15th. day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670.
the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day of April, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th day of
May, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at or
before the last day of May, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670. the
sum of 3000 l, And at or before the 15th. day of June, which shall be in the
year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day of
June, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at or
before the 15th. day of July, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670. the
sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day of July, which shall be in the
year of our Lord 1670. the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th day of
August, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670 the sum of 3000 l. And at
or before the last day of August, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670,
the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th day of September, which shall be
in the year of our Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day
of September, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l.
And at or before the 15th day of October, which shall be in the year of our
Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the last day of October, which
shall be in the year of our Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the
15th day of November, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1970, the sum of
3000 l. And at or before the last day of November, which shall be in the year
of our Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th day of December,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670, the sum of 3000 l. And at or
before the last day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1670,
the sum of 3000 l. And at or before the 15th day of January, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1670, the sum of 6000 l. which twenty four several
payments so as aforesaid appointed to be made, do in the time and space of
twelve Months amount unto the full and just sum of threescore and fifteen
thousand pounds; And also yiedling and paying at or before every succeeding
15th day of January, during the said term of six years the sum of 6000 l. And
on every other last day of January, 14th day of February, 28th day of February,
15th day of March, last day of March, 15th day of April, last day of April,
15th day of May, last day of May, 15th day of June, last day of June, 15th day
of July, last day of July, 15th day of August, last day of August, 15th day of
September, last day of September, 15th day of October, last day of October,
15th day of November, last day of November, and on every other 15th day of
December, and last day of December yearly during the said term of six years,
the sum of 3000 l. And also Yielding and Paying: And the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, and every of them, do further covenant by these presents, to and with
our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, to yield and pay
unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, after the end and expiration of the said
term of six years, these sums following, That is to say, upon or before the
last day of December, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1675. at which
time the said term of six years will be fully expired, the sum of 3000 l. And
upon or before the 15th day of January then next following, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1675. the full sum of 6000 l. which two last payments
being added to the several payments herein before appointed, during the said
term of six years, do amount in the whole to the sum of four hundred and fifty
thousand pounds, and are in full performance of the Contract made with our said
Sovereign Lord the King, To yield and pay unto our said Sovereign Lord, for and
in respect of the Duties of Customs and imported Excise, so as aforesaid
Demised for six years, the yearly Sum of threescore and fifteen thousand pounds.

And our said Sovereign Lord the King, in consideration of the great yearly
Rent and sum of Money before reserved or mentioned to be paid: And to the intent
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any
of them, shall not by the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by his or
their, or any of their means, or by any Act or means of his late Father K.
Charles of blessed memory, If the Farm^rs shall be hindered in the receipt of
these duties,
or otherwise be hindered, debarred, or diminished of any the Customs,
Subsidies, Duties of Imported Excise, and other Sums of money and profits to
them, before by these presents mentioned, or meant to be demised, granted, or
to Farm letten, during the term of six years, or Covenanted or agreed to be
taken (except before excepted) but that they the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall have full
satisfaction and allowance for all such their losses and hindrances in that
behalf to be had or sustained, according to the purport, true intent and
meaning of these presents, Is therefore pleased and contented, And does of his
Especial Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, grant for Him, His Heirs
and Successors, unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, Or if His Majesty, His Father, King James,
or Queen Elizabeth, or if His Majesty shall exonerate and discharge any person
by any Patent or Grant of Exemption, or prohibit or restrain the Trade.
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns; and every of
them in manner and form following, That is to say, that if his Majesty, or his
late Royal Father King Charles, or his late Royal Grandfather King James, or
the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, have heretofore freed, exonerated,
discharged, remitted, pardoned or respited, or that His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, or any of them, hereafter at any time or times during the said term
of six years hereby granted, shall free, exonerate, discharge, remit, pardon
or respite any Owner or Owners of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises, or other
person or persons whatsoever, or any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises to be
brought into this Realm, or carried out of the same, by any of His Majesty's
Subjects of what nature soever, in the Ships or Bottoms either of His Majesty's
Subjects or Strangers, of or from the payment or answering of any Customs,
Subsidies, Imposts, Sum or Sums of Money, or other Duties or Premises by these
presents demised or granted, or covenanted or agreed, or appointed to be paid
or enjoyed as aforesaid, (except before excepted) or otherwise, if the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, or his late Father, or Grandfather, or the late Queen
Elizabeth have given or granted, or if the Kings most Excellent Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, shall give or grant at any time hereafter during the said
term of six years, any license or liberty to any person or persons, or have
made or suffered, or shall make or suffer any restraint or Prohibition of
Trade, Traffic, Passage and Intercourse of any Merchants Ships; or have done
or procured, or shall do or procure, or suffer to be done in any manner of wise
any other Act or thing whatsoever, whereby, or by reason whereof the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them,
shall at any time or times during or within the said term of six years, be
lawfully let or hindered to have, take, levy, receive, obtain or enjoy any of
the said Customs, Subsidies, Impositions, Duties of Excise, Sums of Money, or
other the Premises before by these presents demised or granted, or mentioned
or intended to be hereby demised or granted, or covenanted or agreed to be
taken or enjoyed, or any part or parcel thereof, (except before excepted) or
whereby or by reason whereof they the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall lose or be hindered of or in any of
the Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Payments, Duties, Sums of Money, or benefit
before by these Presents mentioned or meant to be demised or granted, or
covenanted or agreed to be taken or enjoyed, (except before excepted) or if the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, Unless by their consent,
negligence or default, they shall be hindered from the Receipt of these Duties.
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, without their or any of their consent, negligence,
or wilful default, shall be by the Laws of that our Realm of Ireland barred,
letten or hindered to receive, take or recover, and shall not, or may not have,
receive or recover any of the premises before demised or granted, or mentioned
or intended to be demised or granted, or covenanted or agreed to be received or
taken, in such ample sort and manner as they the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, ought to have the same, according
to the purport, true intent and meaning of these presents, toward the payment
of the Rents and Sums of Money reserved or payable by or according to the true
meaning of these presents: That then, and so often, and in every or any such
case, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, Then they are
upon proof.
upon such due proof thereof to be had or made before the Lord Lieutenant, or
other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, to be always one or
more, as they the said Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors
of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them,
whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland
for the time being, to be always one or more, shall by any Order or
Declaration of Council, to be made in Council, and signed with their hands,
allow of, to stay, keep, retain and recoupe in his or their hands, to his and
their own proper use, so much of the said yearly Rent or Sums of Money due,
payable or answerable, or before by these presents reserved or mentioned to be
paid, as by the said Order or Declaration of Council in writing, To have such
reasonable defalcation out of the Rent by way of Retainer, as shall be declared
in writing by the Lord Lieutenant, and six of the Council, with Damages.
so as aforesaid to be obtained, shall be thought reasonable and proportionable
to the Damage which they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall or may have received by reason of
any such respite of payment, exoneration, diminution, discharge, license,
hinderance, or otherwise as aforesaid. And also that the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall
so often, and upon every such due proof had, and Order or Declaration in
writing made as is aforesaid, have full allowance and defalcation to them and
every of them, to be made by the Court of Exchequer, Which is also to be
allowed by the Court of Exchequer.
of and for all and every the said Payments, Rates, Excises, Customs,
Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, and other duties demised or mentioned to be
demised as aforesaid, and so discharged, hindered, lost, or not paid by any the
occasions or means aforesaid, to the full value and sum thereof, to be allowed,
deducted, or defalked out of the Rent So much is to be defalked out of the Rent.
and Sum of money reserved due and payable, or covenanted or agreed to be paid
by the true intent and meaning of these presents, at and upon the next payment
thereof then next following to be had or made, or at any payment then after to
be made, or any part at one payment, and part at other payment or payments, at
the free Election of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns: And the said Lord Lieutenant, Chief Governor and
Council, Lord Treasurer and Vice-Treasurer, to allow the same upon due proof
without farther warrant.
or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there, or any
six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being, to be always one or more, shall by
force of these presents, and upon sight hereof, or of the Enrollment or
Exemplification thereof have full Power and Authority; And his Majesty does
hereby will and require them and every of them, upon due proof to be made from
time to time, to make and allow such and the same defalcations, deductions and
allowances, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, without
any further or other Warrant or Declaration of the pleasure of his Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, in that behalf to be had or obtained. And his Majesty does
hereby will and require the Lord Treasurer and Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for
the time being, the Lord Chief Baron, and other the Barons of the Court of
Exchequer in Ireland, and all other the Officers and Ministers of his Revenue
there, that they and every of them do from time to time permit and allow the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
have and enjoy the full benefit of all such defalcations to be made as
aforesaid, any thing herein before to the contrary notwithstanding.

AND our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, for himself, his Heirs and
Successors, does further covenant, promise, and grant to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by these
presents, That if our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, or
any of them, or any others jointly or in common, together with the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall at any time hereafter during the
continuance of this present Demise or Lease, If Goods Exported or Imported.
bring or cause to be brought by way of Merchandise from any the parts beyond
the Seas, into his Realm of Ireland, or shall carry or cause to be carried by
way of Merchandise out of his Realm of Ireland, into any the parts beyond the
Seas, any Goods, Wares, Merchandises, the Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, and
Duties whereof are by these presents mentioned or intended to be demised or
granted, belonging to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, or to any of them, or to them or any of them, or others jointly or
in common, or to be brought or carried forth by way of Merchandise for the Use
or Account of His Majesty, Solely on his Majesty's account, or jointly with
others.
His Heirs or Successors, or for the Use and Account of any of them and others,
or as the Goods of His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, solely or jointly, or
in common with others, or for the sole Adventure of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, or the Adventure of any of them and others together; That then and
so often the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall upon such due proof made and allowed as before in these
presents is expressed, Upon due proof to have Abatement and Defalcation out of
the Rent.
for any other Deductions and Defalcations by them to be made, have
Defalcation, Deduction, and Abatement out of the yearly Rent or Sum of Money
before by these presents mentioned to be reserved, covenanted, or agreed to be
paid of and for the Customs, Subsidies, Excises, and other Duties and
Premises hereby Demised, of the said Goods, Wares or Merchandises so to be
Imported or Exported, according to such Rates and Proportions as shall be due
or payable to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors Administrators
or Assigns, by the true meaning of these presents, for the like Goods, Wares,
or Merchandises of Irish Subjects of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, to be
brought in or carried out of the said Kingdom by way of Merchandise, by or for
the proper Adventure of the said Subjects of His Majesty, His Heirs or
Successors, having no property or interest in them: And that the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, By Reteyner.
shall and may from time to time deduct, reteyn, and keep the same Sums of
Money, so by these presents agreed to be defalked and deducted as aforesaid, in
their own hands, and to their own use, out of the aforesaid yearly Rent or Sum
of money before reserved or mentioned to be paid by these presents: And that
the said Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland,
and Council there, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or
other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being, to be
always one or more, shall by force of these presents, and upon sight hereof,
or of the Enrollment or Exemplification hereof, have full power and Authority
upon such due proof as aforesaid, To be allowed by the Lord Lieutenant, etc.
without further Warrant.
to make and allow from time to time such and the same Defalcations, Deductions
and allowances, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents,
without any other or further Warrant or Declaration of the pleasure of His
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, in that behalf to be had, procured or
obtained; which allowances and Defalcations so made, shall be of full force and
effect in our Court of Exchequer in Ireland, and all Officers and Ministers of
our Revenue there are required to observe the same accordingly. Nevertheless it
is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and it is hereby agreed,
notwithstanding the said Covenant last beforementioned, Nevertheless his
Majesty may Export or Import.
That our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, shall or may
bring into or carry out, or cause to be brought into or carried out of the
Realm of Ireland, at all and every time and times during the continuance of
this Demise, without any allowance, defalcation, or deduction to be made out of
the Rent, Sum and Sums of Money hereby mentioned to be reserved, and without
payment or allowance to be made of or for the Customs or other Duty for the
same, any Presents or Gifts of Honor, Presents, and Gifts of Honor, and not
Merchandises, as also Victual, Aprarel, etc. and Allom.
and not vendable or esteemed as Merchandises, to or from Foreign Princes or
States, or any Victuals, Apparel, Munitions, or other Provisions, Goods and
Commodities, which by the true intent and meaning of these presents, are herein
aftermentioned to be brought in or carried out without payment of Custom,
Subsidy, or other Duty or thing, in respect of the Importation or Exportation
thereof, or giving any allowance, deduction or defalcation of or for the same.
And also that His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, may Export any Alloms of
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, which during the said term shall be
Exported for the proper and sole benefit, use and account of his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, and their Farmers thereof, and for and upon his and their
own sole and proper Adventure, without payment of any Custom, Subsidy, or
other Duty, or giving any allowance, deduction or defalcation for the same. And
his Highness does by these presents covenant and grant for him, his Heirs and
Successors, to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that if his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, at any time or times hereafter;
before the end and determination of this Grant, shall by his or their Royal
Proclamation, or by any Act of State, Order of Council, or otherwise, forbid
the Transportation of any Corn If Corn or any other Commodity be forbid by any
Act of State, etc. or Act of Parliament, to be Imported or Exported.
or Grain at such time or times when and where the same shall or may be
lawfully Transported out of the Realm of Ireland, or shall forbid the
Transportation out of, or the bringing into the Realm of Ireland, of any other
several or particular Wares, Goods or Merchandises, whereof if they were
brought in or carried out of the Realm of Ireland, the Customs, Subsidies, and
other Duties ought by the true intent and meaning of these presents, to be due
and payable to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or if the same Goods, Wares or Merchandises, shall be by any Act of
Parliament hereafter to be made, restrained either from being Transported out
of, or from being brought into the Realm of Ireland, by reason whereof the same
or any part thereof shall not be Transported out of, or brought into the Realm
of Ireland, at any time during the continuance of these presents, to the
prejudice, hurt, or hinderance of the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, That then and so often during all and
every such time and times, the said Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor
and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or
more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland for the time being, to be always one or more, shall have
full power and Authority by these presents, by their Order in writing and in
manner and form aforesaid, upon the humble Petition of the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to make unto the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, such reasonable
recompense and defalcation out of the yearly Rent by these presents reserved
for and in respect of the said restraint, The Lord Lieutenant, etc. upon
Petition by their Order in writing, shall allow and make Defalcation.
as to them or any six or more of them respectively as is aforesaid, shall be
thought meet and expedient, for and during the time of such restraint as is
aforesaid; and that these presents, or the Enrollment or Exemplification
thereof, shall be a sufficient warrant and discharge to the said Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council
there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord
Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being, to be always one or more, to make the said recompense, allowance,
defalcation and deduction accordingly in that behalf, and to the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, And the Farmers to
stop so much of the Rent as shall be so allowed, without any Account.
to stop and reteyn so much of the said Rent in their hands, as shall be so
allowed unto them for their own uses, without any Account, Forfeiture, or other
recompense to be had or made to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or
Successors for the same, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND his Majesty does hereby for him, his Heirs and Successors, also straightly
charge and command, The King commands all his Officers to do no Act to the
prejudice of the Farmers.
That none of the Officers, Ministers or Servants, whatsoever they be or shall
be, of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, in any wise
by color, pretense, or means of their Offices or otherwise, during the
continuance of this Demise or Lease, shall wittingly or willingly withdraw,
conceal, deny, withhold or diminish from the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, any of the said Customs,
Susidies, Imposts, Payments, and Sums of Money in lieu of Customs, Subsidies,
Imposts, or any of the Duties of Excise for Goods Imported, or other benefits
by these presents mentioned to be demised, granted, and to Farm letten to the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, or any thing to be by them or any of them had,
done, used or enjoyed by virtue of, or according to the true meaning of these
presents, in respect of the same Customs and Premises, to them the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, mentioned to be demised, granted or agreed to be by them taken,
had or enjoyed, or of any of them, Upon pain of Fine and Imprisonment for the
first, and loss of his or their Offices for the second offense.
upon pain of Fine and Imprisonment, the said Offenders therein for his or
their first offense, and loss of his or their Offices for his or their second
offense; the said pains and penalties to be inflicted upon the said Offenders
by the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer there
for the time being, or any three or more of them, whereof the Lord Treasurer of
Ireland for the time being, when there shall be a Lord Treasurer, to be one, or
in default of a Lord Treasurer, the Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time
being to be one, upon Complaint by English Bill in the Court of
Exchequer-Chamber Upon Complaint by English Bill in the Exchequer Chamber.
there in that behalf to be made.

AND our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty for himself, his Heirs or
Successors, does of his especial Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion,
give, grant and assign by these presents unto the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, and to all and
every person and persons which by them, and every or any of them, by writing
under their or any of their Hands and Seals, shall be in that behalf deputed
and assigned, full and free use, benefit and disposition, during the
continuance of this Demise, of all Custom-houses The Farmers and their Officers
to have the use of all Custom-houses.
in Ports, Havens, Creeks, and places within every of the said Ports, any
Customs, or other Duties and Premises whereof or wherein arising are granted
or demised, and the Members thereof where landing, lading or unlading, shipping
in or shipping out, carrying or discharging of any manner of Wares, Goods,
Merchandises or Commodities, into or from the Realm of Ireland shall be, and to
be present with all and every the Customers, Comptrollers, Collectors,
Surveyors, Searchers, Waiters, and other Officers, Attendants and Ministers,
having charge within the said Ports and Creeks, for and concerning the said
Merchandises, Wares and Commodities, or Customs, Subsidies, Sums of Money, and
other Duties for the same, by these presents demised or granted; and to see,
provide, and take order for and concerning their and every of their better
levying, having and enjoying of the premises, and the benefits, profits and
commodities thereof, before by these presents mentioned to be granted and
demised, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, at all
times and places when and where the said Officers or Ministers, or any of them,
shall by reason of any their said several Offices have an occasion or an
Authority to view, search or see; and also in every such place to see, provide,
and use lawful and reasonable ways, orders and means, whereby the said John
Forth, William Bucknal, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
shall and may be justly and truly contented, Free access to all Books or
Registers, Bonds or other Writings, taken, made, kept or preserved by any
Customer, Comptroller, Surveyor, etc.
answered and paid, without any fraud, concealment or diminution, of all and
every the Customs, Subsidies, Sums of Money, Profits, and other things and
Duties before in and by these presents mentioned to be demised, granted or
Leased. And that they the said John Forth, William Bucknal, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, their and every of their
Deputies and Servants, shall and may from time to time, during the continuance
of this present Demise or Lease, have free access unto all Books or Registers,
Bonds, or other Writings whatsoever, taken, made, kept or preserved, or to be
taken, made, kept or preserved by any Customer, Comptroller, Surveyor,
Commissioner, or Collector of Excise, or other Officers of his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors whomsoever, serving or attending, or which during the
continuance of this present Demise or Lease in force, shall serve or have any
charge in any Custom-house, or to, for, or about any Custom, Subsidy or
Impost, or the Collection of any Custom, Susidie or Impost, or Duty of Excise
for Goods Imported, or other the premises hereby demised or mentioned to be
demised, or any of them concerning. And that the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood. William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, their and every
of their Servants and Deputies, shall and may from time to time, during the
continuance of this Demise or Lease in force, at their wills and pleasures
takes Notes and Copies of the said Books, Registers, Bonds or Writings, And to
take Notes and Copies of the said Books, etc. for the better Collection, etc.
of the Duties.
to the intent thereby to be the better informed of such Customs, Subsidies,
Imposts, Duties of Excise, Sum and Sums of Money, as are in and by these
presents mentioned to be demised; and for the better recovery, collection,
having and enjoying of the same, without the let, hinderance, denial or
disturbance of the said Customers, Comptrollers, and other the Officers
aforesaid. And that the said John Forth, William Bucknal, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Kalph Bucknal, their Executors,
Administrators, Assigns, Deputies, Servants and Factors, and every of them,
before by these presents shall have full power and Authority at all time and
times, from time to time during the continuance of this present Demise or Lease
in force, when it shall seem good, meet and expedient to them the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, Servants and
Assigns, with the privity and knowledge of the Customer or Comptroller of the
Customs in every of the Ports within the Realm of Ireland, respectively, they
attending on their Offices, to do, make and execute all and all manner of
Compositions, Power to make Compositions, give Discharges and Warrants for
Landing Goods, and to do all other Acts concerning the Duties.
Discharges and Agreements which by Law may be done, for and concerning the
Customs, Subsidies, and other Duties before by these presents demised or
granted, or mentioned to be thereby demised and granted as aforesaid, (except
before excepted) and to give order for the Landing of the same Wares and
Merchandises, the Customs, Subsidies, and other Duties whereof are by these
presents mentioned to be demised or granted, at the places used for the same;
And to do all other act and acts, thing and things that to the Office of any
Customer, Collector, Comptroller, Searcher, Surveyor General, or any other
Officer, and every or any of them, of and in all and every the Creeks and
Members thereunto belonging, does or shall appertain, to be done for or
concerning the said Customs, Subsidies, or Imposts, Profits, and other Duties
before in and by these presents mentioned to be demised, granted, and to Farm
letten, or any of them, Preserving the power of the Kings Surveyor General,
Customers, Collectors, or Comptrollers
(except as is before excepted) so always as the power of the Surveyor General,
Customer, Collector or Comptroller of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs or Successors, belonging to them by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm of
Ireland, do and shall stand in force, according to the purport and true meaning
and intent of these presents. And the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may
receive, take, The Farmers may receive the Customs by their own hands, or of
their Agents.
collect and levy to and for their own proper use, as well all and all manner
of Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Profits, Sums of Money, and other Duties before
by these presents demised or granted, (except before excepted) which during the
continuance of this Demise or Lease, shall grow due or be payable for the same
Goods, Wares and Merchandises, or any of them, (except before excepted) as well
at and by all and every the Owner and Owners of the said Goods, Wares and
Merchandises and every of them, as also at and by the hands of any of their
Deputies, Factors and Servants, or any other person or persons conveying and
bringing inward as aforesaid, or transporting, conveying or shipping outward as
is also aforesaid, the said Merchandise, Wares or Goods whatsoever, or by the
hands of the Customers, Collectors, and every other Officers for the time
being, of and in every the said Ports and places, the Customs and other Duties
whereof and wherein are in and by these presents mentioned to be demised or
granted unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, as aforesaid, at the free will
and liberty of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, without any let, disturbance, restraint,
denial or interruption of any Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, Searchers,
Waiters or any other Officers, Ministers or Attendants whatsoever, of his
Highness, his Heirs or Successors, or any of them, of or in respect of the said
Ports, Places and Creeks, and without any Account or Accounts, Without Account,
other then the Rent reserved.
or other thing therefore to be paid, yielded or done to his Highness, his
Heirs or Successors, other than the Rent and Sums of Money by these presents
reserved, or appointed to be yielded and paid to his Highness, his Heirs and
Successors for the same. And also that the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, and the Deputies,
Factors and Servants of them and every of them, and all and every the Officers
of the Custom-house, who are by any Letters Patents thereunto lawfully
authorized, shall and may from time to time during the continuance of this
Demise and Lease, at their and every of their wills and pleasures, The Farmers
and their Servants as well by night as by day, may search Ships, enter Cellars,
Shops, etc.
as well by night as by day, go on board, view, search and survey every Ship,
Vessel or Bottom, riding or lying within any of the said Havens, Ports, Creeks,
and Places, and by day time to enter into any Cellar, Vault, Warehouse, Shop
or Place, to view, search, and see whether there be any such Merchandises,
Wares or Goods, the Custom, Subsidy, Imposts, or other Duties whereof is not,
nor shall not then be to them or some of them truly answered, paid or agreed
for, or shall not then appear to them to be truly answered, paid or agreed for
as aforesaid, according to the true meaning hereof; And also to examine the
Shippers, Owners, To examine Shippers, Owners, etc.
and other the Factors, Conveyors, Carriers, and bringers inward or outward of
any the same Merchandises and Goods, and every other suspected person and
persons, in all convenient and lawful manner, upon their Oaths, Upon their
Oaths.
without any let, impediment, restraint, impeachment, contradiction or denial
of any of the Customers, Collectors, Searchers, Surveyors, Waiters, or other
Officers, of or in the said Ports, Creeks and Places, or any of them, or of any
other person or persons whatsoever; And further also to adminster any other
Oath or Oaths, Power to administer Oaths.
to any other person or persons whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the
premises, as fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as any
the Commissioners of the Customs or Excise, Customer or Comptroller in his
Majesty's Ports in Ireland, by virtue of his or their Offices, or of any Act of
Parliament, or otherwise, may legally do; (the Fees and Duties for the
Administration of such Oath or Oaths, The Fees for the Administration of the
Oaths to be paid to whom of right they belong.
nevertheless to continue and be paid and payable to such Officer and Officers,
or other person or persons, to whom the same do, or of right ought to belong,
or are ordered or established to be paid:) And for the better performance
hereof, our said Sovereign Lord the King, for him, his Heirs and Successors,
does give full power and Authority unto the Lord Treasurer of Ireland,
Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer there for the time being, or any three
or more of them, whereof the Lord Treasurer or Chancellor of the Exchequer for
the time being to be one, to make forth under the Seal of the said Court of
Exchequer, Court of Exchequer to issue out so many Commissions concerning the
premises, as the Farmers shall think fit.
such and so many Commissions concerning the premises, in and by these
presents mentioned to be demised, or any thing thereunto appertaining or
belonging, from time to time according to the course of that Court, as they the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or such
other person or persons shall think fit, to be directed to such persons as
they, or any three or more of them as is aforesaid, shall in that behalf
appoint; And that as well all and every the Officers and Ministers, which at
any time or times during the continuance of these presents in force, shall have
any Office or Authority from or under the Jurisdiction of the Lord High Admiral
of Ireland, as also all and every the Customers, Comptrollers, Collectors,
Searchers, Port-Reeves, Waiters, Surveyors, All the Officers of the Lord High
Admiral, and his Majesty,
and all other Officers and Ministers of his Highness, his Heirs and
Successors, within any the Ports, Creeks or places whatsoever, shall from time
to time during the continuance of this Demise or Lease, be aiding and assisting
unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, to be ayding and assisting
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, their Deputies,
Factors and Servants, in every such search, and in all other the premises and
services, in every search, etc.
for the most benefit and advantage of them the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and their Deputies, Factors and
Servants, in, about and concerning the premises, to them before, in, and by
these presents mentioned to be granted or demised, in as ample, beneficial,
diligent manner, wise, order, decree and means whatsoever, as they and every of
them should and ought to have been or done to our said Sovereign Lord the King,
his Heirs or Successors, by any manner of means, for or concerning the same or
any part thereof, if this present Lease or Grant had not been had or made, upon
pain of imprisonment of every such person or persons that shall be so found
obstinately faulty, Upon pain of Imprisonment for the first, and forfeiture of
his or their Offices for the second offense, together with further Fine and
punishment.
remiss or negligent therein, for his or their first offense to be committed;
and under the pain and penalty of the loss and forfeiture of the Office of
every such person or persons, for his or their second offense in that behalf to
be committed; and also of such further Fine and punishment as to the Lord
Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer for the time
being, or any three or more of them, whereof the Lord Treasurer, or Chancellor
of the Exchequer for the time being, to be one, shall be thought meet and
convenient. And our said Sovereign Lord the King is pleased and contented, and
by these presents does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs and Successors, to
and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, by these presents, and does ordain, That all
such devices, concealments, practices, shifts, policies, Act practices
withdrawings, hindrances, matters, causes and things whatsoever, that shall
fortune to arise, grow, be done, or tend to the prejudice, hindrance, loss or
decay of or unto his Highness, his Heirs or Successors, to the loss of the
Farmers
or of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or any of them, concerning the Customs,
touching or concerning any of the Customs, Susidies, Imposts, Duties of
Excise, and benefits before by these presents demised or granted, or mentioned
to be demised or granted as is aforesaid, contrary to the effect and true
meaning of these presents, together with all the devisors, together with the
Practisers, shall be corrected, redressed and reformed
practicers, concealers or doers thereof, shall from time to time during the
continuance of these presents in force, as often as any such thing shall happen
to be, and as need shall require, be corrected, amended, ordered, provided for,
redressed and reformed: And that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and every of them, shall have and receive
full redress and reformation thereof and therein, by the Lord Treasurer of
Ireland, etc.
by the said Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer
for the time being, or any three or more of them, whereof the Lord Treasurer,
or Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time being, to be always one, by any
such lawful, convenient and reasonable ways, means, order or decree, as unto
the said Lord Treasurer and Barons, or any three or more of them as aforesaid,
shall be thought lawful, meet, necessary and convenient according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, to the best relief and benefit of the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns.

And it is also further covenanted, declared and agreed, No seizures but by the
Farmers and their Agents, or by his Majesty's Searchers.
That no seizure or seizures shall at any time or times hereafter be made, of
or for any Goods, Wares or Merchandises, not duly and lawfully Shipped,
Exported or Imported, or for Non-payment of Customs, Susidies, or otherwise,
but by the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Deputies,
Agents, and Assigns, or by his said Majesty's Searchers, or such other Officers
or persons of or in the several Ports of the Kingdom of Ireland, which by
virtue of their Offices, or any Grants or other Authorities to them or any of
them in that behalf made or given, may or ought to seize. And further also,
That all forfeited Goods, Wares and Merchandises, hereby intended to be granted
to, and received and taken by the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall immediately after seizure thereof
made, be brought and laid up in his Majesty's Warehouse or Storehouse of and
in the several and respective Ports where the same shall be so seized, The
Goods seized are to be laid up in his Majesty's Warehouses, and not to be
discharged without the consent of the Farmers, or by due course of Law.
and not be disposed of and discharged without the consent of the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or their Deputies,
or their chief Officer or Officers in the said Ports respectively, or by due
course and proceedings of Law, any Law, Use, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. And whereas in and by the said late Act of Parliament,
entitled, An Act for settling the Excise or New Impost upon his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, according to the Book of Rates therein inserted; amongst
other provisions touching the Excise for Goods Imported, it is provided, That
every Merchant who is not a Shopkeeper, Retailer or Consumptioner, after Entry
of his or their Goods by Bill under his or their hand, Bonds given by the
Merchant Importer, not to deliver any Goods to the Shopkeeper without the
Excise first paid.
or the hand of such for whom he or they will engage to be answerable presently
and before he or they be permitted to have any warrant to receive his or their
Goods out of their Ship, or from the Waterside, shall make and enter into a
sufficient Obligation either singly, if he or they be known Merchants, and
reputed responsable persons, or otherwise with sufficient Security, and in such
sum as shall be double the value of his or their Goods, with Condition that he
or they shall not and will not deliver, or cause or suffer any of the said
Goods to be delivered unto any of the Buyers thereof, or to be put into the
custody or possession of any Shopkeeper or Retailer whatsoever, before such
time as the Duty of Excise set and imposed by the said Act, be first duly paid
and satisfied. If such Bond be not given, the Merchant Importer is liable to
pay the Excise, or in case of refusal the Goods to be laid up. Warehouse room
to be paid.
And that if such Bond be not given, the Merchant Importer should be liable to
pay down the Excise, or in case of refusal, the Goods Imported to be laid up in
his Majesty's Warehouse, and not to be delivered out till such Bond given, or
the Excise paid, and due consideration for the Ware-house-room during the time
the Goods continued there, as by the said Act more at large appears. And
whereas also our said Sovereign Lord the King is credibly informed, that diverse
persons have and do from time to time ship and lade diverse Goods, Wares and
Merchandises, whereof the Customs, Subsidies, and other Duties are in and by
these presents mentioned to be demised to the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, Port Bonds.
at diverse Ports, Havens, Creeks, and other places within the Realm of Ireland,
pretending to carry, convey, discharge and unlade the same at some other Port,
Haven, Creek, and other places of Lading and Unlading within the said Realm, or
some of them; and do also enter into Bonds for the Discharging and Unlading of
the same accordingly, and to return Certificates thereof, some and many of
which persons do nevertheless transport, carry and convey the same into the
parts beyond the Seas, whereby the same Customs, Subsidies, and other Duties
are not truly and justly answered.

AND, Whereas our said Sovereign Lord the King, is likewise credibly informed,
that for the good of the said Kingdom, and to prevent the transportation of
Gold and Silver now a days, Bonds of Merchants-strangers, not to transport Gold
or Silver.
used by Merchants-strangers, the said Merchants-strangers are bound to our
said Sovereign Lord the King to employ within the said Kingdom such moneys as
they should receive within the said Kingdom for their Merchandise, which
Merchants notwithstanding have and do many times neglect to employ their said
moneys in the said Kingdom to the great impoverishment of the said Realm, and
also to the loss of the Customs and Subsidies; Therefore to the end that the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, which are by these presents charged to pay so great Rent, for,
and in respect of the said Customs, Subsidies, Duties of Excise, for Goods
imported and other the premises, may receive no hinderance, nor be defeated of
that which by the true meaning of these presents they ought to enjoy by any
such fraudulent and indirect dealings, Our said Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty is pleased and contented, and by these presents for his Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, does give and grant unto the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, without any Account or other thing
therefore to be paid, If forfeited, the benefit thereof, and of the judgments
and executions thereupon, to be to the Farmers.
rendered or made the whole forfeiture and benefit that shall be raised, gotten
or had as well of and by all and every such bonds, obligations, bills and
writings obligatory; and of all judgments, executions, and extents thereupon
and compositions for the same; and also of, and by all bonds and obligations,
which by force of, or according to the late Act of Parliament touching the
Excise and new Impost, or the late Act of Parliament for the increasing of
shipping and Navigation, shall within the said time and space of six years, to
be accounted as aforesaid, be by any person or persons whatsoever entered into,
and by the labor, travel and industry of the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, Deputies, Agents or Servants, or
any of them at any time or times found out and discovered to be forfeited to
our Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, during the continuance
of the said term of six years, for, or in respect of any Goods imported, which
by any Merchant importer shall be delivered out, or put into the possession of
any Shopkeeper or Retailer, without payment of the Excise thereof first made,
or for, or in respect of the Transportation of any the said Wares, Goods or
Merchancizes, into any the parts beyond the Seas, or in respect of the not
employment of the said moneys as aforesaid, contrary to the Tenor and effect of
the said bonds, obligations, bills and writings obligatory, and the conditions
of the same; and that it shall and may be lawful to, and for the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, and every of them,
in the name of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, and
at their own proper costs and charges, to sue, prosecute and implead in the
Exchequer of his Highness, his Heirs or Successors, all and every such person
or persons, by whom any such bonds, obligations, Liberty to prosecute those
bonds in the Kings name.
bills or writings obligatory shall be forfeited to our said Sovereign Lord the
King, his Heirs or Successors, and his and their Sureties, and in the name and
names of him, his Heirs or Successors, to procure judgment and sue forth
execution of, and for all and every the penalties and sums of money, and
forfeitures in the same bonds, obligations, bills or writings obligatory, or
any of them contained unto his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, due or to be
due as aforesaid, by reason of the same; and our said Sovereign Lord the King
does by these presents straightly charge and command the Treasurer of Ireland,
Chancellor, Vice-Treasurer, Chamberlain and Barons of the Exchequer of his
Highness, his heirs or successors for the time being, that when and as often as
any the penalties, forfeitures and sums of money, so as aforesaid forfeited or
to be forfeited, or due unto his Majesty, his heirs or successors, Exchequer
Officers commanded to deliver the sums of money levied upon such forfeitures to
the Farmers.
upon or by reason of the said bonds, obligations, bills, and writings
obligatory, or any of them, shall be leavied, paid and answered into the
Exchequer, by the labor, travel or discovery of the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of their Deputies, Agents or
servants, or any of them; That then, and so often the said Lord Treasurer,
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, Chamberlains and Barons of the said Exchequer for
the time being, shall and may deliver, or cause the same to be delivered unto
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to the
only use and behoof of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, without any account or other thing to be therefore
rendered, yielded or paid, all and every the said forfeitures, penalties and
sums of money, so recovered, levied and paid into the said Exchequer, as is
aforesaid, in recompense and satisfaction of such loss and detriment, as they
or any of them shall sustain, by reason of any such delivery of Goods imported
by the Merchant Importer, to any Shopkeeper or Retailer, without payment of
the Excise thereof first made, or by reason of any such Transportation into the
parts beyond the Seas, or not employment of the said moneys, contrary to the
Tenor and effect of the said bonds, obligations, bills or writings obligatory,
and the conditions thereof or any of them; And these pres nts, or Inrolment
thereof, shall be a sufficient warrant to the said Exchequer Officers.
and these presents or the inrolment thereof shall be as well unto the said
Lord Treasurer, and to the said Chancellor and Vice-Treasurers, Chamberlains
and Barons of the said Exchequer for the time being, as to all other Officers
and Ministers to whom in that behalf it shall or may appertain, a sufficient
warrant and discharge in that behalf; And our said Sovereign Lord the King
willing and intending that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall enjoy the benefit of all the said
bonds, according to the Tenor, true intent and meaning of these presents, does
by these presents for his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, straightly charge
and command all the Commissioners and Sub-commissioners of Excise respectively,
and all other the Officers of his Highness, The Commissioners and Sub
Commissioners of the Excise are commanded not to take bonds for the not
delivery of Goods imported into the possession of any Shopkeeper or Retayler,
without payment of the Excise first made, or Port bonds or Strangers bond,
without security of sufficient men and such as they will undertake for. Nor
shall the said bonds be taken up without the Farmers consent in writing. No
Cocquet to be made, or deliver, or cancel the said bonds without their consent
in writing.
his Heirs and Successors, of and belonging to all, every or any of the
Custom-houses within the Realm of Ireland; That they nor any of them, nor their
nor any of their Deputies at any time hereafter, during the continuance of this
Demise or Lease, do presume to take, or cause or suffer to be taken, any bond
or writing obligatory, for or concerning the not delivery of Goods imported
into the possession of any shopkeeper or Retailer, without payment of the
Excise first made, or for or concerning the carrying of any Goods, Wares or
Merchandises, from any Port within the said Realm of Ireland, to any other Port
of the same, or of any strangers for employment of their money within the said
Realm, of any other but good sufficient men, such as they will undertake for,
if the parties so to be bound, shall prove unable to pay the sums of money in
the same bonds or writings obligatory to be contained, unless the said bonds or
writings obligatory shall be taken with or by the consent and good liking of
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some
of them thereunto first had by writing under their, or some or one of their
hands; and likewise, that the said Officers shall not make any Cocquet or
certificate, testifying the unshipping or landing of the said Goods, wares or
merchandises within the said Realm of Ireland, or deliver, cancel, or make void
the said bonds or writings, or any of them, unless it be after notice first
given to and with the consent and good liking of the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in writing thereunto first had and
obtained; all which his Majesty wills and commands to be observed, as the
said Officers and every of them will answer the contrary at their, and every of
their uttermost perils, any Custom, Law, Statute, Usage, or either matter to
the contrary hereof had in any wise notwithstanding; and in case the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or some of them,
shall not or may not have, receive and enjoy the full benefit of the
forfeitures of such Obligations made for the not delivery of Goods imported to
any Shopkeeper or Retailer, If the Farmers are hindered from the benefit of
such forfeited bonds,
without payment of the Excise first made, or for discharge of Merchandises
within the said Realm, or for the employment of money received by the said
Merchants-strangers, or of any part thereof by these presents granted or
intended unto them, by reason of any former Grant.
for or by reason of any other or former Grant or Grants thereof, or of any
part thereof by his Majesty, or by his Royal Father of happy memory, to any
other person or persons; It is his Majesty's pleasure, and his Highness does
for him, his Heirs and Successors, covenant, grant and agree to and with the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assign, by
these presents; That they, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, They are to have defalcation for so much
as the conditions of the said bonds amount unto
shall have full allowance, defalcation, deduction and abatement of, and for so
much of the said forfeitures which shall be leavied, or for so much as the
Customs, Excises and other Duties payable for the Goods mentioned in the
conditions of the said Obligations shall amount unto, and as they cannot
receive by the occasion aforesaid, and ought to enjoy according to the true
meaning of these presents; and that it shall and may be lawful to and for them,
or any of them to stay, keep and retain in their own hands out of the Rents or
Sums of money, by way of Retainer.
by these presents reserved, and to grow due and payable, or covenanted and
agreed to be paid such, and so many sums of money as shall amount unto, and be
sufficient to give them satisfaction and recompense for the same; And our said
Sovereign Lord the King, for him, his Heirs, and Successors, Which is to be
allowed by the Lord Lieutenant, etc. Without further Warrant.
does by these presents straightly charge and command, and also authorize the
Lord Lieutenant, and other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and
Council there for the time being, and any six or more of them, (whereof the
Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time
being to be always one or more from time to time) to allow unto the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, full allowance,
abatement, deduction and defalcation of, and for all such sums of money to be
due by and upon such and so many of the said forfeited bonds, without further
warrant
as they cannot receive by reason of any such former Grants as aforesaid, and
ought to have and enjoy according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, without any further or other warrant from his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, to be had, procured or obtained.

AND, Our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty is further pleased and
contented, and by these presents for his Higness his Heirs and Successors, does
covenant and grant to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, that neither his
Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, nor any of them, will at any time hereafter,
until the end of this present Demise or Lease, His Majesty's Covenants to lay
no new Imposition upon any wares imported or exported without the Farmers
consent
impose or lay any new Imposition or Taxation upon any Wares or Merchandises,
whereof the Custom, Impost or other Duties are granted by these presents to be
transported out of the said Realm into any the parts beyond the Seas, or to be
brought during the continuance of this Lease from any the parts beyond the Seas
into the said Realm, without the assent, consent and good liking of the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, testified under
their hands, unless a new Imposition be laid by Authority of Parliament.
and testified under their hand or hands in writing, first had and obtained,
unless such new Imposition shall be set and laid by Authority of Parliament;
Provided further, and the said Kings most Excellent Majesty does for himself,
his Heirs and Successors, covenant, declare and agree to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknal, their Executors, and Assigns; by these presents; That in case at
any time or times, during the Term of six Years hereby granted, as aforesaid,
any new or further Duty, Custom or Imposition, shall be by his said Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, If any new Imposition be laid with their consent
by and with the consent of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or by authority of Parliament be imposed
or set upon, or due or payable for any foreigners wares, upon any foreigners
Wares.
goods or merchandises, which shall be imported into the said Realm of Ireland,
or any of them, or any parts or places in them, or any of them, over and
besides, or more then the Duties, Impositions and payments now due and payable
for the same, If any be, the Farmers are to the collection of it,
that they then the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall during the rest and residue of the said Term of six Years,
have the collecting and manageing, and be collectors and managers of such new
imposed duty and duties, to and for his Majesty's use and benefit; and to be
Accountants and accountable for the same in such manner, and be Accountants for
it.
and to have such sallaries and allowances for their cares and pains therein,
as by his said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, or Assigns, shall be agreed on, and thought fit and
convenient in that behalf: And whereas, by the Laws and ancient usage,
Merchants paying their Customs and other Duties outward, if in their Journies
their Goods and Merchandises have been taken at Sea by Enemies in time of war
or by Pirates, have used to have allowance of their Customs and other Duties,
so formerly paid upon their exportation of their Goods and Merchandises in lieu
and stead of the former, so taken as aforesaid. Now it is mutually covenanted
and agreed by and between the Kings Majesty, for himself, his Heirs and
Successors, and the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, Geor^^ Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, for themselves, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns; That if it shall happen, If goods shipped off, after
Custom paid,
during the continuance of this present Lease, that any such Coods or
Merchandises, for which the said Custom or other Duties shall be duly answered
and paid, to be taken at Sea by any the Enemies of his Majesty, be taken by
Enemies, Pirates, etc. other goods may be shipped off Custom free;
his Heirs or Successors, in time of War or by Pirates, or when letters of
marque or reprizal shall be so generally or frequently granted, that the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, but if the
loss in these cases grows considerable. His Majesty is to hear it,
shall suffer considerable damage thereby, that then and in every such case and
cases, upon due proof of such considerable losses to be made in such manner and
form, as in other cases of defalcation is directed, his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, will bear the loss thereof; And the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and the Farmers to have
Defalcation.
shall have defalcation and allowance made unto them of and for the same out of
the Rent aforesaid, in such manner, and upon such just and due proof, and with
such approbation as any other allowances are to be made according to the true
meaning of these presents.

PROVIDED also, and it is further agreed, covenanted and declared; That the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Fo^^h, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors and Assigns, shall pay and
discharge all debentures for Repayment of Customs for Foreign Goods: If goods
have been imported and paid custom before the commencement of this Lease, and
shall be shipped out during the term the Farmers shall discharge all Debentures
for repayment of such customs, and for it shall have Defalcation by way of
retayner, with Interest, All such sums being first duly proved before the Lord
Lieutenant, etc. Lord Lieutenant, etc. commanded to allow the same.
the Customs inward whereof shall be paid before the feast of the Nativity of
our Lord, next ensuing, before the date hereof, which have been, or shall be
re-shipped or carried out of the said Realm of Ireland, during the said Term of
six Years; And that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors and Assigns, shall have full allowance, deduction and defalcation out
of the Rent, by these presents reserved, and shall and may re-imburse
themselves by way of Recouper and Retainer of so much of the said Rent, as
shall be sufficient to satisfy them and every of them, for all such and so
much money as shall be by them paid, on or by force of such debentures, as
aforesaid, with Interest for the forbearance thereof, every such sum and sums
of money so paid, being first duly certified and made appear to be paid, as
aforesaid, to the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them, as
aforesaid; And our said Sovereign Lord the King does for himself, his Heirs,
and Successors by these presents, straightly charge and command, and also
authorize the said Lord Lieutenant and other chief Governor and Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, and any six or more of them,
whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor and Governors of Ireland
for the time being, to be always one or more to make and allow unto the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, and Assigns, full allowance, abatement and
defalcation of, and for all and every the said payments, sum and sums of money,
paid and certified, or made appear to be paid for debentures, as aforesaid, out
of the Rents and sums of money by these presents reserved according to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, without any further or other warrant from
his Majesty, without further warrant
his Heirs or successors, to be had, procured or obtained in that behalf; And
it is further agreed and declared, and the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Mus^hamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, for
Themselves, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, do covenant, grant and
agree to, and without our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors, by these presents; That they the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors and Assigns, shall and will, If goods imported, during the term
whereof the custom is paid, shall be exported after the term, the Farmers shall
discharge all Debentures for repayment of such customs with out Defalcation.
Provided such Debentures be delivered to them within three months after the
term.
well and truly satisfy, pay and discharge all and every debenture and
debentures, for repayment of Customs for foreign Goods, made and to be made
within the aforesaid Term of six years (the Customs inward, whereof shall be
paid, during the said Term) which at any time after the expiration of the said
Term, shall be re-shipped or carried out of the said Realm of Ireland, without
any defalcation, abatement or allowance, whatsoever; Provided, that the same
debentures be brought in, or delivered to the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some or one of them, within
three months after the end of the said Term of six years, any thing in these
presents contained to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding. And
furthermore, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, do covenant and grant for
themselves, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to and with our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, by these presents, that they
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or
some of them, shall and will, during the continuance of this present Lease or
demise, in force well and truly by warrant and direction of the Lord
Lieutenant, The Farmers by warrant from the Lord Lieutenant, etc.
or other Governor or Governors of Ireland, for the time being, or by warrant
and direction of the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Vice-Treasurer, or the
Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time being, in writing under their or any
of their hands in that behalf, or by such other warrant in writing, as in Cases
of this nature is usual to them or any of them, to be directed, and not
otherwise, content and pay, are to pay all Customs, comptrollers, Officers,
etc, their usual fees.
or cause to be contented and paid to all and every Customer, Collector,
Comptroller, Surveyor, Surveyor-General, and other Officer and Minister
whatsoever, of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, for
the time being, of any of the Customs, Subsidies, Excises and duties, before by
these presents demised or granted, during the Term of six years, unto the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, all and every
such several duties, fees, and sums of money, as they and every of them have
received, taken or been allowed for, by reason or in respect of their said
Offices, in such like manner and form as has been heretofore most accustomably
used to be paid or allowed for the same, and thereof shall exonerate, discharge
and save harmless our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors,
during the said Term; And so likewise shall and will from time to time yearly,
during the continuance of the said term by like warrant and direction of the
said Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, Lord
Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, or Chancellor of the Exchequer, for the time being,
as aforesaid, in writing under their or any of their hands to them or any of
them in that behalf to be directed, and by like warrant to pay the officers of
his Majesty's Exchequer,
and not otherwise, pay and satisfy, or cause to be paid and satisfied unto
all and every Officer, Minister and Ministers of his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors of and in the said Court of Exchequer, all such or the like several
fees, duties and sums of money, as heretofore has been used and accustomed to
be paid to them by the several Customers, Comptrollers, Surveyors and searchers
of the Ports aforesaid, and every of them or their deputies in such manner and
form as the same should or ought to have been done or paid, if this demise and
grant had not been had or made; And shall and will also from time to time,
during the continuance of this demise or Lease for six years in force, content,
satisfy and pay, as also all annuities, pensions and usual payments issuing
out of the Customs, etc.
or cause to be contented, satisfied and paid all and singular annuities or
yearly payments, payable or issuing out of the Customs, Subsidies and other
duties before, by these presents, demised and granted, or mentioned or intended
to be demised or granted for six years unto all and every such person and
persons, to whom any such annuities or yearly payments shall be due and
payable, together with the arrears of such annuities, etc. by warrant.
together with the arrearages of such annuities or yearly payments (if any such
be) at the several times and days of payment thereof, upon warrant and
direction of the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer or Chancellor of the Exchequer for the
time being to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
or assigns, by writing under his or their hand or hands, to be in that behalf
directed.

AND, Our said Sovereign Lord the King is pleased and contented, and by these
presents of his special Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere motion for his
Highness, his Heirs and Successors does covenant, grant and agree to and with
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood; William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, administrators and assigns, and
every of them that for and in consideration of such several duties, fees, sums
of money, annuities and payments, which the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Buucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall from time to time,
during the said Term of six years, so as aforesaid, satisfy, content and pay
unto all and every the Customers, Collectors, Comptrollers, Surveyor, Surveyors
General, Officers, Ministers and other persons respectively, accordigng to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, as is is aforesaid, it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said, John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns and every of them, and shall be defalked for such
payments
from time to time to deduct, defaulk and detain so much out of the yearly Rent
and sums of money before by these presents; reserved or payable, as all and
every such sum and sums of money, duties, fees and payments, as the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or assigns, or any of them,
shall according to the true intent and meaning of these presents by such
warrant or direction, as aforesaid, satisfy, content and pay unto all and
every the Customers, out of the Rents next due after such payments, or at any
oter time or times at their election,
Collectors, Comptrollers, Surveyors, Surveyor General, Officers and Ministers,
and other persons respectively; as is aforementioned, shall amount unto the
same and every part thereof respectively to be deducted, defaulked and detained
out of the next Rent or Rents to grow due next after such respective payments
so to be made, as aforesaid, or at any other time or times after at their
election; And that the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Covernours
of Ireland, Lord Lieutenant etc. to allow the same upon sight of the enrolment
hereof, and on certificate under the hands and seals of such persons as shall
receive the same.
and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the
Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, for the time
being, to be always one or more, by force of these presents upon sight hereof,
or of the enrolment, constat or explication thereof, and upon certificate or
other sufficient testimony of payment of the said duties, fees, annuities,
payments and sums of money aforesaid in writing, under the hands and seals of
such persons which shall have received the same, as is aforementioned, shall
have full power and authority by an Order in writing under their hands, to make
and give allowance of the said deduction and defalcation accordingly, without
any further or other warrant of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, to be
had, sued for or obtained in that behalf; And the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
do for themselves, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant,
promise and grant to and with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors by these presents; That they the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors administrators or Assigns, or any of them for their parts, shall not
at any time during the continuance of this present demise and grant of six
years, abate or diminish any Custom, Subsidy, Excise, The Farmer are not to
abate or diminish any of the present rates and Customs.
Rate, profits or duty, which shall arise, grow, or be due within any the said
Ports or places, before, in and by these presents, mentioned from any Merchant,
Importer or Retayler of Goods imported, or take any less or greater sum or
sums, to the prejudice of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or of any of
his Subjects, for the Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Excise, or other duties for
any Wares, Merchandises or Goods that shall be brought into or transported from
any of the said Ports or places at any time during the said Term, by any
Merchant, Alien, Stranger, Denizen or Natural Subject, other than such as by
the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the said Realm of Ireland, have or ought to
have been used to be taken for the same and every part thereof, without the
assent of his Majesty, without his Majesty's consent under the great Seal or
Privy Seal; nor shall the Farmers do any act to hinder or damnifie his Majesty
of or for any Custom, subsidy, etc.
his Heirs or Successors, in writing under the great Seal or Privy Seal; nor
shall nor will willingly do or suffer to be done any other act or thing
whatsoever, whereby the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, shall or may in
any wise be hindered or damnified of or for any Custom, Subsidy, Impost or other
profit, after this present demise or grant ended or expired in any the Ports or
places aforesaid; and that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will at all times, during the
continuance of this Grant, be ordered and directed by the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, for the time being, to be always one or
more, or by the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, In all doubtful cases the
Farmers are to be ordered and directed by the Lord Lieutenant, and Council or
by the Treasurer, Vice-Treaserer and Barons of the Exchequer.
Chancellor and Barrons of the Exchequer, there for the time being in cases
proper for the determination of the said Court of Exchequer, for or concerning
any question or doubt, which shall hereafter arise or happen upon, or by Reason
of any matter or thing which shall be done by the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, their or any of their deputies or
servants in or about the execution of these presents, or any other clause or
article herein contained; And that they or any of them, their or any of their
deputies, factors or servants, shall not at any time or times hereafter, during
the continuance of these presents, They shall not willingly permit any Merchant
to trade to the prejudice of any corporations, etc.
license or wittingly or willingly permit or suffer any Merchant or Merchants,
their factors or servants to Trade or Traffic in any manner of way which shall
or may be prejudicial or hurtful to any Corporations or bodies Politic of any
Merchants incorporated by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England or
Ireland, by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, that now, is, or any of his
Highness progenitors or Predecessors, or contrary or repugnant to the liberties
and privileges to them or any of them by any such Letters Patents, given or
granted under color or pretense of any clause, sentence, matter or thing in
these presents given, granted or specified, any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding: The moderation of all
forfeitures.
And moreover, whereas heretofore it has happened, and many times hereafter it
may fall out and happen that some forfeitures may be had made and committed by
some Merchant or Merchants, their servants or sactors of their Goods, wares or
Merchandises by the strict penalties of the Laws and Statutes of the said
Realm, concerning Customs,
and some act or things may by them or some of them be done, perpetrated,
committed or omitted, whereby their wares, goods and merchandises may be seized
as forseited by the strict Rules of the said Laws and Statutes of the said
Realm, is to be submitted to such order as the Lord Lieutenant and Council, or
Treasurer, Vice Treasurer ard Chancellor of the Exchequer, by the advice of the
Barons, shall make.
whereas nevertheless in equity and conscience heretofore in such like cases,
the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and
Council there for the time being, or some of them, or the Lord Treasurer,
Vice-Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer of Ireland, for the time being,
have used according to his and their wisdom and conscience, sometimes by the
advice of the Barons of the Exchequer for the time being, and sometimes by the
advice of the Officers of the said Ports, to make some moderation thereof, and
to give redress therein, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood; William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, do therefore
covenant, promise and grant for them and every of them, their and every of
their Executors, administrators and assigns, to and with the Kings most
Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, by these presents, that in every
such case, and when, and as often as any such case of Equity or Conscience
shall happen; That they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and assigns, which orders etc the Farmers are to
fulfill, perform and abide by.
shall stand unto, perform, fulfill and abide all and every such order,
direction and ordinance therein, as the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or
any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor
or Governors of Ireland, for the time being, to be always one or more, or the
Lord Treasurer or Vice-Treasurer of Ireland, for the time being, the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, by the advice of the Barons of the said Court of Exchequer
for the time being, or any three of them, shall set down and appoint; And
whereas heretofore in every of the said Custom-houses, in every of the said
Ports and creeks within the said Realm, there has been usually made unto
Merchants, Factors, Masters, Shippers and Mariners, sundry allowances, and
diverse wares and merchandises in cases reasonable, have been permitted and
suffered heretofore, to pass both into the said Realm, and out of the said
Realm Custom free, whereof and for which not Custom of late has been demanded,
yielded or paid according to a large continued usage heretofore accustomed and
used in that behalf, which notwithstanding this present demise and grant, were
fit and convenient to have coutinuance, during the continuance of this grant,
for the better encouragement of all Merchants in the Trade of merchandise; Now
therefore the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, do covenant, promise and grant,
for them, their Executors administrators and Assigns, to and with our said
Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, by these presents; That they
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
every of them, their and every of their deputies and servants, The Farmers are
to allow usual bills of store according to the Rules in the book of Rates.
shall and will, during the continuance of this Grant allow to all and every
Merchant, Master, Shipper and Mariner of any Ship or Vessel, such provision,
favors, portage and store, as is provided, allowed, and made by and according
to the Rates and Rules set down and expressed in the book of Rates now
established: And if any variance, difference or controversy shall happen to,
Differences between merchants and the Farmers, touching such bills of store to
be decided by the Lord Lieutenant and six of the Council with the advice of the
Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer and Barons, or three of them.
arise or grow at any time or times, during the Term aforesaid, between the
said Merchants, Masters, Shippers and Mariners, or any of them; And the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators Assigns, deputies or
servants, or any of them, touching the said provision; favors, portage and
stores, so from time to time to be allowed, as aforesaid; That then the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, Assigns, deputies and
servants, and every of them in all and every such cases, shall from time to
time stand to perform and abide such order and direction therein, as the Lord
Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there
for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, for the time being, to be
always one or more, shall by and with the advice of the Lord Treasurer,
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, or any three or more of
them set down and appoint. And further also, that they the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and assigns, and their and every of
their deputies and servants, shall and will at all and every time and times
within the said Term of six years, to be accounted as aforesaid, permit and
suffer all such foaring beer, and provision for every Ship and Vessel, They are
also to allow to Ships outward bound reasonable foaring beer, and other
provisions, with the privity of the Customers and Comptrolers of the Port,
Custom free.
which during the said Term shall happen to be bound to pass out of the said
Realm into any the parts or places beyond the Seas, as they from time to time,
with the privity of the Customers and Comptrollers of the port from whence it
shall pass, or their deputies, or some or one of them, shall in their
discretions think fit, reasonable and convenient, the same to be set down in
writing under the hands of them or some of them, to remain and be Registered, in
every Port and creek of the said Realm, with the Officers there, and without
payment of any Custom, and without demand or challenge of any Custom, subsidy,
duty, sum or sums of money, fee or other thing for the same: And if any
variance or controversy shall happen to arise or grow at any time or times,
during the Term aforesaid, and all differences thereupon to be regulated, as in
the foregoing covenant.
between the Merchant, Owner, or Master of any Ship or Vessel, so as aforesaid,
to be bound to pass out of the said Realm; or any other person or persons; and
the said, John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, deputies, assigns
or servants, or any of them touching or concerning the said foaring beer, and
provision, so from time to time to be allowed, as aforesaid; That then the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, deputies, Assigns and
servants, and every or any of them, in all and every such cases, shall from
time to time stand to and abide such order and direction therein, as the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council
there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord
Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, to be always one
or more, by and with the advice of the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer,
Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer, for the time being, or any three or
more of them respectively, as is aforesaid, shall set down and appoint in that
behalf. And further also; That they the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and at
all times, during the said Term of six years, to be accounted, as aforesaid,
remit and abate unto all and every person and persons, that shall build or
cause to be built, The Farmers are to allow all such as build ships of three
decks or two decks and an half, to make their first two voyages free from one
tenth part of the custom.
within any of his Majesty's Dominions, any Ship or Vessel of three decks or
two decks and an half, with a fore-castle and five foot between each deck,
mounted with thirty pieces of ordnance at least, and other ammunition
proportionable for the first two Voyages, that the said Ship or Ships shall
make from his Majesty's Dominions, to any foreign parts, one tenth part of the
customs that shall be paid or payable to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
for all such goods and merchandises, as shall be exported or imported in any
the said Ship or Ships, to and from the said Kingdom of Ireland, according to
the purport, intent and true meaning of the late Act of Parliament passed in
England, for preventing frauds and regulating abuses in his Majesty's Customs,
and the provisions and clauses therein, in that behalf provided and made; And
without any defalcation or abatement out of the said yearly Rent hereby
reserved, or any other allowance or recompense to be therefore, or by reason
thereof made, paid or rendered by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or any
person or persons whatsoever, unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them. And that they, the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, The Farmers are to permit Merchant strangers in eight months to transport
what they imported custom free.
their and every of their deputies and servants from time to time, during the
said Term of six years, to be accounted, as aforesaid, shall and will permit
and suffer every Merchant, alien or stranger, his and their Deputies, factors
and servants, and every of them, which have brought any goods, wares or
merchandises from any the parts beyond the Seas, into the said Realm of
Ireland, being no goods prohibited to be brought into or carried out of the
said Realm by any Statute or Restraint; And having there paid the Customs and
Subsidies inward due for the same, to transport and carry out again the same
goods, wares and merchandises (the property or nature thereof being not altered
or changed) out of any the Ports or Creeks aforesaid into any the parts beyond
the Seas, And every Merchant, being subject born the property not being
altered) to export the same goods at any time, within one year next after the
first Entry of the same, upon the first bringing thereof.
at any time within eight months next after the first entry of the same into
the said Custom-books upon the first bringing thereof into the said Realm, free
from all custom outward, and without demand or challenge of any custom, subsidy
or duty for any such Transportation outward for the same; And likewise shall
and will permit and suffer every Merchant being subject, born within the said
Realm, his deputies, factors and servants, and every of them from time to time,
during the continuance of this Grant, which have brought any wares, goods or
merchandises from any the parts beyond the Seas into the said Realm of Ireland,
being no goods prohibited to be brought into or carried out of the said Realm
by any Statute or Restraint, and there having paid the custom and subsidy
inward due for the same, to transport and carry out the same goods, wares and
merchandises (the property or nature thereof being not altered or changed) out
of any Ports or Creeks of the said Realm into the parts beyond the Seas at any
time within one year next after the first entry of the same into the
Custom-house book, upon the first bringing thereof into the said Realm, free of
all Customs outward, and without demand or challenge of any Custom, Subsidy or
Duty for any such Transportation of the same, as is aforesaid: And that they
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Victuals and apparel for his
Majesty's service by warrant of Lord Lieutetenant, Treasurer, etc. to be custom
free.
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, their and every of their
deputies, servants and factors, shall and will permit and suffer from time to
time, during the continuance of this Demise, all manner of victuals and apparel
provided or to be provided for any of the Kings Majesty's Armies, which shall
then be within the Realms of England or Scotland, or elsewhere, and all apparel
provided or to be provided for any the Kings Majesty's Armies and Garrisons,
and every of them in any place wheresoever, as shall be allowed by warrant in
writing under the hand of the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or
Covernours of Ireland for the time being, or under the hand of the Lord
Treasurer, or Vice-Treasurer of Ireland for the time being, to pass and to be
transported out of any the said Ports and Creeks, into the said several places
beyond the Seas respectively, whereunto they shall be directed custom free, and
without demand of any Custom, Subsidy, Duty, Sum or Sums of money, for any
custom outward for the same victual and apparel, and every of them, so to be
Transported as aforesaid; And shall and will permit and suffer also all such
necessary provisions, as shall be yearly provided within the said Realm for the
Service of his Majesty's Navies, Armies or Garrisons, or any Officers,
Soldiers or Mariners therein being, and shall by the Lord Lieutenant, or other
Chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, or any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, to be always one or more, be limited and
set down in writing under his hand or their hand or hands to pass and be
transported into every place and places, where the same shall be appointed and
directed to be carried and unladen, without let, impediment or hinderance of
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them, or of their, or any of their deputies and servant custom free, and
without demand of any Custom, Subsidy, Duty, Sum or Sums of money for the the
transportation or for the custom for the same; Provided always, and it is
hereby declared, that all apparel, victuals and other provisions laden on board
by pretense of such warrants, what exceeds those warrants, and is exported for
merchandise to pay.
and exceeding the quantities in such warrants mentioned, if the same be laden
on board with intent to be sold and uttered by way of merchandise, shall be
subject and liable to the payment of customs, any thing herein before contained
to the contrary notwithstanding. And also shall and will in like manner permit
and suffer all and every such person and persons as shall have license to pass
and depart out of the said Realm, Such as have license to pass beyond Sea, are
to be suffered to go without exaction, and of custom for apparel only.
into any the parts beyond the Seas, by bill signed by the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or by warrant from the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors of the Kingdom of Ireland, for the time being, to pass
and depart out of the said Realm according to such license at any time, during
the continuance of these presents, without the let, hinderance or disturbance
of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any
of them, their or any of their deputies or servants free of custom of their
apparel only, and without demand or challenge of any custom, subsidy, duty, sum
or sums of money due for the same; and shall also at all and every time and
times, during the continuance of this present demise, Presents to Foreign
Princes, sent by Us or any company of Merchants to pass custom free.
permit and suffer all such goods, wares, merchandises or jewels, which shall
happen to be sent for presents or gifts, either from the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or from any Company or Corporation of Merchants within the
said Realms of England or Ireland, to any foreign King, Prince or Potentate,
every or any of them, custom free, and without demand of any custom, duty, sum
or sums of money, for or by reason of the same; And that they the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns or any of them,
their or any of their deputies or servants, shall not under color or by
pretense of this present demise and grant, The Farmers to suffer no prejudice
to be done to the Prizage or Butlerage, and the Lord Ormond to enjoy the
benefit of his Patent, paying the usual duties.
do or suffer to be done, or cause to be done or suffered any act or acts,
thing or things, that may be hurtful or prejudicial to the butlerage or prizage
of wines, or to the Office of the Kings Majesty's Butler of the said Realm of
Ireland. Provided also, and the true intent and meaning of all parties to these
presents, are, that nothing herein contained shall extend or be construed to
extend to prejudice any Letters Patents or Grant heretofore made under his
Majesty's great Seal of England or Ireland, or either of them, unto the Right
Honorable James Duke of Ormond, or any his Ancestors of the prize wines which
shall become due and payable within his Majesty's said Kingdom of Ireland,
during the said Term of six years; but that the said James Duke of Ormond, his
Heirs and Assigns, shall and may fully, clearly and absolutely, paying only the
usual duties accustomed to be paid, receive the full benefit of all and every
such Letters Patents, according to the true purport and meaning of them and
every of them, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And that the said John Forth, William Bucknall
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, and every of their
deputies and servants, shall and will from time to time, during the continuance
of this Demise or Lease, give unto the Company of Merchants in England, trading
or which shall trade unto the East or West Indies, or into the Countries newly
discovered or hereafter to be discovered, and to all other Corporations or
Companies of Merchants incorporated or authorized by several Charters under the
great Seal of England or Ireland, either by the Kings Majesty or by his Noble
Progenitors and Predecessors, and to the singular members of such Companies and
others such reasonable days and times for the payment of their and every of
their Customs, Time to the companies and their members for payment of their
customs upon good security.
Poundage and other duties upon good and sufficient security, as shall be
between the said Merchant, and the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assign, and every of them, their and every of
their deputies and servants agreed upon, or in default of such agreement, such
days and times upon good and sufficient security, as are given to the said
Companies and Corporations of Merchants, according to their Letters Patents.
and every of them, by the Kings Majesty or any of his Progenitors or
Predecessors, in his or their several Letters Pattents under the great Seal of
England or Ireland, severally and respectively made unto the said Companies or
Corporations of Merchants, and every of them, for the payment of their customs,
subsidies, poundage, duties and sums of money hereby granted and demised, which
shall be due and payable at any time within the said Term of six years, to be
accounted as aforesaid, for or by reason of any goods, wares or merchandises,
by them the said Merchants to be transported out of or brought into the said
Realm, And the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, do for themselves and every of
them, their and every of their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, covenant,
promise and grant to and with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and
Successors by these presents; If any goods, whereof the custom shall be
compounded for within the Term, shall be shipped out after, the Farmers shall pay
those customs to his Majesty over and above the Rent.
That if any Merchant, alien, stranger or denizen, or natural born subject,
within the said Realm, shall at any time or times, during the continuance of
this present demise or lease, satisfy and pay to them the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknal, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, the
custom, subsidy, impost and other duty due for or in respect of the
transportation of any goods wares or merchandises, or shall at any time or
times, during the continuance of this present lease and demise, compound and
agree with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their deputies, servants and
factors, or any of them, for the custom, subsidy, impost and other duties, of
any such goods, wares and merchandises; the said goods, wares and merchandises,
for which such custom, subsidy or impost shall be so paid or compounded for, as
is aforesaid, not being shipped or laden into some Ship or other Vessel within
the continuance of this present lease and demise, to the intent to be from
thence transported from the Ports, Havens and Creeks aforesaid, into the parts
beyond the Seas, that in every such case upon such proof thereof to be made, as
the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer for the time being,
or any three or more of them (whereof the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, or
Chancellor of the Exchequer for the time being to be one) shall allow of the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
within ten days next after such proof, so to be made, as aforesaid, satisfy,
content and pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid, Within ten days
after proof, to pay to his Majesty over and above the rent.
unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, into the
Receipt of the Exchequer of his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, at Dublin,
so much money as the customs, subsidies and impost of such goods, wares and
merchandises, so to be paid or compounded for, and not shipped before the end
of the said Term of six years, to be accounted as aforesaid, shall duly and
truly amount unto over and above the yearly Rent and sums of money, in and by
these presents reserved and payable; And to the intent and purpose, that the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, may be
the fuller empowered and the better enabled to their own proper use and behoof,
to discover, demand, levy, collect, recover and take, during the Term
aforesaid, all and every the customs, subsidies and duties of Excise and new
Impost, and all other sums and duties whatsoever hereby granted, and also may
be the better assured to enjoy the same according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents; His said Royal Majesty does for himself, his Heirs
and Successors covenant, promise, grant and agree to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralp Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form
following (that is to say) That the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or
Governors of his Majesty's said Kingdom of Ireland, or the Lord Lieutenant, or
other chief Governor or Governors, and Privy Council there for the time being
respectively, shall and will from time to time, during the continuance of this
present Lease, so far as they are empowered by Law, constitute and appoint the
said John Forth, That the Farmers or such persons, as they shall appoint, shall
be Commissioners and collectors of the customs and excise, and no other.
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, or such other person or persons, as the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall nominate and appoint, and no
other Commissioners and Collectors of and for said Customs and Subsidies of
Tonnage and Poundage, and Commissioners and Governors of and for the said
imported duties of Excise and new Impost, with full power and authority, so far
as the Laws shall permit, to nominate and appoint such Sub-Commissioners,
Deputies, Waiters, Collectors, and other Officers respectively, in the several
and respeective Ports and places of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, and the
Islands and Territories thereto belonging from time to time, during the said
Term of six years, as fully as the late Commissioners of the Customs and
Excise, or the said Treasurer of the Kingdom are empowered by the said Acts of
Parliament, herein before particularly recited or either of them, and as is
therein declared, limited and appointed, so as such person or persons so to be
nominated by the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, be persons of Integrity and honest conversation, and not be
disabled by the said Acts or either of them, or by any other Law or Statute in
the said Kingdom of Ireland, to execute the same Offices and Employments. And
whereas by the thirteenth Rule, order and direction annexed unto, and following
the said Act of Tonnage and Poundage, the said Lord Lieutenant, Deputy, or
other chief Governor or Governors, and Council of the said Kingdom of
Ireland, for the time being, are authorized to appoint one certain Port in each
Province of the said Kingdom of Ireland, where Merchants, strangers or others
importing goods or merchandise into the said Realm of Ireland, with the intent
to export the same again, may make composition or compound for the duties of
goods; And whereas Rules and Instructions for the regulating the Ports so to be
appointed, as aforesaid, are to be approved of by the chief Governor or
Governors, and Council of the said Kingdom of Ireland, for the time being.
Therefore the said Governor or Governors, and Council for the time being,
shall from time to time, Such one Port and no other in each Province to be
appointed for a free Port, As the Lord Lieutenant, etc. shall think, and may
consist with public safety. The Farmers are to observe all rules in the Act
for Tonnage and Poundage.
during the said Term of six years hereby granted, appoint such one Port, and
no other in each Province, and ratify, approve and allow of such Instructions
and Rules for the regula ing thereof, so far as the same is lawful and may
consist with public safe, as they the said chief Governor and Governors, and
Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them, whereof the chief
Governor or Governors to be always one or more shall think fit. And further,
that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, shall and will during the said Term of six years, duly observe
such Rules, Orders and Directions for Advancement of Trade and Encouragement of
Merchants, as are prescribed and laid down in the Act for settling the
Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage on his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
herein formerly mentioned; and also all other Acts now in force, prohibiting
the Exportation of Wool, Leather, or any other thing whatsoever, And the Act
prohibiting the exportation of Wool, Leather, and other goods.
prohibited to be exported out of the said Kingdom of Ireland (except as herein
is excepted and provided for) and shall not nor will not do, or willingly
suffer to be done any thing or things whatsoever, contrary to any of them, or
the Rules, Orders and directions in them, or any of them prescribed (except as
herein is excepted and provided for) nor shall not nor will not do, or
willingly suffer or permit any Goods or Merchandise to be shipped or landed,
Notice to the Kings Officer upon goods landed
but in the presence of or after due notice given at his place of Office unto
such Officer or Officers, as by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or by the
Lord Lieutenant, Deputy, or other chief Governor or Governors of Ireland, and
Council of the said Kingdom of Ireland, for the time being, shall be appointed
to that purpose, or some of their Deputies, nor shall not within the space of
six Months, They shall not toward the end of the Term fill the Markets.
immediately next before the Expiration or other Determination of the said Term
of six years, directly or indirectly design or contrive to anticipate the
Receipt of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, by inviting, treating or
compounding with any Merchant or Importer to Import Goods to fill the Markets.

THE INLAND EXCIZE, AND ALE and BEER LICENSES.
AND His Majesty of his more abundant special grace, certain knowledge, and
mere motion, has demised and granted, and by these Presents for his Highness,
his Heirs and Successors, for and in consideation of the 70000 l. so as
aforesaid advanced, and of the Covenants and Agreements herein also contained,
Demise of all the Inland Excize.
does demise and grant unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, all and all
manner of Rates, Charges, Impositions, Sums of Money, Payments, and Duties of
Excize whatsoever, which by virtue of the Act aforesaid, or otherwise
howsoever, shall at any time after the 25th. day of March 1671. unto the 25th.
day of December 1675. inclusive grow due, and renew, and from time to time,
during the term aforesaid, ought to become due and payable, and are appointed
to be paid unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for or in respect of any
Beer, Ale, Strong Water, or other Excizeable Liquors brewed, or made, vended,
spent or consumed within the said Realm of Ireland, or for or in respect of any
the Goods, Merchandises or Commodities whatsoever, which are of the Native
Growth, Production, or Manufacture of the said Realm of Ireland; and all other
the Duties of Excize whatsoever, commonly called or known by the name of the
Inland Excize; and also that Duty or Sum of Twenty Shillings, And the duty of
Twenty shillings for Ale and Beer Licenses.
which shall grow due and payable annually to his Majesty, by such Persons who
shall yearly be Licenced to sell Ale and Beer in their Houses by Retail for and
in respect of such License; and all other Duties of that nature, which by
virtue of the said late Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act of the Improvement
of His Majesty's Revenue upon the granting of Licenses for the selling of Ale
and Beer, or otherwise howsoever, shall or may at any time after the 25th. day
of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy and one, unto the Five and twentieth day of December, which shall be in
the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five inclusive, grow due,
and renew, or from time to time, during the term aforesaid ought to become due
and payable, and are appointed to be paid unto our said Sovereign Lord the
King, his Heirs or Successors, or any of them.

Habendum.]
TO HAVE AND TO HOLD all and singular the Rates, Charges, and Impositions, Sums
of Money, Payments, and Duties of Excize whatsoever, which by virtue of the
said late Act of Parliament, touching or concerning the Excize, are due and
payable unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for or in respect of any
Beer, Ale, Strong Water, or other Excizable Liquors brewed, or made in the
Realm of Ireland, or for or in respect of any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises of
the growth, production, or manufacture of Ireland, and all other the Duties of
Excize whatsoever, commonly called or known by the name of, The Inland Excize;
And also all that Duty of Twenty Shillings, which by virtue of the said late
Act of Parliament touching or concerning Licenses for selling Ale and Beer,
will be yearly due and payable to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, from
every Person and Persons taking or renewing any License for selling Ale and
Beer, by Retayl, (except before excepted) unto the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the Twenty fifth day of
March, From the4 25th day of March 1671 for Four years and three quarers.
which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy one,
for, during, and until the full end and term of Four years and three quarters
of a year from thenceforth next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, to
the only proper use, benefit, and behoof of John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, without any Account, Matter or other
thing to be yielded, made, or done for the same, other than the Rents and Sums
of Money, and other things herein before or hereafter, in and by these presents
reserved and covenanted, or agreed to be paid or performed, and in as large and
ample manner as his Majesty may, might, or ought to have, take, or enjoy the
same by force or virtue of any Statute or Statutes, Act or Acts of Parliament,
Custom, Use, Usage or Prescription, and as largely, amply and beneficially as
his Majesty may demise or grant the same, or any part thereof, or as the same
are hereby mentioned, meant or intended to be demised or granted; Any Law,
Statute, Act or Acts of Parliaments, and more especially the Clause in the said
late Act of Parliament, Non obstante the Clause in the Act for Ale and Beer
Licenses.
entitled, An Act for the Improvement of his Majesty's Revenues, upon the
granting of Licenses for selling Ale and Beer, which enacts, That all the Sums
of money due and payable by the said Act, shall be duly and constantly paid
into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, and shall not be set or let to Farm, his
Majesty intending to retain the same in his own hands, and not to interest any
private Person whatsoever with the profits thereof; and that all and every such
Lease, and every Clause of Non obstante therein contained, should be utterly
void; And that all such Lessees or Farmers should be Accountants unto His
Majesty for all profits received by pretense of any such Grant or farm; And
also the Clause in the said late Act of Parliament, entitled, An Act for
settling of the Excize, And also the Clause in the Act for Excize.
or new Impost, upon His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, according to the
Book of Rates therein inserted; which prohibits any Lease to be thereof made,
during the space of seven years next ensuing the said Act, or after the said
seven years, without the Advice of the Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, or six or more of the Council of that Kingdom; and reserving the
highest Rent which in any one of the seven years next succeeding the said
Statute was yielded and paid unto His Majesty, and which declares any Lease
made contrary to the said Act to be void; And also all and every Ordinance,
Order, Custom, Proclamation, Letters Patents, And every Ordinance, Order,
Custom, etc.
Provision, Restraint, or any other matter or thing had or made, or to be had
or made, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

YIELDING and PAYING, and the said John Forth, Yielding and paying.
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, for them, and every of them, their and every of their Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, do by these presents covenant
to and with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors, to
yield and pay unto our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors,
for and during the residue of four years and three quarters of a year,
mentioned in this present Demise; That is to say, from the Feast of the
Annunciation of our blessed Virgin Mary, which shall be in the year of our Lord
1671. for and during the term of four years, and three quarters of a year,
from thence next ensuing; and upon the Feast of the Nativity, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1675. From our Lady day 1671, to Christmas 1675. yearly.
fully to be complete and ended, at or into his or their Receipt of Exchequer
at Dublin, or by such other payments, and with such Deductions,, Abatements and
Allowances, and in such manner as in and by these presents is mentioned yearly,
and every year, during the said four years and three quarters of a year last
before mentioned; the Rent following, That is to say; the full yearly Sum of
Fifty three thousand pounds sterling of good and lawful Money of England, The
Rent of 53000 l. for the first four years, at the usual feast.
during the first four years of the said Term, or so much other lawful and
current Money of Ireland as shall be equivalent thereunto, at or before the
four most usual Feasts in the year, That is to say, the Feast of the
Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary, the Feast of the Nativity of Saint
John the Baptist, the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the Feast of
the Nativity of our Lord, by even and equal portions; The first quarterly
payment of the said yearly Rent of Fifty three thousand pounds reserved, during
the said first four years, to begin and to be made upon the Feast of the
Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, The first quarterly payment to begin upon
the feast of Saint John the Baptist, 1672.
which shall be in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred seventy
two; And for the last three quarters 39750 l. at the usual Feast-dayes.
And during the three last quarters of a year of the said term the full Sum of
Thirty nine thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds of lawful English Money, or
so much lawful and current Money of Ireland as shall be equivalent thereunto,
at or before the three last and usual Feast days of the said Term; That is to
say, the Feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ, by
even and equal portions; the first quarterly payment of the said Thirty nine
thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds reserved, during the last three
quarters of a year, to begin and be made upon the Feast of the Nativity of St.
John the Baptist, which shall be in the year of our Lord God One thousand six
hundred seventy and five.

And whereas by virtue of the said late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act
for the settling of the Excize or new Impost upon His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, according to the Book of Rates therein inserted, it is amongst
other things provided, That if any Vintner, Inne-keeper, Victualler,
Alehouse-keeper, or maker or Distiller of Aqua-vitae or Strong Water, using
common selling and retailing of Beer, Ale, Aqua-vitae or Strong Water in his
or their Houses, should think fit to compound for the Excise of all Beer, Ale,
Aqua-vitae or Strong Water, which he or they shall brew, make, distill, draw,
retail or vend, in his or their Houses; That the Commissioners or
Sub-Commissioners of Excize respectively should have authority to make such
Composition for any time, not exceeding twelve months; and at such Rates to be
paid monthly as they shall think reasonable; So as the Rates were not less
than such Compounder had paid for Excize in twelve months before going; And
that upon such Composition made, the Party compounding should with able
Sureties enter into a sufficient Obligation to our Sovereign Lord the King, for
paying and performing such Composition; and thereupon should be discharged from
making any weekly Entries during the time of such Composition, and from all
Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures concerning the same; as by the said Act more
at large appears, His Majesty is graciously pleased to covenant and agree, and
by these presents for Himself, His Heirs and Successors, If any composition for
Excize shall be made by the Commissioners, or Sub-Commissioners, with any
Retailer or Distiller, which shall continue of force during the term.
does covenant and agree to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them; That if at any time
hereafter, and before the Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary,
which shall be in the year of our Lord God One thousand six hundred seventy
one, any such Composition or Agreement for Excise shall happen to be made with
any of the Persons aforesaid, shall continue in force after the said Feast of
the Annuntiation last mentioned; or if at any time after the commencement of
this present Demise and Grant for Four years and three quarters of a year, any
new or other Composition or Agreement shall happen to be made with any such
Vintner, Innkeeper, Victualler, Alehouse-keeper, or Maker or Distiller of
Aqua-vitae or Strong Water, for the Excize of such Beer, Ale, Aqua-vitae or
Strong Water, as he or they usually brew, make, distill, draw, retail or vend
in his or their Houses; which Composition shall remain and be of force during
any part of the said term of Four years and three quarters, That then, and in
every such case, The Farmers shall have the benefit of the same, and the Moneys
payable thereupon.
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, to have, hold, take,
receive, and enjoy to their own proper use, benefit and behoof, all and every
sum and sums of Money, which by reason or virtue of any such Composition or
Compositions, Agreement or Agreements made, or to be made as aforesaid, shall
at any time during the said term of Four years and three quarters of a year,
grow due and payable, without any Account or other Matter or Thing to be
therefore rendered or given, other than the Rent by these presents reserved. And
if any of the said sums due or payable, during the said term, for or in respect
of any such Composition as aforesaid, shall be behind and unpaid, by reason
whereof the Obligations and Securities entered into for the payment and
performance of such Composition, shall become forfeited unto his Majesty;

Our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty is pleased and contented, and by
these presents, for his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, And the Forfeiture.
does give and grant unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, without any Account or other thing to be
therefore paid or rendered, other than the Rent by these presents reserved, the
whole forfeiture and benefit that shall be raised, gotten, or had by all and
every such Obligations and securities, and of all Judgments, Executions and
Extents thereupon, and Compositions for the same; and that it shall be lawful
for them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, in the name of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, his Heirs and Successors, With power in the Kings name to sue the
Obligations.
and at their own proper Costs and Charges, to sue, prosecute, and implead in
his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, all and every Person and Persons, by whom any
such Obligation shall be forfeited, and his and their Sureties, and in the name
or names of Him, his Heirs or Successors, to procure Judgment, and sue forth
Execution of and for all and every the Penalties and Forfeitures in the said
Obligations contained; and our said Sovereign Lord does hereby Command the Lord
Treasurer, And the Lord Treasurer, etc. are commanded to deliver the said
Forfeitures, when levied, to the Farmers.
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of his Court of Exchequer for the time
being, that when and as often as any of the said Penalties and Forfeitures of
the said Obligations shall be levied or paid into the said Court of Exchequer,
so often all and every the said Penalties and Forfeitures be delivered unto the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to
their own only use and behoof, without any other or further Account; And for
so doing, these Presents, or the Enrollment thereof, shall be to them, and
every of them, and to all other Officers and Ministers to whom it shall
appertain, a sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf.

The Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners are to take no Securities, but such as
they will answer for.
And our said Sovereign Lord the King does further charge and command all and
every the Commissioners and Sub-Commissioners of Excize respectively, that they
presume not to take any Obligation or Security for paying or performing any
Composition or Agreement for Excize, which shall have continuance or effect,
during any part of the said term of Four years and three quarters of a year
hereby granted; but of such sufficient Persons, for whom they will undertake,
if the Parties prove unable, unless the said Bonds be taken with or by the
consent and good liking of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them hereunto first had by
writing under their, or some of their hands; Nor cancel any without the
Farmers consent.
And that they do not deliver, cancel, or make void the said Bonds or
Writings, or any of them, unless it be after notice first given to, and with
the consent and good liking of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, in writing thereunto
first had and obtained.

And if any Act done, or to be done by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, or
by the Lord Lieutenant, or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland and
Council there for the time being, or by the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer,
Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, or any Officers and Ministers of his
Majesty's Revenue for the time being, or by any of them, shall be any
obstruction or hinderance unto them the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in the having or receiving the full
benefit of such forfeited Obligations, and the Penalties thereof, or of the
Judgments and Executions thereupon had, If the Farmers are hindered of those
Forfeitures, they are to have Defalcation, By way of Retainer.
(the due Fees of the Officers of the Exchequer only excepted) then his
Majesty is pleased that there shall be an allowance and defalcation made by way
of recouper and retainer of so much of the Rent by these presents reserved, as
may be sufficient to give recompense and satisfaction for the same. And his
Majesty does hereby authorize the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, and any six or more
of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland for the time being, to be always one or more, And the Lord Lieutenant,
etc. authorized to allow the same.
to grant unto them an Order in writing for the allowance of such Defalcations,
without any other or further warrant from his Majesty to be therefore had and
obtained.

And they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, for themselves, and every of
them respectively, and for their respective Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, do further covenant, promise, grant and agree, to and with his
Most Excellent Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, The Farmers covenant, not to
demand more of the Subject than what shall be agreeable to Law.
that neither they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, nor any of them, nor
their, nor any of their Executors, Administrators, Deputies, Officers, or
Substitutes, nor any of them, shall or will within the space or compass of any
one quarter, or fourth part of a year, during the said term of four years and
three quarters of a year hereby demised, the said quarters to be accounted
successively the one after the other, immediately after the commencement of the
said term of four years and three quarters of a year, demand, receive,
collect, gather, or take by way of composition, or otherwise, from any Brewer
or Victualler, or other person whatsoever, any more or greater Sum or Sums of
Money, by virtue, color or pretense of these presents, than shall be due and
payable by any such Brewer, Victualler, or other person or persons, for his or
their Excize for that quarter respectively, or shall be in arrear for their
Excize before the beginning of such a respective quarter, or shall be agreeable
to the Laws and Statutes of Excize.

HIS MAJESTY'S GENERAL COVENANTS.
He Maje^ Cove^ re^ ^o all ^ns.
AND further, to the intent the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, may be the better enabled to pay the
Rent and Sums of Money by these presents reserved and payable to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, at the days and times herein before limited
and appointed for the payment of the same, our said Sovereign Lord the King is
pleased and contented, and for Him, his Heirs and Successors, of his especial
grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, does covenant and grant to and with
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and
every of them, by these presents, That if the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Deputy or Deputies, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of
them, for any difficulty, delay or doubt, that they or any of them shall find
in recovering or levying of the said annual Rents or Payments, Duties of
Hearth-money, Duties arising by Licenses for retailing Wine or Strong Water,
Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, Duties of Excize for Goods
imported, Duties of Excize for Ale and Beer, and other the Duties of Inland
Excize; Duties arising by Licenses for retailing Ale and Beer, and all other
the Duties, Revenues, Profits and Premises respectively demised as aforesaid,
or mentioned to be hereby demised, granted or leased, or of any part or parcel
of the same; and which by the true intent and meaning of these presents, they
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, ought
to have, take and receive to their own use, after the same shall become due and
payable, or for the difficulty of getting in any other of their, or any of
their debts due unto them, or any of them, to be thereby the better enabled to
satisfy His Majesty's said Rent, or for any other cause or occasion
whatsoever, will give, grant or assign, or cause or procure to be given,
granted or assigned to our said Sovereign Lord the King, If the Farmers desire
to assign any of the Duties demised,
His Heirs or Successors, or to any of them, the said annual Rents, Payments,
Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, and other the Duties, Revenues,
Profits and Premises by these presents respectively demised or granted, or any
part or parcel thereof, after the same shall be due or payable; or any Bonds,
Bills, Obligations, Or any Bonds, Bills, etc. therefore due;
Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances, Specialties, Debts, Duties, Sum or Sums
of Money which shall be due, owing or appertaining to the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors Administrators or Assigns, for, or in respect of the
same, or of any other cause whatsoever, by any Person or Persons whatsoever,
Then our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, His Majesty will accept the
Assignment, and cause speedy process to issue out for the recovery thereof.
His Heirs and Successors, and every of them, to whom the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or any of them, shall
and will give, grant or assign, or cause to be assigned as aforesaid, the same
or any part thereof, shall accept, receive and take the said Gift, Grant or
Assignment, and thereupon with all celerity and expedition shall and will from
time to time cause to be made forth of the said Court of Exchequer of His
Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, or of any of them, as speedy process, or
other proceedings, for the speedy recovering and levying of the said annual
Rents, Payments, Customs, Subsidies and Imposts, Debts, Sums of Money,
Excizes, Duties, Bonds, Bills, Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances,
Specialties, and other the Premises, which shall be so given, granted or
assigned as is aforesaid, and every part and parcel of the same, as the use and
course of the said Court may allow and permit, or as other Debts due, or to be
due to His Highness, His Heirs or Successors, immediately may by order of the
said Court be levied or recovered, any Letters of Privy Seal Non obstante any
Privy Seal, etc.
made by His Majesty's said late Grandfather or Father, or by our said
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, concerning the assignment of Debts, or any
Commandment, Direction, Signification, Grant, or Declaration made, or to be
made, from His late Majesty, or our said Sovereign Lord the King, by Privy Seal
or Great Seal, or otherwise howsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And our said Sovereign Lord the King, for Him, His Heirs and Successors, does
by these presents covenant, promise and grant to and with the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, All Moneys so recovered,
to be paid to the Farmers, without account.
that all and singular the said annual Rents, Payments, Customs, Subsidies,
Excizes, Debts, Duties, Sums of Money, Revenues, Profits, and other the
premises, which shall be recovered and levied, or paid, by reason of any such
Debt, Bond, Obligation, Bill, Judgment, Statute, Recognizance, Process, Order,
Course, or Suite of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors;
as also all and every the foresaid Pains and Penalties which shall so likewise
be recovered, and which the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, are, or ought to have, according to the
intent of these presents, shall immediately after the recovering or levying
thereof, from time to time be delivered by the said Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Barons of the said Exchequer, or some of them, to the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them, to their, and
every of their own proper uses and behoofs, without any Account or other thing,
to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, to be had, paid,
or done, of, or for the same, or any part or parcel thereof, other than the
said several and respective yearly Rents and Sums of Money, and other Things
and Duties before in these presents respectively reserved and agreed to be paid
to his Highness, his Heirs and Successors, according to the tenor, purport, Or
else shall be retained by the King in part of the Rent.
and true meaning of these presents; or else shall be retained toward, or for,
or in part of payment of the said Rent and Sums of Money to His Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, reserved or payable by force of these presents, which
then shall be due, if to the said Lord-Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor,
and Barons of the Court of Exchequer, or the more part of them for the time
being, it shall be thought meet and convenient for his Majesty's service and
surety in the premises. And also, that our said Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and Successors, shall from time to time, as occasion shall be, make, or
cause to be made unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, The
Farmers are to have such Grants of the Forfeitures recovered, as they desire,
and the Extents thereupon.
Administrators and Assigns, and every or any of them, under the Great Seal of
England or Ireland, or under the Seal of the Court of Exchequer there, or
otherwise, as by the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, their, or any of their Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably devised or required, and at their, or
any of their proper Costs and Charges in the Law, such and so many Grants,
Conveyances and Assurances of, and for the said annual Rents, Excizes,
Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Debts, Duties, Revenues, and Profits,
Forfeitures, Pains, Penalties, and Sums of Money, and of all Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels extended or seized thereupon, or for, or
by reason thereof, which by our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors, or by any of them shall be had, recovered, levied, or paid
by virtue of any such Process, Order, Course, or Suits, if the said
Lord-Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons, or the more part of
them, shall not think good so to retain the same. And his Majesty does hereby
for him, his Heirs and Successors, authorize and straightly charge and command,
as well the Lord Chancellor or Keeper of the Great Seal of Ireland for the time
being, as the said Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the
said Court of Exchequer for the time being, or some of them, to perform, do and
execute, or cause to be performed, done and executed, his Highness said
pleasure herein, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents;
And these Presents, or the Enrollment, Constat or Exemplification of the same,
shall be from time to time a sufficient warrant to the said Lord Chancellor or
Keeper of the Great Seal of Ireland, Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Barons of the said Court of Exchequer for the time being, and to all other
Officers and Ministers whatsoever of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs and Successors for the time being, to whom it shall appertain, for the
making forth Process, suing for, recovering and levying of the said Annual
Rents, Excizes, Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Debts, Duties, Revenues, Profits
and Sums of Monyes, and every of them, and of all the said Forfeitures, Pains
and Penalties; and for the Payment and delivery over to the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or to any of them, the
said annual Rents, Excizes, Imposts, Customs, Subsidies, Debts, Duties,
Revenues, Profits, Forfeitures, Pains, Penalties, and Sums of Money, and other
things whatsoever, which by virtue of such Process, Order, Course or Suits, as
is aforesaid, shall be levied or paid, and for to accept the same so recovered
as in part of payment of the Rent and Sums of Money above reserved or payable,
according to the tenor of these presents, then next due to be paid, in case it
shall be thought meet to retain the same as aforesaid, and also for the making
of such Grants and Assurances of the said annual Rents, Excize, Customs,
Subsidies, Impositions, Debts, Duties, Revenues, Profits, Forfeitures, Pains,
Penalties, and Sums of Money, and other things that shall be so recovered,
levied, or paid, as is aforesaid, under the Great Seal of Ireland, and under
the Seal of the said Court of Exchequer, or either of them, or otherwise as by
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any
of them, or by their, or any of their Counsel learned in the Law shall be
reasonably, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, devized
and required, without any other Warrant or Declaration of the pleasure of his
Highness, his Heirs or Successors, to be obtained or had in that behalf.

And that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may from time time, during the said
several and respective terms of years to be accounted as aforesaid, The
Farmers power to take Bonds in the Kings name.
take Bonds Obligatory in the name of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or in the names of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, as well of all and every
Merchant and Merchants, and Owners of the said Goods, Wares and Merchandises,
whereof the Customs, Subsidies, Impositions, and other Duties, are in and by
these presents mentioned to be demised, or any of them as of any other Person
or Persons for any other Debt, Duty or Cause whatsoever, with Surety or
Sureties as otherwise for Payment of the said Customs, Subsidies, Impositions
and Duties, and other the Debts and Duties whatsoever, and every or any of them
in such sort and manner, and at such days and times as to them the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors Administrators or Assigns, or any of them,
shall seem meet and convenient, and to detain and keep the said Bonds and every
of them in their or some of their hands, And to have the benefit of them.
and to have and take the full benefit and advantage of the same, and every of
them, to their own proper use, by way of Suite, at their own Cost and Charge,
in the name of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, or
otherwise, and upon satisfaction and payment thereupon, or otherwise to deliver
up or cancel the same, or otherwise to dispose thereof for their best advantage
and benefit, or profit, or otherwise, as they shall think fit; And also that
they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every of them, shall have full power, liberty and authority, in
the name of our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, or any of them, or in the name or names of them the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every or any
of them at their pleasure to implead, And at their charge to prosecute,
sue and prosecute all and every such Person and Persons, his and their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every or any of them, which shall
so become bound to his Majesty, his heirs or Successors, or otherwise indebted
of and for all and every such Sums of money, Penalties or Forfeitures as shall
grow or become due or payable, by reason or means of any such Bonds, or Debts,
as also all and every other Person and Persons, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, that shall or may by any means be found to be
indebted, chargeable, or answerable to His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
or to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, or any of them, for and in respect of the
said Annual Rents, Payments, Excizes, Customs, Subsidies, Impositions,
Revenues, Profits and Duties, and all and every part or parcel of the same, or
other Debts or Duties, or for not payment of the same, and the Sum and Sums of
Moneys, Penalties and Forfeitures, Arrearages of Rents, Profits, Payments,
Excizes, Customs, Subsidies, Impositions, Revenues, Profits and Duties, and
all and every part and parcel of the same, which shall be recovered or had, of
the Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of
them, of the said Person or Persons, their Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, to levy, hold and take Execution thereof, to
the use of them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, and every of them, and further to do, make, take and prosecute in
such like manner and form as his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, of his or
their Royal Prerogative, power and Authority, in his, or otherwise in their own
proper Names, or by any whatsoever Right or Title should or might have done,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.

And also, that these presents, Without further warrant to the Treasurer, etc.
or the enrollment thereof from time to time, shall be as well to the
Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of his Majesty's said Court
of Exchequer for the time being, and all other Officers and Ministers of the
same Court, as also to the Barons, Justices, Officers, and Ministers of his
Highness, his Heirs and Successors of the said Court of Exchequer for the time
being, or of any other his Majesty's Courts of Record, and to every of them
sufficient warrant and discharge to hear, determine, sue, prosecute, grant,
levy and make execution against all and every Person and Persons, their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, by and upon whom any of the said Sums of
money, penalties or forfeitures due or payable upon, or by reason of any such
Bonds, or any of the said Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Impositions and Duties,
before by these presents demised or granted, or mentioned to be demised or
granted, or any part or parcel thereof, be, or shall be charged, due or
levyable, in the name of our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or
Successors, or in the name or names of them the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, to the proper use
and behoof of the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, or any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, according to the
true intent and meaning of these presents, without any Account or other profit
or thing whatsoever to his Highness, his Heirs or Successors, therefore to be
had, paid or done, the said yearly Rent or Sums of money by these presents
reserved and covenanted to be paid as aforesaid, only excepted and foreprized.

And whereas in and by the several laws and statutes touching the Customs,
Excize, Duties of Hearth-money, Duties arising by Licenses of Retaylers, and
other the Duties and Profits hereby respectively demised, several Fines and
Penalties are imposed upon offenders, and variously distributed; And whereas in
all cases where any Fines or Penalties are imposed, or other Forfeiture
incurred for non-payment of any Duties of Excize, there the Duty it self is
wholly lost, as to the present Farmers thereof; His Majesty is therefore
graciously pleased to declare, and does hereby covenant and agree to and with
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, during the continuance of the several
and respective demises herein before made and granted, or mentioned to be made
and granted, His Majesty's Covenants not to discharge any of the Duties nor
Penalties.
will not pardon, remit, or any way discharge any of the Duties hereby granted
or demised, or any Fine, penalty or forfeiture whatsoever, which during the
said several and respective terms of years shall happen to be incurred by any
Offender or Offenders, and shall and may be lawfully imposed or levied, and
become due and payable for any offense committed against the Laws and Statutes
aforesaid.

All Commissioners for putting the Laws in execution, Judges, etc. are directed
to levy and cause to be levied all the said Fines and Forfeitures, and to pay
the Informers, and the Kings part to the Farmers;
And further, that all and every the Commissioners appointed, or to be appointed
for putting any of the said Laws and Statutes in Execution, and all and every
the Judges in any of the four Courts, and all Justices of Peace in their
several Sessions, shall from time to time, and at all times during the
continuance of this present Demise, be directed and appointed well and truly to
levy, and cause to be levied all and every the Fines, penalties and
forfeitures, which shall happen to be duly and legally imposed, and thereout
pay, or cause to be paid unto the several and respective Informers, and to such
others to whom the said Statutes have allotted and distributed any share or
part of the said Fines and forfeitures, such part or share as to them shall
appertain, and such part and proportions of the said Fines, penalties and
forfeitures which shall remain due and payable to His Majesty, shall pay, or
cause to be paid unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, And the Farmers are made Collectors and Receivers of the same.
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, (the Charges of levying the same being first
deducted;) For which purpose his Majesty does hereby constitute and appoint
them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and the Survivors and Survivor of them,
his and their Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, to be Collectors and
Receivers to His Majesty's use of his part of the penalties, fines and
forfeitures accrewing due as aforesaid; and the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
for them and every of them, and for the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns of them and every of them, do covenant and grant to and with His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors by these Presents, That within One and
twenty days next after every of the Four most usual Feasts or Quarter-dayes
which shall incur, The Farmers covenant to pay quarterly, or within 21 days
after, all the penalties and Forfeitures they receive over and above the Rent,
during the continuance of the several and respective Demises, they the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, the Survivor and Survivors of them, his and their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall and will satisfy and pay His
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors at His or their Receipt of Exchequer at
Dublin, over and above the several and respective yearly Rents herein before
reserved as aforesaid, all and every the fines, penalties and forfeitures to
them paid and delivered as aforesaid, or so much thereof as shall remain in
their or any of their hands after the several defalcations, deductions, Or so
much as remains in their hands after all defalcations, etc. satisfied.
allowances and payments herein mentioned shall be made and satisfied; And his
Majesty is graciously pleased further to declare and agree, That it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, upon all and every the Accounts by them
to be made touching and concerning any Fines, And in consideration thereof are
to defa^k as much of their Rent as the Moneys paid in for the Penalties amount
unto.
Penalties and forfeitures by them received as aforesaid, to abate, defalk,
deduct, detain and keep to his and their own use so much of the several and
respective Rents hereby reserved, as they or any of them shall from time to
time pay into the said receipt of His Majesty's Exchequer, of, for, or in
respect of the said fines, penalties and forfeitures in consideration and for
satisfaction of the said several Duties lost and unpaid by reason of any Fines
and penalties that shall be incurred and imposed; And upon full payment made as
aforesaid, all and every the Persons liable to any account for Fines, penalties
or forfeitures, shall be thereof wholly discharged, the said Laws and Statutes
imposing the said Penalties, or any other Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Farmers may defalk the Interest of the 70000 l. quarterly.
And His Majesty for himself, his Heirs and Successors, is hereby graciously
pleased to covenant and agree to and with the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Iemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, and every of them from time to time, and at all times during the
continuance of the several and respective terms before granted, to defalk and
deduct out of the several and respective yearly Rents herein before reserved,
and to retain quarterly and every quarter of a year so much thereof in their
own hands as may be sufficient to satisfy and pay the quarterly interest of
the threescore and ten thousand pounds so as aforesaid advanced after the rate
of ten pounds per Cent. for one year; And further that if the 70000 l. And if
the 70000 l. remain in the Kings hands during the term, the Farmers may detain
the last half years rent; and if that will not reimburse them, to be supplied
out of the future growing Revenue.
so as aforesaid agreed to be advanced and paid in, shall be suffered to remain
and continue in his Majesty's hand until the end of the term of seven years
hereby granted, then and in such case it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, and the
Executors, and Administrators of the Survivor of them, to retain and keep in
his and their own hands the last half years Rent which shall be due and payable
for the Premises; that is to say, the several and respective quarterly Rents
which shall grow due and payable at or upon the feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, which shall be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
seventy five, and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ, which shall be
in the said year of our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy five then next
ensuing, being the two last quarterly payments, during the several and
respective terms herein before granted, to the intent they may be thereby fully
satisfied, re-imbursed and paid the whole several and respective Sums of
Threescore and ten thousand pounds, so as aforesaid advanced, together with the
Interest thereof then due, rendering the overplus, if any be, to his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors; And if it shall happen by reason of any Accidents or
other Interruptions, or by reason of any just and necessary defalcations then
due and unsatisfied, that the two last quarterly payments, so as aforesaid
intended to be retained, shall not be sufficient to re-imburse the said
Threescore and ten thousand pounds, so as aforesaid advanced, together with the
Interest thereof which shall be then behind and unpaid; His Majesty is pleased
further to declare, that the same shall be satisfied and paid out of some part
of his Majesty's Revenue in Ireland which shall grow due after the expiration
of the said several and respective terms, whereof the Lord Treasurer,
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer in
Ireland, and all other Officers and Ministers of his Majesty's Revenue there;
And also all and every the respective Farmers, Collectors, Commissioners, or
Receivers for the time being, are hereby required to take notice, and to see
the same paid accordingly; and for so doing these presents, or the enrollment
thereof, shall be to them and every of them a sufficient warrant and discharge
in that behalf.

And His said Majesty does hereby further for himself, The Farmers empowered to
recover all Arrears at the end of their terms.
his Heirs and Successors, covenant and agree to and with the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, and the Survivors and Survivor of them, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, That from and immediately after the expiration or
other determination of the said several and respective terms of years hereby
granted, they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and the Survivors or the
Survivor of them, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or such other
Person or Persons as he or they shall nominate, shall be sufficiently empowered
to levy, raise, recover, and receive to their own proper use and behoof all
such Arrears of Rents, Payments, Duties, Impositions, Customs, Subsidies,
Excizes, Sums of Money, Profits, and Premises hereby granted as aforesaid, as
shall become due unto them at any time during the said several and respective
terms of years hereby granted. If any Plague or War happen, or Act of
Parliament pass to lessen or suspend any of the Duties, then to be a
defalcation.


Provided always, That it is hereby intended, declared and agreed, and His
Majesty, for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, does covenant, grant and agree
to and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, by these presents, that if at any time or times during the
continuance of all or any the several and respective demises herein before
granted, any spreading Infection of Plague, Pestilence, or any great Mortality,
depopulation or destruction of Houses by fire, or otherwise, or any foreign
invasion, or any public, open, or domestic War, Rebellion, or Insurrection
shall be or happen within his said Realm of Ireland, or any the Counries,
Cities, Towns, or Places of or within the same; Or if Authority of Parliament,
Proclamation, or any other Act of State; Or if His Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, shall at any time during the said several terms, pass any General
Act of Pardon or Oblivion, or make any other particular Pardon or Release, or
shall pass any other Act of Parliament, or has done, or shall cause to be done
any other Act whereby or by reason or occasion whereof the said Customs,
Impositions, Excizes, Hearth-moneys, Annual Payments, Rents or Duties, or any
other the Revenues, Profits and Premises hereby severally and respectively
demised, or any Arrears thereof which shall incurr and grow due during the said
several and respective Demises, or any part thereof, other than what is herein
before expressly excepted or prohibited, shall be pardoned, suspended, lessened,
diminished, or taken away, or whereby, or by means whereof the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns shall be hindered or
obstructed in or from the having, levying, receiving, or collecting thereof,
then they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, shall from time to time, and in every or any the said Cases have
such proportionable recompense, abatements, defalcations and allowances by and
out of the said several and respective Yearly Rents hereby reserved, as upon
consideration had of the nature of the several branches of the Revenue hereby
demised, and of the damage which may arise by reason of such suspension,
diminution or obstruction as aforesaid, and of the proofs thereof which shall
be produced by the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators,
Deputies or Assigns shall be thought reasonable, The said allowances,
abatements and defalcations to be made by and with the approbation and order in
writing of the Lord Lieutenant, and other Chief Governor and Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any Six or more of them
(whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor or Governors of Ireland
for the time being, to be always one or more,) And these Presents, or the
enrollment thereof, shall be unto the said Lord Lieutenant or other Chief
Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or to
any six or more of them, (whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other Chief Governor
or Governors of Ireland for the time being to be always one or more) a
sufficient warrant and authority in that behalf, without any further or other
warrant or declaration of the pleasure of his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors
in that behalf to be had or obtained; Nevertheless it is declared and agreed,
But his Majesty may receive such Duties for which defalcations are made.
that it shall and may be lawful to and for his Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors to recover and receive to his and their own use and uses such parts
and proportions of the Sums, annual Payments and Duties for which allowances
and defalcations shall be had or made to the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, the said several and respective demises
or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And also that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, The Farmers may have
Duplicates of their Patent, or any clause therein.
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall and may at
their proper costs and charges, from time to time during the continuance of the
several and respective demises and grants herein before made at their and every
of their wills and pleasures, and at their own costs and charges, have all and
as many Constats, Exemplifications and Duplicats of these presents, or of any
Covenant, Article, or Sentence therein contained, and of every and such part
and parcel of the same, and when, and as often as to them or any of them shall
seem meet, and these presents, or the Enrollment of the same shall be unto the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of Ireland for the time being, as also to the
Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, and to all and every
Officer and Minister in England or Ireland to whom it shall or may appertain, a
sufficient warrant and authority for the allowing, granting and passing of the
same; and that without any further or other grant or warrant from his Highness,
his Heirs or Successors, to be had, procured or obtained in that behalf: And to
the end the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and their Deputies, Agents and Factors immediately attending this
service, may have the better opportunity to attend the managing thereof.

And that they may not be distracted from this their service, And shall be
discharged from public Offices and Taxes.
which is of so great weight, and so much concerns his Majesty and
themselves, his Majesty is well pleased, and does by these presents for him,
his Heirs and Successors, grant, covenant and agree to and with them and every
of them, and wills and ordains that they and every of them, as much as his
Majesty may lawfully and by the Orders and Customs of those places where they
and every of them inhabit, tolerate and dispense with, shall be freed and
discharged from all public Offices and Services, which would require their
personal attendance, and might withdraw them or any of them from their
necessary attendance on this service; And that they the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, their and either of
their Deputies and other Officers, shall be from time to time, and at all times
during the continuance of the said several and respective demises freed,
acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all payments or answering of
Taxes, Impositions, or other things whatsoever, as well public as private that
may or shall be imposed, taxed or assessed upon them, or any of them, for or in
respect of this present Farm or Demise, or any thing therein contained, or of
the said Office or Offices of Collectors or Receivers of the Duty aforesaid, by
virtue of any Act of Parliament now in force, or at any time hereafter to be
made.

And if it shall happen that they, or any of them shall be so taxed or
assessed, contrary to the true intent and meaning of these presents, That then,
upon producing or showing forth these our Letters Patents, or the enrollment or
exemplification or constat thereof, or of so much thereof as shall be thought
necessary, His Majesty for Himself, his Heirs and Successors, does hereby
will, require, and strictly command all Commissioners or Officers, and
Ministers whatsoever that shall be employed either in imposing such Taxes or
Assessemnts, or in collecting or levying of the same, That they desist and
forbear to proceed upon the execution of their Offices and Duties against the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns
respectively, and their Deputies and other Officers in or for imposing, or in
collecting such Taxes, Charges or Assessements; his Majesty's pleasure, and
full intent and meaning being, that they and every of them shall be, and are
hereby freed and discharged of and from the same.

Clause of assistance, commanding all Sheriffs, etc. to be aiding and assisting.
And our said Sovereign Lord the King does by these presents for him, his Heirs
and Successors, straightly charge and command all and every Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Head-Boroughs and other Officers of and
within every City, Borough, Town, and all other His Majesty's Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, whether Civil or Military, that they and every of them
shall from time to time during the said term be aiding and assisting unto the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and
their and every of their Deputies, Factors and Servants, and every of them, in
the due Execution of all and every the aforementioned Premises, according to
the true intent and meaning of these presents, whether it be in and about the
levying or recovering of the said Quit-rents, and other annual Rents and
Payments, or any of them, or any Arrears thereof by distress, seizures, entries
and due proceedings thereupon, or otherwise in the due recovery thereof, or of
any other the Revenue hereby demised, or any part thereof, in as large, ample,
beneficial and diligent wise order and manner whatsoever, as they and every of
them should or ought to have been to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his
Heirs or Successors, by any manner of means, if these several and respective
Demises or Grants had not been had or made, upon pain of his Majesty's
indignation or displeasure, and of such pains and penalties, and imprisonments
as by the Laws or Statutes of the said Realm can or may be inflicted upon them
for their negligence and contempt in that behalf; And his Majesty's will and
pleasure is, That the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and Barons of the
Exchequer there for the time being, or any three or more of them, (whereof the
Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, or Chief Baron of the Exchequer for the time being
to be one,) shall have by force of these Presents full power and authority to
make forth and award Writs under the Seal of the said Court of Exchequor for
that purpose, according to the order and course of the said Court, and the
Contemners of the said Writs to punish in such sort, as by the course of the
said Court has been accustomed. And in an especial manner his Majesty's will
and pleasure is, Clause for better collecting and levying the Duties, etc.
That the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor and Barons of his
Exchequer there, or any three of them, (whereof the said Treasurer,
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, or Chief Baron to be one) do strictly require and
enjoin all and every the Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers,
who are or shall be authorized, employed or directed to levy any the Rents,
Annual Payments, or Duties aforementioned, or any of them, or otherwise to
execute any Process concerning the same, That they do in their several places
from time to time with diligence and faithfulness do and perform the same,
without partiality and delay; and after Execution or Receipts otherwise hereof,
either make speedy returns, or such speedy payment thereof as they ought, and
as shall be in that behalf requisite. And His Majesty does hereby declare and
agree, That He, his Heirs and Successors, shall and will from time to time
during the continuance of the said several and respective Demises, upon humble
suit in that behalf, give such further and other power and authority for the
ordering, bettering, collecting and levying the said Annual Rents or Payments,
Duties of Hearth-money, Duties arising by Licenses for retailing Wines or
Strong Water, Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, and Duties of Excize
for Goods imported, Duties of Excize for Ale and Beer, and other the Duties of
Inland Excize, Duties arising by Licenses for Retailing Ale and Beer, and all
other the Duties, Revenues and Premises respectively demised as aforesaid, and
like aid and assistance from His Majesty and his Privy Council, his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, and the Officers thereof, and all other His Majesty's
Courts of Justice, and all other his Officers and Ministers whatsoever, as any
Commissioners, Receivers, Collectors, Farmers, and other Ministers of any other
part or parts of his Majesty's Revenue in England or Ireland now have, or
hereafter may have, and as in this case shall be thought fit and reasonable.

Clause for further Assurance,
And further, That His said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors shall and will
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, during the continuance of all or
any the respective Demises or Grants herein before made or mentioned to be
made, upon application to him or them, to be by the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns in that behalf made, and at their
Costs and Charges give and grant such further and other Assurance and
Assurances, Privilege and Privileges, Powers and Authorities, for the better
security and sure making of the Annual Payments, Rates, Duties, and Premises to
them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, with, under, and subject unto the Provisoes, Reservations and
Agreements herein contained, and such others as by his Majesty's Council
learned in the Law for the time being, and the Council learned in the Law of
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall
be reasonably devised, advised or desired.

And for recovery of the Arrears at the end of the several terms.
And that from and after the several and respective expirations of the said
several and respective terms of years, His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
or the Lord Lieutenant or Deputy, or other Chief Governor or Governors of the
said Kingdom of Ireland for the time being respectively, shall and will
sufficiently authorize the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or such as they shall nominate and appoint, as far
as the Laws and Statutes of Ireland will permit, to demand, collect, levy,
recover, receive and take all such Arrears of Customs, and Subsidies of Tonnage
and Poundage, and all such Arrears of the said Duties of Excize and New Impost,
And all such Arrears of the Duties arising by Hearth-money, Duties arising by
Licenses to retaile Wine, Aqua-vitae, Strong Water, Beer, or Ale, and all such
Arrears, Rents, Annual payments, Revenues, Profits, and Premises as are granted
by these Presents, and which shall become due unto them at any time during the
said several and respective terms of years hereby granted, and which at the
several and respective ends and expirations of the said several and respective
terms of years, shall so remain in arreare and unsatisfied.

And our said Sovereign Lord the King, for himself, His Majesty will not pardon
any of the Duties.
his Heirs and Successors, does further covenant, grant and agree to and with
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that
neither our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
nor any of them, shall and will at any time or times hereafter, before the end
of the several and respective Demises and Leases herein before made, pardon and
release to any Person or Persons, or compound or agree with any Person or
Persons other than unto and with the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or of or for any of the said annual
Rents, or Payments, Duties arising by Licenses for retailing Wine, or
Strong Water, Duties of Hearth-money of or for any of the said Customs,
Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, Duties of Excize for Goods imported, Duties
of Excize for Beer and Ale, or other Duties for Inland Excize, or any Duties
arising by Licenses for retailing of Beer and Ale, or any other Duties by these
presents respectively demised or granted, or mentioned to be demised or granted
to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp,
Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns.

And the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, The Farmers may
sue and prosecute in their own, or His Majesty's name.
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, shall have full power and
authority either in their or any of their name or names, or in the name of his
Highness, his Heirs or Successors or any of them, at the pleasure of the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor
and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, to implead, sue and prosecute, as well all and every such Person and
Persons, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every or any of them, as
shall or may by any means be found not to have paid, or to be indebted, charged
or answerable to our said Lord the King, his Heirs or Successors, or to the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or
any of them, for the annual Rents, Payments, Duties of Hearth-money, Duties
arising by Licenses, Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of Money, Duties of
Excize for goods imported, Duties for Inland Excize, and other Duties, in and
by these presents respectively demised and granted, or mentioned to be demised
and granted unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as is aforesaid, or any part or parcel of the same
in the Court of Exchequer of his Highness, his Heirs or Successors, or in any
other Court or Courts of Record whatsoever; And the said several annual Rents,
Payments, Revenues, Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums of money, Duties, and
other things before in these presents demised or granted, or mentioned to be
demised or granted, as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, for so
much, and such part thereof as by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, ought to have, take or receive to their own uses, to take, recover
and levy upon the Bodies, Goods, Chattels, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments
of them or any of them, their, or any of their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, and every of them from whom any of the Sums of
money, Revenues, or Duties aforesaid, shall be due or payable, and to take
Execution thereof to the proper use of the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, and to do, make and
prosecute for and concerning the same respectively, in such and in the like
manner and form as our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, of his or their Regal power, Prerogative and Authority, as by the
Laws of the Realm of Ireland, in his or their Name or Names should or might
have done, if the said several and respective Demises or Leases had never been
had nor made; And that these presents, or the enrollment of the same from time
to time, shall be as well to the Lord Treasurer of Ireland, Chancellor and
Barons of the Court of Exchequer in Ireland for the time being, and all other
Officers and Ministers of the same Court; as also to the Barons, Justices,
Officers, and Ministers of his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, of the same
Court for the time being, or of any other Court or Courts of Record, and to
every of them a sufficient warrant in that behalf, without any account or other
profit or thing whatsoever to our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs or
Successors, thereof or therefore to be had, paid, or done, other than the said
several and respective yearly Rents which in and by these presents are
mentioned, to be reserved and covenanted to be paid as aforesaid, and other
than such as are hereby excepted, reserved or saved to our said Lord the King,
his Heirs and Successors.

And that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, And paying their Rents,
and performing their Covenants, are quietly to enjoy.
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, well and truly paying
and satisfying the several and respective yearly Rents and Sums of Money hereby
reserved as aforesaid, and performing, fulfilling and keeping all and singular
the Covenants, Provisoes and Agreements in these presents mentioned, which on
their parts ought to be performed, shall and may at all times during the
continuance of the several and respective Demises or Leases hereby granted,
fully and freely have, levy, take, use, receive, and enjoy all and every the
said Annual Rents or Payments, Duties of Hearth-money, Duties arising by
Licenses for Retailing Wine or Strong Water, Customs, Subsidies, Imposts, Sums
of Money, and Duties of Excize for Goods imported, Duties of Excize for Ale and
Beer, and other the Duties of Inland Excize, Duties arising by Licenses for
Retailing Ale and Beer, and all other the Duties, Revenues and Premises by
these presents respectively granted or demised, or mentioned to be granted or
demised as aforesaid (except before excepted) to their own proper uses and
benefits; and that all and every the Covenants, Articles and Clauses in these
Presents contained, on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, to be performed in all things, and from time to time
shall be most strongly and largely construed, taken and expounded against the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and largely, beneficially and
favorably for the avail, benefit and advantage of the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, according to the true intent and
meaning of these presents, any Statute, Law, Act of Parliament, Usage, Custom,
Proclamation, Prohibition or Restraint heretofore had, made, set forth, or
proclaimed, or hereafter to be had, made, or set forth, or proclaimed, in any
wise notwithstanding; And also notwithstanding that all and every Statute,
Proclamation or Restraint being, or that hereafter shall be to the contrary
thereof, or of any part thereof, be not herein by special and express words
named, recited, Non obstante Non-recitals or mis-recitals, etc.
or dispensed withal by these presents; And notwithstanding the not recital or
mis-recital of any former Lease or Grant heretofore made of the premises, or of
any part or parcel thereof, And notwithstanding the not-recital or mis-recital
of the Titles of any Act or Acts of Parliament touching or concerning any of
the branches of Revenue, or other the Duties and Profits herein before
respectively demised or granted, or mentioned to be demised or granted; And
notwithstanding the true yearly value of the Premises, or of any part thereof
not in these Presents mentioned, or not rightly mentioned, or any mis-recital
of any Letters Patents before mentioned, or any of them, or of the Date or
Dates, certain Content or Contents of them, or any of them, or any other
mis-recital or mis-naming, or not recital or not naming whatsoever in any wise
notwithstanding. And the Statutes in the first year of the Reign of King Henry
the Fourth, and the eighteenth year of King Henry the Sixth, or in the thirty
seventh year of King Henry the Sixth, or any of them, or any defect or lack of
any form or omission in these Presents, or any other Law, Statute, Restraint,
Proclamation, Letters Patents, or Prohibition whatsoever, to the contrary
thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

The Farmers to have the use of all Public Offices and Places, etc. and to
enlarge and repair them, so as they exceed not 3000 l. which is to be deducted
out of the last Quarters rent.
And his Majesty for the better enabling the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to manage the several and respective
Farms herein before respectively demised, is pleased that they the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall from time to
time and at all times during the respective terms before granted, have full
power, license, liberty and authority to make use of all and all manner of
Houses, Offices and Places which do belong unto his Majesty, and are now, or
within these five years last past have been made use of, as public Offices for
the receipt or management of His Majesty's Revenue, or any branch thereof, and
also all and all manner of furniture, utensils and necessaries thereunto
belonging, together with all Beams, Scales and Weights, Boats, Barges, or
other Vessels, Instruments, or other matter or thing whatsoever relating to the
same, and which do belong to His Majesty; and in case the same shall not be
found sufficient for the necessary uses of the Revenue, and the mannagement
thereof, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, from time to
time to lay out and expend in the necessary repairing, and amending, and
enlarging any of the Houses, Offices, and Places aforesaid, so much Moneys as
they shall think fit, so as all the expenses and disbursements touching or
concerning the Premises do not in the whole, from first to last, exceed the
sum of Three thousand pounds; and all and every the Sums of Money so as
aforesaid expended, shall be repayed, satisfied and re-imbursed by way of
Recooper and Retainer of so much of the several and respective Rents hereby
reserved, as will be due and payable on the last quarter of the last year of
the said terms, or other sooner determination of these presents, as the said
expenses will amount unto; And the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor
and Barons of the Court of Exchequer in Ireland, and all other Officers and
Ministers there, are hereby authorized and empowered upon due proof of such
expenses and disbursements made to admit, The Lord-Treasurer, etc. to allow the
same, without further warrant.
accept and allow of the said expenses, and the Sum of Money they shall amount
unto, not exceeding Three thousand pounds, as is aforesaid, in part of payment
of the said last Quarters rent; And for so doings, these presents or the
enrolments thereof, shall be to them and every of them, a sufficient warrant
and authority in that behalf.

And the said John Forth, William Bucknall, And they are to keep them in good
repair.
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, for
themselves, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in consideration
hereof, do covenant and agree with our said Sovereign Lord the King, his Heirs
and Successors, that they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times during the said several and respective terms of years, at his and
their own proper costs and charges, keep in good and sufficient repair all such
Custome-houses, Warehouses, Offices, Cellars, and other the Premises whereof
they are to have the use, and which shall be mended and enlarged during the
said several and respective terms of years as aforesaid, and the same
together with all such Scales, Weights, Books, Furniture, Boats, Barges, and
other utensils belonging to His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and whereof
they are to have the use as aforesaid, shall and will according to such
inventories as have been formerly taken, deliver up at the expiration or other
determination of the said respective terms of years, in as good plight and
condition as they received the same (reasonable use thereof excepted) And also
shall and will during the said several terms of years, pay such Rent or Rents
(if any such be due) for such the Custome-houses, Warehouses, Offices, Yards,
Cellars, and other Rooms aforesaid, as His Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
ought to pay for the same respectively.

THE FARMERS General Covenants.
AND to the end his said Majesty may from time to time be fully satisfied of
the true yearly Value of all and singular the premises herein respectively
demised and granted, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood,
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, for themselves, their
Executors, and Administrators, do covenant, promise, grant and agree to and
with his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors by these presents, in manner and
form following, (that is to say) that the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them and the Executors, and Administrators of such
Survivor, The Farmers are to keep dictinct Books and Entries of all Profits.
Fines, Forfeitures and Defalcations.
shall and will from time to time and at all times during the several and
respective terms hereby granted, make and keep distinct fair written Books,
containing due and true Entryes of all and every the rates, duties, sum and
sums of money by them or any of them, their or any of their Executors, or
Administrators, or their or any of their Officers, Substitutes or Servants,
had, received, levied, and raised by virtue of these presents, for or by reason
of any duties arising by Hearth-money, for or by reason of any duties arising
by Licensing of persons to Retail Wine, Aqua-vitae or Strong Water, or for or
by reason of any Fee-farm-rents; Quit-rents, or other Annual Rents and payments
herein before demised, or for or by Reason of any Customs, Subsidies,
Impositions, or duties of Excise for goods imported, or for or by Reason of any
Excise due and payable for any Beer, Ale, Strong Water, or other Exciseable
Liquors, or for any other commodities of the Growth, production or manufacture
of Ireland, commonly called Inland Excise, or for or by reason of any duties
arising by Licensing of persons to Retail Beer, Ale, or Strong Water in his or
their houses (except before excepted) or for fines, forfeitures or penalties
relating to, or any way touching ot concerning the premises herein before
demised or granted respectively, or any part or parcel thereof, which by them
or any of them shall be received; And of all Compositions, and abatements of
any the duties aforesaid by them or any of them made, and of all deductions or
defalcations to them or any of them allowed, in some Book or Books to be by
them for that purpose separately and distinctly kept; and shall and will also
submit to such comptrol upon their Receipts and payments, and such yearly Audit
of their accounts, as his Majesty shall thing fit to appoint: And also shall
and will at or before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1673. (unless the several and respective terms hereby
granted shall sooner determine) permit and suffer all and singular their Books
of accounts touching or concerning these present Farmers, And suffer such Books
to be viewed, and Copies thereof taken, etc. Or shall render an account thereof
upon Oath, if required.
or the receipts and payments thereof, to be viewed, and Copies thereof to be
taken at his Majesty's charge, by such person or prrsons as his Majesty has
appointed, or shall think fit to appoint; or shall otherwise upon his or their
corporal Oaths, if thereunto required by the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or
any six or more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor
or Governors of Ireland for the time being, to be always one or more, render a
true and full account of the yearly value of the premises during every year of
the said several and respective Terms then incurred.

And they the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip
Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William
Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Rasph Bucknall, for themselves and every of
them, and the Heirs, Executors, Administrators and assigns, of them and every
of them, do covenant and grant to and with his Majesty, If any Duties by Act of
Parliament increase, the Rent to increase, and the Farmers to account for the
overplus.
his Heirs and Successors, that if at any time hereafter during the said
several respective Terms of years, any of the rates or duties of Hearth-money,
Lycenses to retayl, Customs or Excise, or any other the rents, duties or
revenues so as aforesaid demised, shall be by authority of Parliament raised;
or if at any time hereafter any Act of Parliament shall be passed whereby the
rates and duties aforesaid shall or may be more generally imposed, or extended
to any other persons, or made demandable, levyable, or receivable in more
places, or of more persons then by the present Laws and Statutes they are or
ought to be, Then, and in such case they the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, his and their Executors administrators and
Assigns, shall thenceforth during the residue of the respective Terms hereby
granted, receive, and by all lawful ways and means recover the same, and shall
therefore yield and pay such further increase of Rent as shall be protionable
to the increase or extent of the said Rates, and as by the Lord Lieutenant or
other chief Governor and Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time
being, or any six or more of them (whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief
Governor or Governors of Ireland for the time being to be always one or more,
shall be thought reasonable, or in default thereof, shall truly and faithfully
Collect, gather and receive all and singular the rates and duties so as
aforesaid increased, and a true account thereof shall render, and pay what
shall be due thereupon unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, at his and
their Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin, and at the four usual Feasts, over and
above the Rents by these presents reserved.

PROVIDED always, and upon this condition nevertheless, If any Rent reserved on
the demise for 7 years and four years and 3 quarters be behind 90 days, The
Farmers shall forfeit a quarters Interest of the said 70000l. advanced.
And it is hereby covenanted, concluded and agreed upon by and between all the
said parties to these presents, that if at anytime hereafter during the said
several and respective terms of seven years, and four years and three quarters
hereby granted, the said several and respective yearly Rents therein mentioned,
and thereupon reserved to be quarterly paid at the four usual Feasts, or any
part or parcel thereof, shall be behind and unpaid in part or in all, contrary
to the true intent and meaning of these presents, by the space of fourscore and
ten days, next after any of the said Feasts or days of payment on which the
same ought respectively to be paid as aforesaid, the Defalcations duly allowed
being first deducted: Or if default shall be made in the payment of any other
sum or sums of Money in and by these presents covenanted and agreed to be paid
in part or in all, by the space of fourscore and ten days next after any of the
days of payment herein appointed for the payment thereof, contrary to the true
intent and meaning of these presents, That then and in every such case, and for
every such default, the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood;
William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
administrators and assigns, shall forfeit and lose so much money as the
interest of seventy thousand pounds for one quarter of a year, after the rate
of ten pounds per Cent. for one whole year shall amount unto. Or if at any time
hereafter during the said term of six years hereby granted, Or if any Rent
reserved on the Demise for six years be behind twenty days, to forfeit a months
Interest of the said 70000 l.
the yearly Rent therein mentioned and thereupon reserved to be paid by several
proportions, and at several times, amounting in the whole to twenty four
several payments in the time and space of twelve months, or any part or parcel
thereof, shall be behind or unpaid in part or in all, by the space of twenty
days next after any of the said days or times of payment, the Defalcations duly
allowed being first deducted, That then and in every such case, and for every
such default the said Lessees and Farmers, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, shall forfeit and lose so much money as the interest of 70000 l. for
one month, after the rate of ten pounds per Cent for one whole year shall
amount unto.

Provided also, And if the Rent reserved quarterly be behind forty days after
the ninety days, or the Rent reserved on the Demise for six years, other twenty
days after the former twenty days, Then the farm to be seized.
that if the said yearly Rents in and by the said several demises for seven
years, and four years and three quarters of a year reserved, or any part or
parcel thereof, shall be behind and unpaid by the space of forty days more
next ensuing the fourscore and ten days in the former proviso mentioned, that
is to say, by he space of one hundred and thirty days after any the Feasts or
days of Payment in the said several demises limited: Or if the said yearly Rent
in and by the said demise for six years reserved, shall be behind and unpaid by
the space of twenty days more, next ensuing the twenty days in the said former
Proviso mentioned, that is to say by the space of forty days after any of the
days of payment, in the said demise for six years limited; That then, and from
thenceforth, in every or any such case, it shall and may be lawful to and for
his said Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to seize the said several and
respective Farms, and all the said duties hereby granted and demised as
aforesaid, into his and their hands, and the same to demise and let to Farm to
any other person or persons who will contract and agree for the same. And if
the Lord Lieutenant, etc. or any six of them, etc. discharge the Farmers by
order in Writing, their several demises to be void.
And that in case the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors of
Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or more of them,
whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors for the time
being to be always one or more, shall after failer of payment as aforesaid, by
any Order in writing to be left at the receipt of his Majesty's Exchequer in
Ireland, or to be sent thither by any Messenger; summon or cause to be summoned
the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, or any of them, the Survivor or Survivors of them
or any of them, their or any of their Executors or Administrators, to appear
before them, to show cause, if they can, why the said several and respective
Farms, or either of them, should not be seized and disposed as aforesaid: And
having heard his or their Allegations, or in default of their appearance, shall
under their hands and seals signify unto them the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall,
and the Survivor and Survivors of them, their Executors, administrators and
Assigns, their pleasure, that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, or the
Survivor or Survivors of them, or his or their Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, shall forbear to act or intermeddle any further in the mannagement or
administration of the said several and respective Farms, or any of them; and
shall leave such signification at any of the Custom-houses, or at the Office of
Excise, or any other chief Office or dewlling place to them or any of them
belonging, wheresoever the same shall be kept: That then, and immediately from
thenceforth, these present several demises and grants, or such of them which in
the said writing under hand and seal shall be particularly mentioned, and all
and every clause, article and thing therein contained, which on the part of his
Majesty ought to be performed, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and
of none effect, as if these presents had not been made, without any Office,
Inquisition or Seizure, Scire-fatias, Process, or other matter or thing
whatsoever whereby to avoid or determine the same, (any thing in these presents
contained to the contrary notwithstanding)

NEVERTHELESS the Revenues and profits of all or any the respective Farmers so
as aforesaid to be avoided or determined, But the profits received between the
last Rent paid, and such avoydance, shall be answered to his Majesty.
which shall have been received by the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their
Executors, administrators or Assigns, or any of them, between the last
Feast Day next preceding such breach of the Condition and the time of seizing,
avoiding or determining such Farm or Farms, shall be duly and truly answered
and paid unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

PROVIDED always, If the Farm be seized, the 70000 l. advanced, or so much as
remains in his Majesty's hands, is to go toward the arrears, The residue and
Interest to the Parmers.
that if at any time hereafter the said several and respective Farms or any of
them shall happen to be seized, and the Estate and Interest in them or any of
them avoided or determined in manner aforesaid, for non-payment of the said
respective yearly Rents herein before reserved, or for non-payment of any part
thereof, or for any other the causes aforesaid; or that these presents shall by
Act of Parliament, or Act of State hereafter to be made, or any other way,
cease or become void, by reason of any breach of the before mentioned
provisoes, covenants and agreements, or any of them, or be demised to let to
Farm to any other person or persons: Then his Majesty does hereby declare,
That the sum of threescore and ten thousand pounds so as aforesaid advanced and
paid, and the Interest thereof then due, or so much thereof as shall be then
remaining in his Majesty's hands behind and unpaid, shall be accepted by his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the satisfaction of such
arrears of Rent as shall be then owing and unpaid: and the residue thereof, (if
any such be) together with the Interest thereof then due (the said arrears
being first deducted) shall be repaid and satisfied out of such part of his
Majesty's Revenue as shall grow due and payable after such avoidance or
determination as aforesaid. And the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor,
and Barons of the Exchequer, and all and every the Farmers, And the Lord
Treasurer, etc. on sight hereof to pay the same accordingly.
Commissioners, Collectors and Receivers thereof, or any part thereof, are
hereby empowered and required to pay the same accordingly, upon the sight of
this present Grant, or the Inrolment thereof, without any other or further
Warrant.

PROVIDED always nevertheless, The Power of granting Licenses to transport
Wool-flocks to continue.
and it is hereby declared to be the true intent and meaning of all parties to
these presents, that nothing herein contained shall extend, or be construed to
extend to lessen, abate, interrupt, make void, or give any disturbance to the
execution of any Orders, Directions or Authorities lately granted by his
Majesty, under the great Seal of Ireland, to make Licenses or Dispensations for
the transportation of Wool-flocks and other Commodities therein mentioned, into
his Majesty's Kingdom of England only, and not elsewhere, nor into any
foreign parts out of his Majesty's Dominions, And to grant pardons of the
offenses committed against the Statutes of the 11. and 13. Eliz.
and to grant pardons of the offenses committed against the Statutes of the
Eleventh and Thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth in that case made and provided, and
of the forfeitures, and penalties forfeited to his Majesty by the said Acts, or
either of them; nor to give any disturbance to the execution of the like
Authority granted or to be granted by his Majesty, his Heirs or Successors, at
any time during the continuance of the said several and respective Leases unto
any other Lieutenant, Deputy, chief Governor or Governors of Ireland for the
time being; nor to lessen or make void any powers or authorities given or
granted to the Commissioners of Appeals, And the Power granted the
Commissioners of Appeals.
or to his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, but that they and every of them shall
and may at all times during the continuance of the said several Leases, lessen,
abate, mitigate, compound for, or discharge such fines, penalties and
forfeitures as by Law they are authorized to do: any thing herein contained to
the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

And because in this present Indenture several demises are contained, wherein
several Duties and Revenues of a different kind and nature are demised for
several and different terms of years; and provision is likewise made that
Defalcations of Rent shall be allowed in several cases, in such manner and form
as herein before is expressed; Notwithstanding which Provisions, some doubt may
arise whether they to whom the power of making such allowances by way of
Defalcation is entrusted and committed, may not or ought not upon every demand
of Defalcation to be made, have a respect to, and consideration of all and
every the Branches of Revenue hereby severally and respectively demised as
aforesaid, and then refuse to make any Defalcation unless the Farmers so
demanding the same shall make it appear that they have sustained great loss
upon the whole Revenue severally demised as aforesaid, although they should
make it appear that they have sustained great loss by that Branch of Revenue
for which a Defalcation is demanded: For better Explanation therefore of this
doubt, his Majesty is pleased hereby to declare and agree, that when, and as
often as any Defalcation shall be demanded by virtue of any Covenant, Clause or
Article in these presents contained, for and in respect of damage suffered in
any particular Branch of Revenue herein before mentioned and demised, All
Defalcations to be considered in every particular branch, for which Defalcation
is demanded, not collectively, by computing what is got or lost upon the
several branches; but distributively, by computing what is got or lost by that
particular which Defalcation, etc.
That then and in every such case the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor
or Governors of Ireland, and Council there for the time being, or any six or
more of them, whereof the Lord Lieutenant or other chief Governor or Governors
for the time being to be always one or more, shall from time to time proceed to
consider of such Defalcations, without any respect of, or inquiry into what
has been or may be gotten or lost upon the whole contract for taking to farm
all the several Branches of Revenue herein before mentioned, but shall only
take into consideration that Branch of Revenue for which a Defalcation is
particularly demanded, and upon consideration thereof had, if it shall be found
that the Farmers and Lessees thereof, their Executors and Assigns, have
sustained great loss and Damage in that Branch of the Revenue, for which a
Defalcation is demanded, by reason of such Accidents, for which a Defalcation
is intended, according to the true meaning of these presents; Then, and in
every such Case, a reasonable Defalcation shall be made and allowed as
aforesaid; It being the true intent and meaning of these presents, That in
cases of Defalcations each several Branch of Revenue comprised in any of the
several Demises and Terms of years shall be considered severally and apart by
it self, without any respect to, or consideration had of any Profit or
Advantege which may have been made of any other Branch of Revenue for which no
Defalcation is demanded.

Provided always, and it is hereby declared and agreed, No Defalcation for
Quit-rents granted away before Michaelmas last,
that nothing herein contained shall any way Entitle the said Farmers or
Lessees, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, to ask,
demand, or have any defalcation for or in respect of any new Quit-rents, which
by virtue of any Letters Patents under his Majesty's great Seal of England, or
under his Majesty's great Seal of Ireland, have been Granted, Released, Or for
the Quit-rents of the Lands enclosed in Phoenix Park.
or Discharged at any time before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel now
last past; or for or in respect of any Quit-rents due or payable for any Land
enclosed in his Majesty's Park near Dublin called the Phoenix Park, or any
other his Majesty's Parks whatsoever.

And whereas much time has been already spent since the said Proposals first
made to his Majesty by the said Lessees and Farmers, and his Majesty's
acceptance thereof, before the Covenants, Provisoes and Agreements in these
presents contained could be settled and made ready for his Majesty's great Seal
to be thereunto affixed, By reason whereof a great part of the first year of
the Lease for seven years hereby granted, which was to take effect in
possession, and to Commence from the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord Christ
now last past, is elapsed and gone, No advantage to be taken of any forfeiture,
so as the Rent which was to have been paid before Midsummer 1669, be paid in
six months after the date hereof.
and that some doubt may arise whether the said Lessees and Farmers will not
immediately upon the sealing hereof incur some danger of forfeiture for
breach of some Proviso or Condition herein before mentioned, by reason of their
non-payment of their Rent, and other sums of money which should have been paid
at such days and times as are now past: His Majesty is hereby pleased to
declare, that no advantage shall be taken of any forfeiture for non-payment of
any Rent or other sums of money which should have been paid before the Feast of
the Nativity of St. John Baptist, one thousand six hundred sixty and nine, so
as the same be paid in to his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer at Dublin within
the space of six months next ensuing the date of these presents; any thing
before contained in these presents to the contrary notwithstanding.

And his Majesty does hereby further declare and agree, that for the better and
more effectual impowering and enabling the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, to
have, take, receive, collect and enjoy the said Quit-rents, and all other the
rents hereby demised, as the same shall from time to time grow due and payable,
during the term hereby granted; It shall and may be lawful to and for the said
John Forth, The Farmers or any five or more of them to give Acquittances for
Quit-rents, etc.
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, or any five or more of them, from time to time, and at all times
during the term hereby demised, to make and give under their or any five or
more of their hands, Acquittance or Acquittances to all or any person or
persons whatsoever paying the said Quit-rents and other the rents hereby
demised. And the Acquittance or Acquittances of them the said John Forth, And
the same to be to these paying the same a sufficient discharge.
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph
Bucknall, or any five or more of them, shall be unto a^l and every such person
or persons so paying the same from time to time, a sufficient discharge for the
same; And the Lord Treasurer, Vice-Treasurer Chancellor, and Barons of the
Court of Exchequer in Ireland, and all other Officers and Ministers of the
Revenue there for the time being, are hereby authorized and empowered to admit,
allow, and approve of all such Acquittance or Acquittances by them the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor,
and Ralph Bucknall, or any five or more of them, from time to time so made and
given as aforesaid, and to exonerate and discharge all and every the person and
persons of and for all and every such Quit-rents, and other rents, sum and sums
of money in all and every Acquittance or Acquitcances mentioned and contained,
in as full and effectual manner and form as if the same Quit-rents and other
rents, sum and sums of money had been really paid by such person or persons
into the recept of his Majesty's Exchequer in Ireland: And for so doing, these
presents or the Inrolment thereof shall be to them and every of them a
sufficient Warrant and Authority in that behalf.

The persons making and giving the said Acquittances to any the Officers their
just fees, etc.
PROVIDED always, that the several persons who shall make or give such
Acquittances, do pay or secure to be paid unto all and every the Officers and
Ministers of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer aforesaid, all such just and
usual Fees, Allowances and Duties, for and in respect of such Rents and sums of
money for which such Exonerations and Discharges shall be made by them as
aforesaid, as they the said Officers and Ministers ought to have had and
received, in case the said Quit-rents, and other rents and sums of money in
such Acquittances mentioned and contained, had been actually paid into his
Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer as aforesaid.

And for the better ascertaining and securing the payment of the Quit-rents
hereby demised, Where Lands vested in his Majesty by the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation, and subject hereby to the payment of Quit-rents, or are or shall
be granted in Custodium, or demised for years, The Farmers to receive so much
yearly Quit-rents as by the said Acts are due, and in default thereof to pay
themselves by way of Retayner, etc.

Saving to his Majesty such Rents as shall be reserved on any such Grant in
Custodium, or other Lease for any less term than one and twenty years.

The Patent to be enrolled in Chancery, and Exchequer in Ireland, within a year
after the date hereof, on pain of losing 100 l. a month after the said year
expired.


His Majesty is graciously pleased further to declare and agree, that where any
Lands vested in His Majesty by the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, or
either of them, and subject to the payment of such Quit-rents as are hereby
demised, do or shall remain in his Majesty's hands, or are or shall be granted
in Custodi^um, or otherwise let or demised for any term of years, That then and
in all and every such case and cases, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey
Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to
have and receive so much yearly Quit-rent as by the said Acts of Parliament, or
either of them, are due and payable for such Lands; or in default thereof, to
pay themselves the said Annual Quit-rents by way of Retainer of so much of the
yearly rent reserved by these presents, as the said Annual Quit-rents of such
Lands shall or may amount unto (any Continuance of such Lands in the hands and
possession of his Majesty, or any granting thereof in Custodium, or other
letting or devising of the same, to the contrary notwithstanding.) Saving
always to his Majesty such Rents as are or shall be reserved of any such Grant
in Custodium, or other Lease thereof made or to be made for any less Term than
one and twenty years.

PROVIDED lastly, that if the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Buck-nall, their
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall not within the space of Twelve
months next ensuing the date hereof, cause this present Indenture to be
enrolled in his Majesty's High Court of Chancery in Ireland, and also in the
Court of Exchequer in Ireland, in the Office of the Treasurers Remembrancer
there, That then and in such case, and for every such default, the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them,
shall forfeit and lose unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, the sum of
One hundred pounds for each month after the said year expired, wherein the
said Indenture shall remain and continue without Enrolment thereof made in
manner and form aforesaid.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, Our said Sovereign Lord the King to one part of this
present Indenture, remaining in the hands of the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor and Ralph Bucknall,
has caused his Great Seal of England to be affixed: And to the other part
thereof, remaining in the hands of our said Sovereign Lord the King, the said
John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon,
James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp. Humphrey Tailor
and Ralph Bucknall, have interchangably set their Hands and Seals, the Day and
Year first above written.

By the King.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty:
YOur Majesty in consideration of 70000 pounds advanced by 10000 pounds per
mensem, and covenanted to be left in Your Majesty's hands for four years at 10
pounds per cent. and good security to be given for payment of your Rent when
any part of it shall be taken out, and in consideration of the Rents reserved,
Is hereby graciously pleased to Demise unto John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, Your
Revenue in Ireland arising by Hearth-money, Licenses to retaile Wine and
Strong Water, the new Quit-rents given to Your Majesty by the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation, the Chief-rents, Fee-farme-rents, Rents service,
Rents charge, Rents secke, Rents reserved upon Leases exceeding one and twenty
years, Coppyhold, and all other ancient Crown-rents, except such Quit-rents as
have been granted or released by your Majesty since Michaelmas last, and except
the Rents reserved upon the Farms of the Customs and Excise, which are yet in
being: To have and to hold from Christmass-day last for seven years, Rendering
yearly 91500 pounds at the four usual Feasts; The first payment was to begin at
our Lady Day last past. And your Majesty is further pleased to Demise unto them
your Revenue arising by Customs and imported Excise, To have and to hold from
Christmass-day next ensuing for six years, rendering yearly seventy five
thousand pounds. But the times of payment thereof are to be monthly, according
to the rate of 6000 pounds a month, at two several payments in the month, by
Equal portions; The first payment is to begin on the 31 of January next, but
every 15 of January following during the Term; and also upon the 15 of January
after the Term, there must be paid 6000 pounds. And your Majesty is further
pleased to demise unto them your Revenue arising by Inland Excise, and by
Licenses to Retaile Ale and Beer; To have and to hold for four years and three
quarters, from the 25 of March 1671, Rendering yearly 53000 pounds for the
first four years, by four quartely payments, and 39750 pounds during the last
three quarters; with Covenants and Provisoes suitable to the respective Terms,
which have been seen and examined by the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's
Treasury, and by some of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council in England,
and some of the Lords and others of His Majesty's Privy Council in Ireland.

HENEAGE FINCH.

THE PATENT FOR THE ABATEMENT.
CARLES the Second by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland
King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these presents shall come,
Greeting: Recital of the aforesaid Indenture, etc.
Whereas We in and by one Indenture of Demise, bearing date the Twelfth Day of
July last past before the date hereof made, or mentioned to be made, between
Our-self of the one part, and John Forth Alderman, and now one of the Sheriffs
of the City of London; William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John
Breedon, of the City of London Esquires, James Hayes of Lincolns Inn in the
County of Middlesex Esquire, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, of the City of
London Esquires, William Muschamp, and Humphrey Tailor of Dublin in the Kingdom
of Ireland Esquires; and Ralph Bucknall of the City of London Esquire, of the
other part, for the considerations therein mentioned, have demised, granted,
and to Farm let unto the said John Forth, and other the Persons last before
mentioned the Duty arising by Hearth-money, the Duties arising by Licenses to
retail Wine and Strong Water, all the New Quit-rents given to Us by the late
Acts commonly called The Acts of Settlement and Explanation, all Chief Rents
and Fee-farm Rents, all Rents Service, Rents Charge, Rents Seck, Rents reserved
upon Leases Exceeding 21. years at the making hereof, Assart Rents, Rents due
for Purprestures arrented, Copyhold Rents, and all other certain Rents,
Annuities and Sums of Money yearly payable to Us within Our said Kingdom of
Ireland, whether the same be due by the Common Law, Statutes, Custom or
Prescription, or by our Ancient Prerogative, Right and Inheritance of the
Crown, or otherwise howsoever, Except the Rents payable upon the Farm of the
Customs and Imported Excize within our said Kingdom of Ireland, still in being,
and the Rents due and payable upon the Farm of Beer and Ale, and other the
Inland Excize, and of the Moneys payable for Licenses to retail Ale and Beer,
which is still also in being; To have and to hold from Christmass-day last for
seven years from thence next ensuing, under the yearly Rent of Fourscore and
Eleven thousand and five hundred pounds of lawful English Money, or lawful
Irish Money, equivalent thereto, at the four usual feasts by equal portions:
And the first payment thereof to begin upon our Lady day last past before the
date hereof.

And whereas we have by the same Indenture likewise demised to the said John
Forth, and other the Farmers first above named, the Customs and Subsidies of
Tunnage and Poundage, and the Duties of Excize for Goods imported as fully as
they have been, or may be granted, except the Alnage and such other Duties of
Customs and Excize as may hereafter be imposed beyond the present Rates; And
except the Customs of Bullion, Allome, Smaults, Saffers, and also the Prizage
and Butlerage, and the Customs of Logwood, and Logwood forfeited; and except
the Duty of five shillings per Tonne upon French Shipping, To have and to hold
from the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God next ensuing for Six years,
under the yearly rent of Threescore and fifteen thousand pounds, but payable in
several proportions, and according unto several Monthly distributions therein
more particularly mentioned and expressed.

And whereas also, We have by the same Indenture demised unto the said Farmers
the Excize of Beer and Ale and Strong Water, and other Excisable Liquors,
within our said Realm of Ireland, commonly called the Inland Excize, and Duties
arising upon Licenses to retail Ale and Beer. To have and to hold from the Five
and Twentieth day of March 1671. for the term of Four years and three quarters
from thence next ensuing; Yielding and paying, during the First four years of
the said term, Fifty three thousand pounds yearly, by four quarterly payments,
and during the Last three quarters of a year, Thirty nine thousand seven
hundred and fifty pounds, by three equal and quarterly payments; The first
payment of the Fifty three thousand pounds to be upon the Feast of St. John the
Baptist 1672. And the first payment of the Thirty nine thousand seven hundred
and fifty pounds to be upon the Feast of St. John the Baptist 1675. As by the
same Indenture, and the several demises thereby made, or mentioned to be made,
(amongst diverse other Powers, Provisoes, Covenants and Clauses therein
contained) more fully and at large it does and may appear: By reason of which
several and respective demises so as aforesaid made; There will be due and
payable to Us, during the First year of the said Seven years, ending at the
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord next ensuing, only the Rent of Fourscore and
Eleven thousand and five hundred pounds, And after the said Feast of the
Nativity of our Lord next ensuing, unto the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1675. there will be due and payable unto
us, as a further increase of Rent, the yearly Sum of threescore and fifteen
thousand pounds, which being added unto the former Sum, amounts to One hundred
threescore and six thousand and five hundred pounds yearly, and after the Feast
of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary which shall be in the year of
our Lord 1671. unto the said Feast of the Annuntiation in the year of our Lord
1675. there will be due and payable as a further Increase of Rent, the yearly
Sum of Fifty and three thousand pounds, and from thence until the Feast of the
Nativity of our Lord 1675. the Sum of Thirty nine thousand seven hundred and
fifty pounds, in all the Sum of Two hundred and nineteen thousand and five
hundred pounds yearly; Which Rent was first undertaken to be given by the said
William Muschamp and Humphrey Tailor alone, who did also contract and agree to
advance the Sum of Threescore and ten thousand pounds: And whereas the
Covenants, Reservations, and Agreements aforesaid, were of too great weight and
value to rest upon the security of the said William Muschamp, and Humphrey
Tailor only, insomuch that We did in no sort think fit to make or perfect any
Grant of the Premises, until John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and
Ralph Bucknall, were willing to contract with Us, and to become Tenants and
Farmers of the Premises; who have also submitted to Our further pleasure, that
all Quit-rents which have by Us been granted or released before the Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel now last past, should stand excepted out of the
Demise to them made, to their no small loss and detriment.

We therefore, for the better Encouragement of them the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, in the management of the
said Farm, and in consideration of their many and acceptable Services to us
heretofore done, and hereafter to be done and performed, and as a mark of Our
especial favor to them shown, and for diverse other good Causes and
Considerations Us thereunto especially moving, of Our especial grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, have given and granted, and by these Presents for
us, Our Heirs and Successors, do give and grant unto the said John Forth,
William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes,
Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Ab^^eme^^
of 623^ l. out of the Rent of 91500 l. per Annum, due between the 25 Dec. last,
and 25 Dec. next.

And out of the 2 Rents or sums of 91500 l. and 75000 l. due between 25 Dec.
1669. and 25 Dec. 1670. -- 11378 l.


Administrators and Assigns, out of the several Rents in and by the aforesaid
Indenture to Us reserved and payable as aforesaid, the several Sums of Money,
and in the proportions and manner following: (that is to say) out of the
aforesaid Rent or Sum of Fourscore and eleven thousand and five hundred pounds
per Annum, due and payable to Us by the aforesaid Indenture, between the Five
and twentieth day of December last past, and the Five and twentieth day of
December next ensuing the date hereof, the Sum of Six thousand two hundred
fifty and two pounds; And out of the said two several yearly Rents or Sums of
Fourscore and eleven thousand and five hundred pounds, and Threescore and
fifteen thousand pounds per Annum, to Us due and payable by the aforesaid
Indenture, between the Five and twentieth day of December 1669. and the Five
and twentieth day of December 1670. the Sum of Eleven thousand three hundred
seventy and eight pounds; And out of the several Rents or Sums of Money to Us
due and payable by the aforesaid Indenture, And out of the other Rents due
between 25. Dec. 1670. and 25. Dec. 1671. 14773 l. 10 s

And out of the Rents due between 25 Dec. 1671. and 25 Dec. 1675. during the
last four years 15000 l. Habendum to the only benefit of these Patentees.


between the Twenty fifth day of December 1670. and the Twenty fifth day of
December 1671. the Sum of Fourteen thousand seven hundred seventy three pounds
and ten shillings; And also out of the several Rents, or Sums of Money to Us
due and payable by the aforesaid Indenture, between the Five and twentieth day
of December 1671. and the Five and twentieth day of December 1675. for every
year, during the said four last mentioned years, the Yearly Sum of fifteen
thousand pounds, To have and to hold the said Sum of Six thousand two hundred
fifty and two pounds, and the said Sum of Eleven thousand three hundred seventy
and eight pounds, and the said Sum of Fourteen thousand seven hundred seventy
and three pounds and ten shillings, and also the said Yearly Sum of fifteen
thousand pounds unto the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood,
Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form
aforesaid, as of our free gift, without any account, trust, or other matter or
thing whatsoever to Us, or any other to be rendered for the same, and to their
own sole use and benefit, and not for the benefit of any other the parties to
the said Iadenture: And we do hereby grant and agree to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, that it shall and may
be lawful to and for them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Admistrators and Assigns, from
time to time during the continuance of the several and respective demises in
the said Indenture mentioned to abate, deduct, defalk, detain, retain, and keep
in their hands and to their own proper use and behoof out of the several and
respective Rents and Sums of Money, who are also to detain their said
abatements out of the Rents.
by the Indenture aforesaid reserved, the aforesaid several Sums of Six
thousand two hundred fifty and two pounds, and Eleven thousand three hundred
and seventy eight pounds, and the said sum of Fourteen thousand and seven
hundred seventy and three pounds, and ten shillings, and also during the said
Four years as aforementioned, the yearly Sum of Fifteen thousand pounds per
Annum, by equal quarterly payments and deductions, according to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents, and of Our will and pleasure herein before
declared.

And We do hereby command, authorize and empower the Lord Treasurer, And the
Lord Treasurer, etc. to suffer fuch abatements, etc.
Vice-Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons of Our Court of Exchequer in Ireland,
and all other Officers and Ministers of Our Revenue there for the time being,
That they and every of them do accordingly permit and suffer the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, to detain, retain, By way of Retainer.
and keep in their hands, and to their own proper use and behoof out of the
said several Rents by the Indenture aforesaid reserved, and due and payable
unto Us as aforesaid, the said several Sums of Six thousand two hundred fifty
and two pounds, and Eleven thousand three hundred seventy and eight pounds, and
the said Sum of Fourteen thousand seven hundred seventy and three pounds and
ten shillings, and the said yearly Sum of Fifteen thousand pounds per Annum, in
such manner and at such times as the same are hereby granted, according to the
true intent and meaning of these Our Letters Patents; And that they, and every
of them, do accordingly exonerate and discharge the said John Forth, William
Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet
Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, and every or any of them, of, for, and concerning the same Sums of
Money, and every part and parcel thereof hereby given and granted as aforesaid,
in as full and effectual manner and form, as if the same Sum and Sums of Money
had been really paid into the Receipt of Our Exchequer in Ireland, at the days
and times wherein they are by Our said recited Indenture of Demise mentioned to
be payable; And for so doing, these Presents, By virtue of these Presents,
without further warrant.
or the enrollment thereof, shall be to them, and every of them, a sufficient
Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

And whereas there are several Sums of Money now due, and in arrear to His
Majesty for Quit-rents from several Persons within the said Kingdom of Ireland,
a speedy and hasty Collection whereof may not only very much hinder and
dis-able the Persons so owing the same Arrears to pay the same, But also the
future growing Quit-rents by them to be due and payable, and by the Indenture
aforesaid demised and granted to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall; whereas a
moderate Collection of the said Arrears may render the same Persons more able
to pay, as well the said Arrears, as also the future growing Quit-rents.

To the end therefore that the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, may be the
better secured in the full enjoyment and perception of the same Quit-rents to
them demised for the term of Seven years, according to the true intent and
meaning of the same Indenture, His Majesty is hereby graciously pleased to
declare, and does hereby covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said John
Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James
Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and
Ralph Bucknall, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That His Majesty,
his Heirs or Successors, shall not, nor will not in any one year, during the
said term of Seven years to them the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William
Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George
Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, His Majesty will not in any one
year collect above one seventh part of any arrears of Quit-rents, now due, etc,
Non obstante the ill reciting, not reciting, etc. the aforesaid Indenture, etc.
and Ralph Bucknall, so as aforesaid granted, collect, gather, receive, or
take, nor suffer to be collected, gathered, received or taken of, or from any
person or persons whatsoever, above one Seventh part of any such arrears of
Quit-rents by them, or any of them, now due and in arrear as aforesaid.

Notwithstanding the ill reciting, not reciting, or mis-reciting the aforesaid
Indenture of Demise, made or granted, to the said John Forth, William Bucknall,
William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet, John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth,
George Dashwood, William Muschamp, Humphrey Tailor, and Ralph Bucknall, or to
the former Farmers of any of the said Farms still in being, or any the Rents or
Sums of Money thereby or thereupon reserved and payable to Us, or any other
Matter, Cause or Thing whatsoever therein contained, to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding, or any other defect, matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. In witness
whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. Witness Our Self
at Westminster the Third day of August, in the One and twentieth year of Our
Reign.

By the King.

YOur Majesty (taking notice of Your Grant and Farm of Your Revenue of Ireland,
made to John Forth, William Bucknall, and others, and of their advancement of
70000 l. to your Majesty, and becoming Security for the performance of the
Covenants therein contained on their parts, and in Consideration of an
Exception in the said Grant of all the Quit-rents, by your Majesty given away
and discharged before Michaelmass last) is hereby graciously pleased to grant
to the said John Forth, William Bucknall, William Dashwood, Philip Jemmet,
John Breedon, James Hayes, Dannet Forth, George Dashwood, and Ralph Bucknall,
out of the Rents by the said Grant reserved, between Christmas last and
Christmas next, the Sum of 6252 l. and out of the Rents payable between
Christmas next, and Christmas 1670. the Sum of 11378 l. And out of the Rents
payable between Christmas 1670, and Christmas 1671. the Sum of 14773 l. and
10 s. And further to grant them the yearly Sum of 15000 l. per Annum, out of
the Rents, by the said Grant reserved between Christmas 1671. and Christmas
1675. with power to defalk the same out of the Rents quarterly. And your
Majesty does hereby also Covenant with them, that Your Majesty will not in any
one year of the Seven years thereby granted, Collect above one Seventh part of
any Arrears of Quit-ents now due to your Majesty.

HENEAGE FINCH.

THE TABLE.
A.
ABatement, v. King. Of the rents reserved by the first Patent 105.
Acts of Parliament Of the Kings Revenue in Ireland recited 1 Of Tonnage and
Poundage to be observed, as also the Act prohibiting the Importation of Wool
and Leather 67 To lessen or suspend the revenue, to have defalcation 83 v.
Increase of rent. v. Power.
Acquittances Exchequer the Farmers or any five may give 102 After the term, if
goods are shipped out, which were compounded for within the term, the Farmers to
pay thoss Customs over and above the rent 64 Ale and Beer-licences 69 Alnage.
v. Exception Allome. v. Exception Ammunition. v. Apparel Apparel for Ships 37
For such a go beyond the Sea 63
Annuities v. Payments Appeals: Power to the Commissioners of Appeals preserved
100 Arrears Power to recover them at the end of the term 83 Of Quit-rents. v.
Collection
Assistance For the Customs 39 The Penalties upon the Officers if they refuse
44 The General Clause 87
Assurance, for further Assurance the General Clause 88 Assignment Of any the
duties, or bills, bonds, etc. how ordered 75

B.
Blockwood. v. Exception Bullion. v. Exception Butlerage. v. Exception Books,
the Farmers may search 14 Copies of all Books belonging to the Customs 40 Of
EntrieS, Fines, Forfeitures, Defalcations, to be kept by the Farmers; but to
suffer such Books to be viewed, and Copies of them, and render an Account of
them upon Oath 95
Bonds for the Inland-Excise 46 Penalties for not giving, or refusing them b.
v. Transportation. For the Foreign Excise, the taking of them, and the
delivery of them up 49 If hindered, to have the whole benefit of the forfeitures
by retainer 50 Not to be cancelled without consent 70 Of all the duties may be
taken and prosecuted in the Kings Name, but the Farmers to have the benefit 72,
73

C.
Clothes the over-lengths 26 Cocquet not to be made or cancelled without the
Farmers consent 49 Concealment. v. Rent. Collectors of the Customs, and power
to search 42, 43 The Farmers are made Collectors of Rents, Hearth-money, and
Wine-licences 13 Of the Customs 41 v. Forfeitures
None to intermeddle with the Collection but who the Farmers shall appoint 17
Of all the Duties, by a General Clause 88
Collection: His Majesty will not Collect in any one year above a seventh part
of his Arrears of Quit-rents 112 Copies of Returns to be made by such persons
as the Kings Remembrancer shall allow of, without Fee 15 Commissioners For
Wine-licences, to be answerable for securities, unless they are taken with the
Farmers consent 20 For the Customs, who the Farmers shall nominate 66 For the
Excise, to take no securities but such as they will answer for, without the
Farmers consent 72
Commissions for the Customs, as often as they please 43 Companies, time to pay
their Customs 64 Composition for Excise, the Farmers to have the benefit, and
the forfeitures 72 Corporations, not to suffer Merchants to trade to their
prejudice, 57, 58 Corn 37 v. Port corn, Composition, and Discharges 37
Customs demised 27 The Rent. v. Payment Hindered therein. v. Obstruction
Custom-houses, the use of them 39
D.
Defalcation. v. Obstruction Rent Customs King Bonds Enemies Debentures Payment
Forfeitures War Plague Act of Parliament Quit-rents Wooll-flocks
The Interest of the 70000 l. quarterly 82 If continue in the Kings hands
during the term, to detain the last half years rent; and if that not
sufficient, to be paid out of the growing revenue ib. His Majesty may receive
the Duties for which Defalcation is made 85 To be considered in every
particular branch, and not collectively, 101, 102
Discharges. v. Customs Diminish, the present rates; the Farmers not to do it
without the Kings consent 57 Doubtful cases to be decided by the Lord
Lieutenant, etc. ib. Discharge: His Majesty will not discharge any of the
duties demised 80 Duplicates of the Patent 85 Debentures for goods whereof the
custom was paid before the term, to be discharged, and to have Defalcation by
retainer with interest 53 If after the term, etc. without defalcation 54
Provided they be delivered to the Farmers within three months after the term
ib.

E.
Enemies Goods Shipped off and Custom paid and taken, etc. other Goods may be
Shipped off Custome-free 52 But if the loss prove considerable, the King to bear
it, and the Farmers to have defalcation ib.
Enrolment of the Patent in the Chancery and Exchequer in Ireland within twelve
months after the date, and the penalty 103 Exceptions Annual Rents whereof any
grant or release was made before Michaelmass last 6 The Rents of the present
Farm of the Customs 7 The Rents of the present farm of the Excise ib. And of
the Ale and Beer-licenses ib. Alnage 28 Such duties as shall be imported beyond
the present rates ib. Or increase of rent hereafter to be made by Act of
Parliament ib. Bullion ib. Smaults ib. Saffers ib. Prizage and Butlerage ib.
Logwood and Blockwood forfeited ib. Port Corn 29 Five shillings per Ton upon
French shipping ib.
Excise foreign demised 27 Inland demised 69 Not more then by Law to be
demanded 73
Examining Shippers. v. Oath Exchequer Officers to be paid by the Farmers 54
F.
Fees Returns and duplicates to be signed without Fee 15 v. Oath. v. Payment.
Due to the Exchequer Officers upon Exchequer Receipts, the Farmers to pay them
102
Foaring Beer to be allowed 60 Forfeitures. v. Transportation. Of Securities by
those licensed to retaile Wine and Strong Water, or by Collectors of the
Rents, to be to the Farmers 19 And all executions thereupon ib. And then to be
delivered to the Farmers without further Account, and the Officers discharged
20 If hindered therein, to have Defalcation 21 Moderation of forfeitures of
Customs to be made by the Lord Lieutenant, etc. 58 Of Compositions 72 Of all
the duties
Such Grants to be made of them to the Farmers as they shall desire 76 Judges,
etc. commanded to put the Laws in execution, and to levy them; and therefore
the Farmers are made Collectors 81 To be paid quarterly, or within one and
twenty days after, over and above the rent ib. Or so much as remains in their
hands after all defalcations, etc. satisfied ib. And are to defalk so much 82
If the Rents be not paid at the days and times limited 96, 97 And then the
Lord Lieutenant, etc. may discharge the Farmers, and the lease to be void 98
But the profits received between the last rent paid and such avoidance to be
answered to His Majesty ib If the farm be seized, a provision for the 70000 l.
and interest ib. French shipping. v. Exception.

G.
Gold. v. Transportation Gifts of honor 37
H.
Habendum The Quit-rents, etc. Hearth-money Wine-licenses 7 From Christmas
last for seven years 8 The Customs and imported Excize from Christmas next 25
The Inland Excise, and Ale and Beer licenses 69 The Abatement of the Rents
reserved upon the lease of the Farm 109

I.
Imposition No new Imposition without the Farmers consent, unless by Authority
of Parliament 51
Increase of the duties by Act of Parliament, the rent to increase, and to
account for the Overplus 95
K.
King. Goods imported solely on his account, or jointly with others, to have
defalcation 35, 36 v. Officers. His Officers power preserved as to the Customs
41

L.
Lands enclosed in Phaenix-park 101 Logwood. v. Exception. Leather. v. Act
License. v. Wool-flocks.
M.
Marque 27 Market not to be filled toward the end of the Farm 67
N.
Non obstante The clause in the Act for Hearth-money 8 The Act for Excise 30
The clause in the Act for Ale and Beer-licences 70 And the Act of Excise 71.
And every Order, Custom, Ordinance, etc. ib. His Majesty will accept Assignment
non obstante any Privy Seal, etc. 75 Non-recitals, mis-recitals 91 Non-recitals
and mis-recitals in the first Patent 112
Notice to the Kings Officers upon goods landed 67
O.
Oath to examine Shippers 42 Power to administer as to the Customs, ib. The
Fees how to be paid 43
Obstruction In the Duties of the first Demise, to have Defalcation with
interest and damages 18. Lord Lieutenant upon proof to allow the same ib. If
hindered in the first Demise, to have Defalcation 21 In the Customs by His
Majesty or his Ancestors, or hereafter shall discharge any unless by their
consent, to have Defalcation by Retayner 32, 33, 34 In the having the
Forfeitures of Bonds for Excise, Defalcation by Retayner 73
Officers, entry of goods 27 Kings Officers to do no prejudice to the Farmers
in taking the Customs 38 And the penalty thereupon 39 v. King
Offices public the Farmers and their Officers are freed from 85 Public the
Farmers to have the use of them, and may expend 3000 l. for repairs, to be
deducted out of the last Quarters Rent 92 And they are to keep and leave them
in good repair 93

P.
Payments On the first Demise 13 On the Customs, 30 By monthly payments 31 The
Fees, Salaries, etc. of Customers, Controllers, etc. 54 And the Exchequer
Officers, 55 Annuities, Pensions, etc. issuing out of the Customs, ib. And to
have Defalcation, ib. On the Excise, and for Ale and Beer-licences, 69 No
advantage to be taken if the first Quarters Rent be paid within six months
after the date 101 v. Forfeiture If any money be paid into the Exchequer, it
shall be accepted in part of Rent, if any due 17 If none due, or not so much as
is paid in, to have it out again without Fee ib.
Pardon: his Majesty will not pardon any of the Duties 89 The King may pardon
offenses against the 11 and 13 Eliz 100
Power to do what the Kings Officers can do 13 To put the Acts in execution 14
Pirates 27 Prizage. v. Exception Port-Corne. v. Exception Presents
Custome-free 37 Practices in the Customs, how reformed 44 Port-Bonds 46 One
port to be free in each Province 66
Plague, whereby the Duties lessened, Defalcation 83
Q.
Quit-rents granted or released before Michaelmas last, to have no Defalcation
101 Quiet Enjoyment. v. Rent
R.
Rates. v. Diminish Repairs. v. Offices Rent during the whole term recited 2
If cease by the Kings seizing, or, by judgment in the Exchequer for Innocent
Papists, to have defalcation 22 If Rents concealed, except the new Quit-rents:
what for their pains, and how paid 23. 24 Quiet enjoyment 91 The Farmers to
have only the Rents of Lands vested in his Majesty by the Acts, and granted in
Custodiam, or demised for years; and in default, to pay themselves by retayner
103 Saving the Rent upon leases for one and twenty years, or a lesser term ib.
Power to detayne so much as abated by the Patent of Abatement 110
Records and Returns To have the Custody 14 To be signed withont Fee ib. And
placed in the Farmers Head-Office 15 All persons, except such as have not
finished their Accounts, are to deliver them to the Farmers, etc. 16 A
discharge for the delivery of them ib
Retayner If obstructed in the duties of the first demise 18 Or in the Customs.
v. Obstruction in the second demise 32 v. King For victual, apparel, etc. 37 v.
Bonds v. Rents

S.
Saffers. v. Exception v. Fofeitures Power to sue them en the first demise in
the Kings name 20 For Wine licenses, who to take them, and who answerable ib.
For the Excise, the Commissioners to take none but what they will answer for,
without the Farmers consent 72
Search. v. Customs Seizures for Customs 45 How to be laid up and discharged
ib. Of the Farm. v. Forfeiture
Shop keepers. v. Bonds Ships. v. French shipping That shall be built there of
three decks what to be allowed 61
Smaults. v. Exception Suites to be in the Kings name, and the Farmers to have
the benefit 89, 22 Store-bils to be allowed 59 And differences thereupon to be
decided by the Lord Lieutenant, etc. ib.

T.
Transportation Bonds of Merchants not to transport Gold or Silver, if
forfeited, Farmers to have the benefit 46, 47 Those Bonds to be prosecuted in
the Kings name 44 Exchequer Officers to deliver the moneys upon such Bonds ib
Merchants strangers to import within eight months what they exported
Custome-free 61 And subjects borne, within twelve months, if the property be
not altered ib.
Taxes public the Farmers, etc. freed from 85
U.
Unlading of Goods without Entry 27 Victual 37
W.
Warrants. v. Customs. Warehouse-roome 46 Wool. v. Act. War, to suspend or
lessen the duties, v. Defalcation Wool-flocks: license to transport them to
continue 99
FINIS.

