A LETTER From a Person of HONOR in the COUNTRY Written to the EARL of
CASTLEHAVEN BEING Observations and Reflections Upon his Lordships MEMOIRES
Concerning the WARS of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultrey, 1681.

A LETTER Written to the EARL of CASTLEHAVEN.
My Lord Castlehaven,
HAving Received your Lordships of the 24th Current, with your printed
Memoires, which you are pleased in some sort to Entitle me to; and I will not
conceal from your Lordship that I am not yet ashamed, now I have read them,
though I cannot approve all in them, that I was the first incentive to your
Writing them; which was upon this occasion, having sat along with your Lordship
in Parliament, and observing for the most part such a consent between your
Lordship and me, in proceedings there upon the most abstracted Principles of
Honor and Allegiance, I could not but account of your Lordship as a true
Englishman and a Loyal Subject, whatsoever blemish your engagement under the
confederate Rebels of Ireland had before fixed on you; and having heard you so
often pathetically declare your self fully to mine and most honest Men's Minds,
against the dangers of the growing greatness of the French and the too fast
Declension of the Spaniard, between which great Powers of the World, the Crown
of England was so happy and wise in former times as to hold and guide the
Balance; and finding by your frequent, and as I could not but conceive,
Cordial Expressions against the Pope of Rome's Usurping Authority in these
Dominions, over and against his Majesty, and Kingdoms, to such a degree, that
you spared not, like a right Ancient Peer of this Realm, often to say, That if
the Pope himself should Attack any of his Majesty's Dominions, you would be one
of the first to labor his Destruction; I was deservedly much delighted in your
Lordships Converse: which having been often honored with, both by your
Letters, when in Foreign parts, and your favorable Society here at home, I was
instrumental, as your Lordship well knows, to prevail with the Parliament to
set a mark of great Honor on your Lordship, by a special recommendation and
intercession to his Majesty for a regard to and reparation of the Breaches time
and misfortune had made upon so Ancient and Honorable a Family. And looking
upon your Lordship as a Peer of most noble Principles, and free of the worst
part of Bigotry, I could not but lament your leaving the Parliament, and still
wish your return.

During our said Converse, being engaged in the History of Ireland, to which I
was the more inclined by an interest therein for several Generations; my Great
Grandfather, Sir John Perrot, having been Deputy thereof, governing the same
with great Wisdom and Success, my Grandfather Annesley having been Commander at
Sea in Queen Elizabeth's time, and one of the Undertakers for Land in Munster,
after the Earl of Desmond's Rebellion; my Father, the Lord Baron of
Mountnorris, and Viscount of Valentia (of whom I have very often heard your
Lordship speak with great Honor, and as your worthy Friend) having faithfully
served King James and King Charles the First, near Forty years in that Kingdom,
in Offices and Employments of high Trust; and I my self being a Native of the
City of Dublin, a diligent Observer of the Troubles there, wherein I had some
share; and having both Honors and Lands descended to me in that Realm; and
knowing that your Lordship had heretofore a great part in the Action there, and
taking notice that no Memorials I had yet seen, did give a full account of your
Lordship, whom as my own Friend and my Fathers Friend, I was willing to do
right to in History, as far as I could; ever highly esteeming the Bravery of
your Actions and Wisdom of your Conduct, as far as I had Cognizance thereof,
though I bemoaned the unhappy circumstances of your engaging under a Power
usurping over your own Prince, and incroaching Royal Power; which I find you
cannot digest, either the Pope or Duke of Lorraine should have done: I
discoursed with your Lordship many of the most important Designs, Actions and
Traverses of Fortune in Ireland, since the fatal 23 of October 1641, and
finding by your full Relations, with a perfect memory thereof, that you were
able to give help to History therein; I moved your Lordship (to which you
friendly consented) that at leisure hours you would reduce to writing what you
could remember, with as exact reference to Time and Order (as you could
recollect) of Passages and Exploits there; and that I might by your favor be
possessed thereof: And I wish things had rested there, little expecting a
formal Relation in print, and much less so introduced before I had the perusal
of it; for I must now acquaint your Lordship, that I did not, after what I have
above related, save now and then to your self, inquire after your Memoires
promised me, till by a Letter of the 16th of this month, from a hand I
respect, I had notice he had seen them; and my Censure thereon was desired,
they seeming to him (after 28 years silence, to cast a Calumny on the
Government then; and as he suspects, with no good intention, though he refers
that to my Opinion; knowing (as he is pleased to say) none to appeal to but me.
Your Lordship sees now how you are engaged for want of commanding my Service
before the Printers: and I am confident the heat of a Battle would be less
formidable to you then the Paper war you must expect to be assaulted with;
wherein, if I be necessitated to have the least hand, your Lordship may be
assured it shall be en Gentilhome and en amy, and chiefly with an aim to
convince your Lordship of that which has obscured the Glory of your Adventures
and Exploits or Undertakings, in that unfortunate Kingdom; and therefore I
forbear giving any Opinion to my Friend, till I have vented my thoughts to your
Lordship, which I shall now take the liberty to do.

Upon serious perusal of your Book, I find your Lordships Story of two parts,
The First till the Cessation of Arms concluded by the Rebels Commissioners at
Seginstowne, with the Marquess of Ormond, Sept. 15, 1643; all which time your
Lordship was wholly of the Rebels Party, and under their Pay and Command, which
I wish your Lordship had not thought fit for the Press, though there were some
Acts of Souldierly bravery in it. The Second Part, From that time till your
Lordship finding the ill state of Affairs in Ireland, was dispatched by the
then Lord Deputy Clanrickord, to set out the same to the King in France; from
whence, though your Lordship procured a Letter from his Majesty to the Lord
Deputy, and sent the same by a safe Messenger, yet you returned not again, but
engaged in the Service of the Prince of Conde. My Lord, I am loath now to make
my Remarques upon this Second Part, because your Lordships acting therein at
times, under the Confederate Irish their Commission, and under his Majesty's
Authority at other times, and sometimes under both. It will be fitter at
present for me to be silent therein, than to attempt the unblending such a
mixture, and separate your Acts of Allegiance from those of Opposition to the
King, which I must always blame you for: or to condemn you entirely, when some
things your Lordship did were by full Authority, though very fatal to the
English Protestant interest in that Kingdom, and no ways advantageous to his
Majesty or his Affairs.

But the First Part of your Story, which takes up three Sections of your
Memoirs, I cannot let pass unanimadverted and corrected, without condemning the
generation of the just; suffering Blemish, and Calumny, to lie upon his Majesty
and Government, both in England and Ireland; and leaving your Lordship in a
mistake of having done well, when I hope I shall evince that you did very ill,
unless the galantry of a Soldier can expiate for all that was amiss. For this
end I must take notice to your Lordship, that all I find you urge to satisfy
your own Conscience, or to vindicate your Honor and Integrity to the World, in
this your engaging your self amongst the Irish, is to this effect: Your
Lordship says, That at the first eruption of the Rebellion (which you seem to
tie to the North, but was universal) you acquainted the Lords Justices with
your willingness to serve the King against the Rebels, as your Ancestors had
formerly done in Ireland; but they replying, that your Religion was an
Obstacle; there being then a Parliament in that Kingdom sitting, you were
resolved to see the event, sending your Brother to your House at Madingstowne,
in the County of Kildare, to secure and defend it, in case there were any
rising in those parts. Sometime after the Parliament being dissolved (but you
do not mention that you attended your duty in Parliament, when it was sitting,
and declaring against the Rebels) your Lordship desired a Pass from the
Justices to go to England, but they refusing, you acquainted them with the
condition of your Estate, and desired a supply of Money till you could apply to
the Parliament of England for a Pass to bring you over, which they denied. You
pressed them then to direct you what course you should steer, to which they
replied, Go home and make fair weather. You took this advice, and being come,
my Lord of Antrim, and my Lady Duchess of Buckingham (both Papists, and after
that deeply engaged in the Rebellion) soon followed (whether by concert with
your Lordship is not said) and you were very well pleased with so good company.
But in a short time the Irish came and drove away great part of your Stock,
which you recovered by a party sent out with your Brother, who brought with him
two or three of the chiefest Conductors of that Rabble. This enraged the Irish
so much, as you conceived your Brother was not safe there, and therefore sent
him to Dublin, to attend the Justices Orders, and assure them of your readiness
to return on a call, they sending a Convoy, which they promised to do as
Occasion required. But your Lordship hearing that you were indicted of High
Treason, and hereupon your Brother addressing to the Lords Justices again, to
let them know that they had not kept their words with him, in suffering this
clandestine proceeding against you (as your Brothers Letter calls it) you went
to Dublin, and addressed your self to my Lord of Ormond, as your Brother did in
your behalf to the Lords Justices and Council, to acquaint them with your
coming; and upon your appearance before them they ordered you to come the day
following, at which time, without calling you in, they committed you to Mr.
Woodcock's House, one of the Sheriffs of Dublin. Your Brother seeing (as he
calls it) this rigorous usage toward you, and being refused a Pass for himself
to go for England, he got away to the King at York, and petitioned him that you
might be sent for over to be tried here by your Peers. But his Majesty's Answer
was, That he had left all the Affairs of Ireland to the Parliament; upon which
he petitioned the Parliament to the same effect: their Answer was, that they
could do nothing without the King. After this your Brother says, he was
continually serving his Majesty in England. Your Lordship once more places
your self at Madenstowne, whither you had at first retired by advice of the
Lords Justices, and continued there some Five or six months after in peace and
quietness; but your Lordship does not mention that other neighboring places
possessed by the English did so; or what in diligence your Lordship had with or
gave to the State. But proceed to say, That in the mean while Parties were sent
out by the Justices from Dublin, and the Towns adjacent, to kill and destroy
the Rebels; and the like was done through all parts of the Kingdom. But your
Lordship adds, the Officers and Soldiers did not take care enough to
distinguish between the Rebels and Subjects, but killed in many places
promiscuously; on which partly, and partly on other provocations that
proceeded, and some too that followed, the whole Nation finding themselves
concerned, took to Arms for their own defense, and particularly the Lords of
the Pale did so, who yet at the same time desired the Justices to send their
Petition to the King, which was refused. And for their further discouragement,
Sir John Read, his Majesty's sworn Servant (a stranger to the Country,
uningaged, and an Eyewitness of their proceedings, then upon his Journey to
England) prevailed with by them, to carry their Remonstrance to his Majesty,
and to beg his Pardon for what they had done; coming to Dublin, and not
concealing his Message, was put to the Rack for his good will. The said Lords
having tried this and other ways to acquaint the King with their Grievances,
and all failing, an open War broke forth generally throughout the Kingdom. Your
Lordship next takes notice of your accidental entertaining my Lord of Ormond at
Dinner, immediately after the Battle of Killrush, which you were a Spectator
of, being in sight of your House; but that some who came with him, turned this
another way, and publishing through the Army, that it was a mighty Feast for my
Lord Mount Garret and the Rebels; this through the English Quarters past for
current. And you believe it was much the cause of this underhand villainous
proceedings (as you call it) against you forementioned. Your Lordship proceeds
to tells us, That after Twenty Weeks that you had remained in Prison, you were
ordered to be removed to the Castle of Dublin, which startled you, and brought
to your thoughts the proceedings against the Earl of Strafford, who confiding
in his Innocence, lost his Head: you concluded then that Innocence was a
scurvey plea in an angry time; besides, your Lordship looked upon the Justices
and most of the Council to be of the Parliaments Persuasion; wherefore you
resolved to attempt an escape, and save your self in the Irish Quarters, which
your Lordship did, and give us a Relation of the manner of it; and how your
Lordship took your way toward the Mountains of Wickow, where being come, you
cared little for the Justices, though before Dinner, your escape being
discovered, on notice given to the Justices, you were pursued by a party of
Horse, taking their way to your House at Madingstowne, which they invested in
the night: but not finding your Lordship, after possessing themselves of what
your Lordship had within and without, they killed many of your Servants and
burnt the House. Your Lordship kept on your way to Kilkenny, as much through
the Fast Country as you could, till you arrived, where you found the Town very
full, and many of your acquaintance, all preparing for their Natural Defense;
seeing no distinction made, or safety but in Arms. To this end your Lordship
says, They had chosen amongst themselves, out of the most eminent Persons, a
Council, and gave it the Title of, The Supreme Council of the Confederate
Catholics of Ireland; and formed an Oath of Association, by which all were
bound to obey them. They had made Four Generald of the Four Provinces, Preston
of Leinster, Barry of Munster, Owen-Roe Oneal of Vlster, and one Burk of
Connaught; and being to give Commissions, they caused a Seal to be made, which
was the Seal of the Council. Your Lordship says, you were sent for to this
Council to tell your Story, which you did. And being asked what you intended to
do, you answered, to get into France, and so to England; upon which they told
you their condition, and what they were doing for their preservation,
persuading you to stay with them, being your Lordship was beloved in the
Country; had three Sisters married amongst them, was persecuted upon the same
score they were, and ruined; so that you had no more to lose but your Lives.
You took two or three days to think of this Proposition, examining the Model of
Government they had prepared against the meeting of the general Assembly, and
most particularly their Oath of Association, which your Lordship judged to be
very reasonable, as the case stood. On the whole matter you returned to this
Council, Thanked them for their good Opinion of you, and engaged your self to
run a Fortune with them. Whether Anger and Revenge did not incline you to it as
much as any other consideration, you say you cannot resolve; but this you well
remember, that you considered how you had been used, and seen your House
burning as you passed by; besides, that you were a light man, with no charge,
and not any hopes of redress from the King, who was then engaged in an
intestine War. Now being thus a Confederate, and having taken the Oath, they
made your Lordship one of the Council, and General of the Horse under Preston.

The Assembly met the 24th of October, 1642. It differed nothing from a
Parliament, other then that the Lords and Commons sat together, and not in two
Houses.

This your Lordship says, we see was a force-put upon you, and you hoped in
time, the storm being passed, to return to your old Government under the King.
You had many Learned in the Law amongst you, whom you encouraged to keep you as
near the Old Government as might be; holding to the Ancient Laws of the Land.

That Assemby, without delay, approved all the Council had done, and settled a
Model of Government, viz. That at the end of every General Assembly, the
Supreme Council should be Confirmed or Changed as they thought sit. That it
should consist of Twenty five, six out of each Province, three of the six still
Resident.

(...) was your Lordship, with (...) to any Province, but to the Kingdom in
general. Every Province had a Provincial Assembly, which met on occasions, and
each Country had Commissions for Applotting Money within themselves, as it
came to their st^^res, upon the general Applotment of the Province. Many other
things there were as to Government. If a better came to them written in Irish,
it would be wondered at, and hardly could one be found to read it. You say you
were not in case to bring to Justice those that begun the Rebellion. But you
never saw any of them esteemed or advanced. The general Assembly being put off,
the Generals fell to their work, and your Lordships General took in Burras,
Fort Faukland and Barrish, in the Kings County, where you were with him. Your
Lordship was also with this General the 18th of March, 1642, when he was beaten
at Rose by the Marquess of Ormond, and by Colonel Monk, since Duke of
Albermarie, at Timochoe, in the Queens County, the Fifth of October, 1642. Yet
afterward he besieging Ballynekill, in the same County, you ventured once more
with him; where he having intelligence that Major General Crawford was
Besieging Ballybritas, a Castle, belonging to the Viscount Clanmalleer, he sent
your Lordship with a party of Fifteen hundred Horse and Foot, to endeavor the
succouring of that place, which your Lordship did; and Crawford drawing off, in
passing the River of the Barrow, in a Skirmish, had his Thigh broken with a
Musket Shot. You returned as Ballynekill was rendered. After this your Lordship
remained at Kilhenny, with the Supreme Council, and Preston went into the lower
parts of the Province with the Army; of whose Absence, the Enemies Garrisons,
in the County of Catherlagh and Queens County, taking advantage, alarmed the
County of Kilkenny, even to the Gates of the City. Your Lordship was then by
the Council commanded to go against them. And therefore having gotten together
about 2000 Men, with some Cannon, you marched to Ballynunry, in the County of
Catherlagh, and took it; as also Cloghgrenan, where the County of Wexford's
Regiment mutined, but were reduced and some Examples made, served well for the
future. Your Lordship marched thence into the Queens County, and Besieged
Bellylenan, Commanded by the Grimes's, a valiant People, with a strong
Garrison. But a great breach being made, their Succor came by the way of Athy.
Your Lordship was not well at this Allarm, but laid upon your Bed in your Tent.
However you made no great matter of it, knowing the Succor could not be
considerable; but your Lordship beating their Succor in their view, the
besieged Garrison yielded, on condition to march out with their Arms. And then
your Lordship was persuaded to head the Munster Forces, of whose Success, under
your Command, you give a full Relation; and then returning to Kilkenny, gave
the Assembly an account of what had passed. Soon after the Assembly being broke
up, and a Supreme Council chosen to govern in their absence; you retired to
Kilkash, your Brother Butler's House, to rest your self. The Council went to
Ross, and whilst they were there, a Trumpet brought them a Letter from the
Marquess of Ormond, setting forth his being appointed by the King to hear your
Grievances, and to treat for an accommodation. The particulars of the Letter
you know not, but the Trumpet was quickly dispatched with some slight Answer;
which coming to your knowledge, you repaired to Kilkenny, whither the Council
was returned; and on information, finding what you had heard to be true, you
sent for Sir Bobert Talbot, Sir Richard Barnwall, Colonel Walter Bagnal, and
such others as were in the Town, well affected and leading Men of the Assembly,
though not of the Council. Now being in your Lodging, you acquainted them with
what you had understood, and that if they would stick to you, you would
endeavor to give it a turn. You all agreed on the way, which was to go to the
Council then sitting, to take notice of the Kings offer, and their return; and
to mind them that the consideration and resolutions concerning Peace and War,
the general Assembly referved to themselves only; and therefore to require that
they would send immediately a Trumpet of their own, with a Letter to the
Marquess of Ormond, giving him to understand they had issued a Summons for a
general Assembly, in order to acknowledge the Kings gracious Favor, in naming
him his Commissioner to hear your Aggrievances and redress them. This you put
in execution, and gained your point without much resistance.

The Marquess of Ormond being thus brought into a Treaty, the Confederate
Commissioners met at Seginstowne, near the Nasse, as his Excellency had
appointed, in order to a Cessation of Arms. At which time all Parties labored
to get into possession of what they could. Colonel Monk, after made Duke of
Albermarle, marched into the County of Wicklow to take in the Harvest, and
possess some Castles. Your Lordship being then commanded by the Council to go
against him, and having Rendevouz'd your Troops, consisting of about 3000 Horse
and Foot at Ballynekill, in the County of Catherlagh; notice was brought you
that Colonel Monk was marched away in all haste to the assistance of the Lord
Moor, then facing Owen Roe Oneal, near Portlester. You finding your self now to
have nothing to do, thought it worth the while to endeavor taking in
Dullerstown, Tully, Lacagh, and all other Castles in the County of Kildare,
between the Rivers of the Barrow and Liffe, which you did; leaving Garrisons in
them. This done, you repast past the Barrow at Monaster-Evan, marched into
Leix, and took three or four small places. But as you were going on, had Advice
from the Commissioners at Seginstowne, that they had on the 15th of September,
1643, concluded a Cessation of Arms with the Marquess of Ormond, to which you
submited.

As your Lordship did also to the two Peaces of 1646, 1648, both suitable, and
of the same strain; and though both were of advantage only to the Irish, and
highly dishonorable to the Crown of England, and destructive to the English
and Protestants, yet both were broken and set at naught by the Irish
themselves, a just Judgment of God against them, whose hands were full of
Blood; and there being no hopes that such untempered Mortar could cement them
and the Posterity left alive of murdered Parents, Brothers, Sisters, and other
Relations; or that ever the English could live out of danger, and free of
Massacres for the future, without exemplary punishment of the Murderers and
Rebels, and bringing them by forfeitures and otherwise, to an absolute
subjection to the Laws, and keeping them in that state, as it is now hoped they
are, and will be by the watchful Eye of Government.

I shall now, as briefly as I can, take the liberty to give your Lordship
impartial Remarks upon what your Lordship has written in justification of the
Rebels, or tending to caluminate his Majesty's Government, or English and
Pretestant Subjects; reserving a fuller account thereof to a fitter occasion.

In the first place, Seeing your Lordships Memoires, dedicated to the King, I
cannot but take notice how dangerous a thing it is, and of how bad consequence
it may prove, especially in this case and juncture, to misinform his Majesty;
not that I do suspect or tax your Lordship of design to abuse the King; for I
do charitably believe, as your Lordship affirms upon your word, that they do
not contain a lie or mistake to your knowledge, yet I must positively aver, and
it is my part to make it good, that the Relation wants the most material and
pregnant Truths in the principal part thereof, and of most consequence to the
Public, as I doubt not your Lordship will believe and confess upon such
glances as I shall make upon particulars as I go over them. But before I
proceed, it will import the giving clear light to an affair, which contrary
interests have so much endeavored to perplex, to observe the state that
unhappy Kingdom of Ireland was in at the Eruption of that satal Rebellion. A
Parliament sitting the year before in Ireland, both Houses taking notice of
some Grievances growing upon them, and the want of some good New Laws for
advancing the Prosperity and good Government of that Kingdom, did send chosen
Agents or Commissioners, both Lords and Commons, of most esteem amongst them,
to attend his Majesty in England, for redress of such Grievances, and procuring
such new Grants and Graces, as they were directed to move for, from a Gracious
King. His Majesty received them favorably and with good dispatch, they
returned for Ireland fully satisfied, and laden with all the Graces and
Bounties, good Subjects could hope to receive upon such an Address to their
Prince; and what needed Confirmation in Parliament, was to be done when the
Parliament should meet, at the day to which it was Prorogued. The People of
Ireland were never better pleased then with the gracious Returns his Majesty
had made by their Commissioners. That Kingdom never enjoyed a more prosound,
and more like to be lasting Peace and Prosperity, Commerce and Trade, both at
home and abroad, never flourished more; barbarous Customs were never more
entirely subdued and abrogated; there never was more Unity, Friendship, and
good Agreement, amongst all sorts and degrees (except in the standing root of
miscnief, the difference in Religions then at this time, nor more mutual
Confidence. I can say, being that time there, the Sheep and the Goats lived
quietly together; and there was that entire trust in one another, as to all
Matters Civil and Temporal, that I remember very well, the Summer before the
Rebellion, The Titular Bishop of Fernes coming his Visitation into the County
of Wexford, where I then dwelt, at the request of a Popish Priest, I lent most
of my Silver Plate to entertain the said Bishop with, and had it honestly
restored. In this serene and happy state was that Kingdom, every one sitting
under his own Vine and Fig Tree in peace, and in the abundance of all things,
when, whether surfeiting of Quiet and Plenty, or by the just Judgment of God
upon a sinful and superstitious Nation; or that the said Committees having
staid in England till they saw symptoms of a misunderstanding between his
Majesty and his two Houses af Parliament in England, and being most of them
Papists, conceived they had fallen into a fit juncture to set up their darling
Idolatry, and restore the pretended Jurisdiction of their Idolized Foreign
Power of the Pope of Rome, or being in at the Intrigues of the Popish Faction
all Court, and receiving encouragement by what they observed, and was infused
into them; they had here laid the Foundation of the Massacre and Rebellion,
whereof Ireland was to be the Scene; or upon what other grounds, I shall not
here take upon me determine, but I well remember that he 23d. of October, after
their Return, broke out upon a formed Combination and Conspiracy, wherein
almost all the said Popish Committees were leading Men and principal Actors,
such a horrid and bloody Massacre and Rebellion, as is not to be paralleled in
History; neither Man, Woman, nor Infants in the Womb, or at the Breast, being
spared; but the generality of that Nation turning barbarous and wild Irish
again, after so many hundred years Subjection to the Crown of England, and
Endeavors of their Reformation and Civilizing to so vast an expense of Blood
and Treasure, as is hardly to be believed. But, my Lord, I may now but touch at
things, Comme en passant, that I may keep within the bounds of a Letter; but
when, what I have meditated, and am preparing from Records and authentic,
unquestionble Relations and Transactions of that bloody Tragedy and matchless
Defection from the Crown and very Nation of English Men, shall see the light,
your Lordship will be informed, of what, it seems, has not yet come to your
knowledge, and what must make your Lordship blush, at your so fatal mistake, to
have ever been (so far (as you confess your self) in so ill Company, and to
have partaken in the least in so foul a Guilt.

Having made this necessary Excursion and Caution, I proceed in your Lordships
own Method, Going first with your Lordship to the Lords Justices, acquainting
them of your willingness to serve the King against the Rebels, to which no
doubt, by advice of his Majesty's Privy Council in that Kingdom, they gave a
very prudent Answer, That your Religion was an obstacle; and how could they
well say less, when it was apparent that it was a Popish Conspiracy, and those
of that profession universally engaged in the Defection; in so much that though
the State there would have distinguished them into Allegiance, and for that
end, more out of desire to win them than any confidence they had in them, but
to leave them without excuse, put Arms and Ammuuition into the hands of the
Lord Viscount Gormanston; and other Popish Lords and Gentlemen of best Quality
and Estates in the English Pale; and who by their tenures had formerly, and
were obliged to assist the Crown, in times of danger; and they, almost all of
them, went with his Majesty's Arms in Aid of the Rebels; and they who did
best, did but restore the Kings Arms, and joined themselves, and all the power
they could make, to the Insurrection; forgetting the Grants and bountiful Gifts
of Lands their Ancestors had received from the Crown, for former, and on
condition of future Service; in which Rank your Lordship places your noble
Ancestors, and I heartily wish you had continued that station.

Your Lordships next motion was to the Lords Justices, for a Pass to go for
England, which, though they could not consent to, they gave your Lordship good
Advice, and which for a time you followed (viz.) to go home to your House,
being but 20 miles from Dublin, and under the protection or reach of the State,
as there should be occasion, and as your Lordship found afterward.

Concerning your Lordships entertaining my Lord of Antrim and the Duchess of
Buckingham at Madinstowne, whither they soon followed, whither by consent with
your Lordship is not said, and your delight in their company, I have nothing to
say, but that it was an ill time for Feasting and Jollity, when stripped, and
almost starved English, came flying by your Gate every day from the Rebels
Cruelty. And I find, that both the Marquess of Antrim and the Duchess, were
after that deeply engaged in the Rebellion; and her Grace living and dying in
the Irish Quarters, chose to be buried at Waterford. And though your Lordship
had power enough, when the Irish came and drove away a great part of your
Stock; to recover it, by a party sent out with your Brother, who brought with
him two or three of the chiefest Conductors of that Rabble; yet you do not so
much as pretend that you delivered up any of them to Justice (as you ought.)
But you say that this enraged the Irish so much, as you conceived your Brother
was not safe there (where yet you thought fit to continue; but sending him to
Dublin to attend the Justices Orders, and assure them of your readiness to
return on a Call, they sending a Convoy, which they promised to do as occasion
required, yet your Lordship hearing that you were indicted of high Treason (the
most public way of accusing, though your Brothers Letter calls it Clandestine)
you went to Dublin (it seems you could go when you pleased without a Convoy)
but did not, it seems, think fit to appear and oppose the Indictment, but being
committed by the Lords Justices and Council (the Justification whereof is not
the work of this Letter, but will have its proper time and place) your Lordship
after addressing your Case, by your Brother, to the King and Parliament in
England, without success, whither your Brother, being refused a Pass by the
Justices, was gotten. It seems your Lordship meditated your escape into the
Irish Quarters, and relate the manner how you compassed the same, which few
will believe your Lordship would have done, or held it the way to save your
self, but that you knew you had deserved it of them, and that they had no cause
to hurt you, as appeared after, by their making you General of their Horse; and
your Lordship, choosing the Oath of Association before that of Allegiance.

Your Lordships having now shifted sides, betake your self roundly to a
justification of the Rebels cause, I must follow you your own way, though it be
not so methodical as I could wish, and is with great confusion of times and
affairs, which the thread of History will reduce to order when time serves. It
is true, that Parties were sent out by the Justices, according to his Majesty's
Direction, to kill and destroy the Rebels throughout all the parts of the
Kingdom; and if the Officers and Soldiers did not take care enough (in your
Lordships Opinion) to distinguish between the Rebels and the Subjects, but
killed in many places promiscuously (whereof your Lordship gives no instances,
or of particular complaints to have been made of any such thing) I would fain
know what distinction could be made of those that were found in Arms or Action
against the Kings Authority; for there will appear to have been no prosecution
of others, nor any others killed, unless by such accidents as might happen in
full peace, and when the course of Justice is free.

But your Lordship says, that on this partly, and partly on other occasions
that preceded, and some too that followed (but you enumerate none) the whole
Nation finding themselves concerned, took Arms for their own defense; and
partlcularly the Lords of the Pale did so, who yet at the same time, desired
the Justices to send their Petition to the King, which was refused.

This being the chief ground by which your Lordship would justify the most
formed and dangerous Conspiracy and Rebellion that ever was in that Kingdom
since the Crown of Englands first Title thereunto, which your Lordship (being a
Peer of England) should have distinguished from a just and a lawful War, but do
not. I must observe to your Lordship, that its an ill way to acquaint the King
with their pretended Grievances, La main a lespe; they should have done that,
if they had any, before their treacherous and bloody Massacres and open
Rebellion; but indeed they had none to offer, but what was the just return of
their own black Actions; for your Lordship knows (as I have said before) that
by Committees of both Houses of Parliament in Ireland, whereof most were
Papists, they had just before their Rebellion, returned laden with such Graces
and Condescentions of Favor from the Crown, as had been sufficient (meeting
with the least ingenuity, gratitude and humanity) to have made wavering Persons
good Subjects; but the Lord Macguires and others Confessions, manifested that
they had laid their Design of Treason too deep to retreat easily, when they had
once struck the stroke, till finding their error, not from remorse, but from
sense of danger imminent (which must inevitably follow, unless they could
subdue England too. At the first they made a loud cry of Grievances, and at
length bid fair, as they had made Ireland a field of Blood and Desolation, to
disturb England also.

Concerning the further discouragement the Rebels received by Sir John Reads
treatment, and what that was, and upon what grounds, though I have all the
passages thereof by me, and will by no means allow of Racking any Man, as being
contrary to the Law of England; yet I must observe that it was a very jealous
time, after so many thousands slaughtered barbarously in cold blood, the
Rebellion increasing every day, too great a curiosity arising to know the
bottom of the design, that remedies proportionable might be applied; and Sir
John Read being one of the Kings Servants and a designing Papist, being there
so unseasonably, without being able to give a good account of himself or
business, and going away Agent for the Rebels in Arms, without leave of the
State, might make them exceed the strict bounds of Law in his Examination

Your Lordship in the next place taking notice that you had tried this and
other ways to acquaint the King with your Grievances (which I have showed
before were none) and all failing, an open War broke forth generally throughout
the Kingdom; this being a mere color and pretense, your Lordship unfortunately
puts the effect before the pretended cause; for by what you had said before,
and what the truth of the cause is, the horrid Rebellion, (for it never merited
the name of a War) was universal, before they so much as alleged any
Grievance. Your next Memoire is of your entertaining my Lord of Ormond at
Dinner after the Battle of Kilrush, which you were a Spectator of; and that
some who came with him, turned it another way, publishing through the Army that
it was a Feast for my Lord Mountgarret and the Rebels, which through the
English Quarters past for current.

Here your Lordship, by your own showing, intimates, that though you were a
Spectator from your own House of a Battle, wherein the Crown lay at stake, and
had formerly discovered you had force enough to recover your Cat el taken away
by the Rebels, and apprehend some of their Leaders, which you call Rogues, yet
(though a Peer of both Kingdoms) you would be no Actor, though the Kings
General was at your Gate, doubting, it seems, the event of Battle; but the
success rendering my Lord of Ormond Victorious, you set before him that Dinner,
which you had not strength to keep from him. And indeed it was generally then
held by the English, that if the Rebels had gained the day, your Lordship would
more frankly have bid the Lord Mountgarret, their General (and a Butler also)
welcome to that Dinner than you did my Lord of Ormond; and this is what passes
rant in this particular to this day, which you believe was much the cause of
that villainous proceeding (as you call it) forementioned, whereas it seems
you were so far from being ill dealt with in the least, that my Lord of Ormond,
your Guest, though he might have justified his carrying you Prisoner with him
to Dublin, who would not assist him in Fight, as your Tenure required left you
(as some think by a blameable omission) Master of your own House, and without
the least damage done you, though much happened after to the Kingdom by your
liberty, of which you were for some time restrained in the Sheriffs hands, and
after ordered to be removed to the Castle of Dublin, which you say startled
you, and it brought to your thoughts the proceedings against the Earl of
Strafford, etc. whereupon you made an escape, probably in the manner related.

But here your Lordship, not distinguishing times, and I not having Papers by
me, am so doubtful of an intermixture of Affairs to your advantage, that I must
reserve the unfolding thereof to another tfme, when I shall be able exactly to
show you the times of your Lordships appearing and joining with the Rebels; and
of the proceeding against the Earl of Strafford, and how they preceded on the
other. I shall only for the present, observe how that great personage (though
more innocent than your Lordship could pretend to) never sled his Trial, well
knowing that would have fixed more guilt upon him in construction of Law, than
could be proved against him; and judged it more honorable to hazard the losing
of his Head than his Innocence. Your Lordships Wisdom took a contrary course,
and concluding that Innocence was a scurvy plea in an angry time (as in deed it
is in any times, where it is so thin laid, that gross guilt appears under it)
you find it safer to arraign the state than to abide a Trial; and accordingly
taxing them for passion and partiality, and to be of the Parliaments persuasion
(when your Lordship would have had them and the whole Kingdom of yours, and by
what means time has manifested) you resolved to attempt an escape and save
your self in the Irish Quarters, which your Lordship did to the Mountains of
Wicklow; where being come, you cared little for the Justices. Is it possible,
if your Lordship had thought your self innocent, that you would seek safety, or
count your self safe among the most enormously bloody and guilty men that ever
were under the Sun; and fly the Kings Justice with reflection and scorn upon
the State, that was pursuing them for their Crimes; and to avoid the inward
stings of Guilt or Apprehensions of Punishment, run headlong into open and a
vowed Guilt, among those who were under Gods Vengeance and the Kings. I leave
this to your Lordships more serious second thoughts.

Being out of the danger of Justice, though your Lordship cared little for the
Justices (as how could your Lordship, when you were associated with those who
had bid defiance to God and the King) yet your Lordship quickly saw a proof,
how civil and merciful they had been to you hitherto, when they upon your
escape, showed you they had power enough to pursue you, and pillage and burn
your House in your Mountain view, and use your Family as Enemies, which they
might have done before, but their constant course was to endeavor the
re-gaining those who had faltered in their Allegiance; and not to increase the
number, which was too heavy upon them already.

Your Lordship at length arrived to the beloved place designed, the City of
Kilkenny, Head Quarters of the Confederate Rebels, where you found many of your
acquaintance preparing for their natural defense, seeing no distinction made,
or safety but in Arms.

Your Lordships heart was now at rest among your Friends and Relations, to whom
indeed, after committing all the wickedness their hand of violence could reach
to, being defeated in several Battles by his Majesty's Forces, and driven into
their Holds, defense became natural, their Crimes having left them no hopes but
in Arms; and who could expect no distinction to be made, where they were
universally involved in the same black guilt.

For this end your Lordship says they had chosen a Council, formed an Oath of
Association, made Four Generals of the Four Provinces, caused a Seal to be
made, raised Monys, constituted a General Assembly, etc. all ensigns of the
more than Regal Power they had usurped. To this Council your Lordship was sent
for, and being well prepared by those inclinations which made you forsake the
Kings Government and the Laws, you quickly closed with them upon the grounds
before expressed, and upon consideration of their model of Government, and very
reasonable (as your Lordship judged it) Oath of Association, which your
Lordship prints at large, and their desiring your conjunction, with thanks
returned, your Lordship engaged your self to run a Fortune with them, upon very
ill principles, if anger and revenge inclined you to it as much as any other
consideration (which you intimate, though you say you cannot resolve.)

Its strange how the Earl of Castlehaven and Lord Audley in England. could
close so cordially with the Irish, who had shed so much innocent English Blood
in full peace, and think himself justified by such an account of his engagement
as this, unless he had been resolved in the justice of their cause from the
beginning, however he carried it with seeming fairness to the Lords Justices
till he got out of their reach.

But engaged your Lordship was, and being thus Confederate, and having taken
the Oath of Association, becoming one of their Council, and General of the
Horse under Preston, and giving the most specious account you can of your
proceedings in that quality. Truth being the greatest and best friend, I had
rather one or several Persons and Families, should lie under the Consequences
of its impartiality, than that the English Nation and Protestant Religion
should suffer by a timorous unworthy concealing, or withholding any part of it.
And since your Lordship, to palliate or justify your own Actions, and the
Confederate Irish Cause, endeavors to render the generality of the English
Protestants Criminal, your Lordship must not think it much, that I, one of
English Race, and for Religion of the Church of England, should be a little
plain in their Justification and Defense; and for that end remove the mask your
Lordship has put upon the face of Affairs, by continuing my Remarques upon
your Lordships Memoires. And first to the constitution of a Council, it was
made up of Members incapable of that trust by Law. In the Oath of Association,
and Propositions grounded thereon, there is not a word but breaths high Treason
(except the first thirteen lines, which set up the Kings Name and Authority
only in pagentry and mockery, to be crucified and contradicted by all that
follows; and yet this Oath your Lordship held very reasonable, as the case then
stood, that is, when you and your Confederates were encouraged or heightened
with a Power able, as you fancied, to make good what you had sworn. And
suitable to this ungodly, traiterous Oath, where all the subsequent proceedings
of the Confederates, their Councils at home and their Actions abroad, their
Cessations and pretended Peaces, which I shall take notice of more particularly
in their respective series of time.

The general Assembly met the 24th of October 1642; your Lordship says it
differed nothing from a Parliament, but that the Lords and Commons sat
together, and not in two Houses. Was this so inconsiderable a difference in the
Opinion of a Peer of England as well as Ireland, or fit for one of so noble
Extraction to be submitted to, against Honor, Law and right Reason. But the
truth is, and I speak it for the honor of the Nobility of Ireland, the Rebels
had not debauched enough of them, either for interest or number, to bear the
Countenance of a House of Peers, or to be of any considerable figure among that
People, who having cast off Majesty, could not be warmed by the beams thereof,
which I count the Nobility; but they resolved of course into common persons
again, and had but single Votes among the Crowd, instead of those Honorable
Privileges and Negative Voice, which their Ancestors had acquired as the just
reward of their faithfulness to the Crown in former times, and in all
Defections and Rebellions since the subjection of that Nation to England. And
this your Lordship ingeniously confesses (and says we see it) was a force-put
upon you, and you hoped in time the storm being passed, to return to your old
Government under the King. Here you own the being fallen from it, but could
your Lordship imagine, or any others believe, this Cob-web pretense possible,
were you not all engaged by the bond of an Oath to the contrary, and to
preserve your new upstart treasonable Model and Constitution; and that the
storm should never cease till you had by Arms attained a confirmation of all
that you had done, for which, by the said Oath, you renounced the receiving any
Pardon or Protection, but by your own Sword. But that Assembly differed also
from a Parliament in this, That it was called by a packt party of bloody
Papists in Rebellion and Confederacy, and had neither Legal nor Regal Authority.

But to conciliate, credit and belief, you add, That there were many learned in
the Law amongst you, whom you encouraged to keep you as near the old Government
as might be, holding to the Ancient Laws of the Land.

This is as improbable as the other, but if true, is a demonstration that Irish
Popish Lawyers, are the worst instruments that can be tolerated in Ireland.
And it is notorious in Fact, that these were the Men that did both contrive and
put in order the Rebellion, and frame their whole Constitution, and without
whose Council and Abilities (having had their Education in the Inns of Court of
England) they had never come out of that Chaos of Confusion, where they were at
first, or reduced their Affairs to a consistency, but had been quickly
mastered. And therefore I hope this hint concerning the Lawyers will awaken his
Majesty and Parliament of England, and the Government in Ireland, to provide
against the continuance of such dangerous instruments, as the Popish Lawyers
have showed themselves to be, and in probability will so continue; making use
of their Learning and Skill for subversion of Government and good Order: So
that Ireland is never like to be quiet if they be tolerated. Your Lordship
proceeds to tell us, that this Assembly without delay approved all the Council
had done, (how could they well in gratitude do less, being themselves a
Creature of that Councils making) and settled a Model of Government, viz. That
at the end of every General Assembly, the supreme Council should be confirmed
or changed, as they thought fit. That it should consist of Twenty five, six out
of each Province, three of the six still resident, the 25th was your Lordship,
with no relation to any Province, but to the Kingdom in general, etc. Your
Lordships Relation was a mock Image of his Majesty, which was also to the
Kingdom in general, and, but that it is not now my business, I could here
evince that this Constitution cast the over balance of the Government clearly
into the Irish hands, such of the old English Extraction as joined with them,
being Ciphers upon the matter, as it appeared afterward in practice: so
improbable was what your Lordship asserts, that if a Letter came to them
written in Irish, it would be wondered at, and hardly could one be found to read
it, unless you would confess, that those skilled in reading the Irish Language
are extinct; for the meerest Irish of that Kingdom, and all the Popish Clergy,
who (if any) are likliest to be skilled in it, were engaged in the Rebellion,
and constant promoters of it, having their Colleges and Monasteries in
Kilkenny, and all Cities and chief Towns under the Confederate Irish Power, and
wholly at their Command. For a close of this Paragraph, your Lordship says,
you were not in case to bring to Justice those that begun the Rebellion, but
you never saw any of them esteemed or advanced. This is strange, when Owen Roe
Oneal, Sir Phelemy Oneal, Con Oneal, the Mc. Donnels, Mc. Thomas, the Farrolls,
the Delyes, the Mc. Cartyes, Mc. Guires, Mc. Mahans, Fitzpatricks, Mc.
Gennis's; and generally those of the mere Irish septs and Families, were
chiefly trusted, whose names it were too tedious to repeat, but I have
Authentic Lists of them; but indeed I do believe the Confederates, even of
English Extraction, had as little will as power to question those that begun
the Rebellion; and to this day they are so far from any inclination to condemn
it, that all their Writings run in Justification of it; and I never yet met
with any that cordially seemed to repent it, or persuade others to it, except
only Peter Walsh, whom your Lordship calls your Ghostly Father Caron, and some
few Remonstrants with them, who condemning the Doctrines of Rebellion, King
killing, and Deposing, etc. do obliquely censure this Rebellion; and some of
them positively call the beginners and continuers thereof to repentance.

The rest of your Lordships Memoires is more History than Justification, as
well whilst you continued to serve under the Confederate Catholics, which was
till the Peace of 1646, proclaimed, as after, till you left Ireland, wherein
your Lordships part being mixed of Gallentry and Generosity in some instances,
as well as Severity and fierce Prosecution of the English in others, I will not
be a critical observer thereof, or lead any to envy your Lordship, the just
esteem of whatever you did honorably, though in an ill cause. But since your
Lordship lays some weight of merit upon the Cessation, and two Peaces of 1646,
and 1648, and expresses no unfavourable Opinion of that which goes by the name
of Glamorgan's Peace, and think much that the Irish their Estates were given
away by the Acts of Settlement, I shall only make some general Remarks upon
those particulars, and the whole state of that Rebellion, and so put an end to
your Lordships trouble and my own.

And first, I must observe upon the whole matter, that the Irish did the
English more hurt, and advantage themselves more by the Cessation and two first
Peaces, than ever they did or could do by open force after the first Massacre.
Upon this grounds the Lords Justices and Council, were from the beginning
averse to them; and for me to show the Design and Intrigue of the Cessation and
Peaces, which I can do by unquestionable Memorials and Records, will make a
great part of a Volumn, and cannot well come within the bounds of a Letter; but
when I have said all, I think fit to your Lordship, upon occasion of your
Letter, your Lordship who (as you were an Enemy, as keen as generous) having
been by your place and interest privy to all the Cabals and secret Councils
against the English and Protestants, being deeply engaged in the Roman
Catholic Confederacy; and any other Attempts against them, in what shape or
form soever they appeared) will I hope, if you find any thing written by me
questionable or doubtful in your opinion, favor me with your severest
Reflections thereupon; for as I design nothing but exact truth wherever it
light, so if by inadvertency or want of full information, I should err, or
come short in the least, your Lordship shall find me ready to retract or
supply, but never to persist in it.

Your Lordship knows as well as any man, that the Earl of Ormoud, made
afterward Marquess and Duke with the same Title, was the first of that Family
of the Botelers, that was Educated in the Protestant Religion; his Mother the
Lady Thurles, Brothers, Sisters, and all his Relations continuing Roman
Catholics, and in the Irish Quarters, and those able to bear Arms, as the Lord
Muskery, after Earl of Clancarty, and Colonel Fitzpatrick, his Brother in Law,
his Brother Colonel Richard Butler of Vilcash, and Colonel George Mathewes,
and other his Relations; as the Lords Mountgarret, Dunboyne, and diverse other
Lords, and others of his Name and Family, were Generals or Commanders of lower
Quality in the Rebels Army; so that his Lordship was upon the matter single in
any Duty and Allegiance to the Crown; all his Lordships Friends, Kindred and
Dependants, taking the contrary part; and his Lordship escaping soon after the
Rebellion to Dublin, only with the Kings Troop, which he Commanded, and some
Servants that attended him. The Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant, as he was
upon his Journey for Ireland, was discharged that Employment, to make way for
the Marquess of Ormond to succeed him, who had an unlimitted Commission sent
him, sole to examine the pretended Grievances of the Irish, and for making a
Cessation with the Rebels, which he did, and was after made Lord Lieutenant,
and concluded the two first Peaces beforementioned. I have heard Sir Philip
Percival, a very worthy Person and of a fair Estate, being asked why he would
by his Certificates of Defect of Stores, give countenance and furtherance to a
Cessation, which he knew could only advantage the Rebels, and be ruinous to the
English? Answer, The Stores were really wasted upon unprofitable, fruitless
Marches, and then his Certificates being required, he durst not (as an Officer)
refuse them, though he was aware of the use would be made of them.

To show your Lordship how the Cessation operated (laying aside at present, the
question of the warrantableness on necessity thereof) and that the two first
Peaces were against Law, and several Acts of Parliament, in both Kingdoms (and
upon that and other accounts, the validity thereof) I must take another
opportunity, when I may discourse things more fully with your Lordship. I can
now only briefly tell your Lordship, that all the Proceedings of the Rebels in
Arms, and all their Demands, were Treason: That the English and Protestants had
the Laws on their side, which the Irish by combination and force did break, and
designed wholly to subvert: That the Irish tolerated no Protestants in their
Quarters, though that Religion were the only legal Establishment; but seized
and forfeited all their Estates, whilst the Protestants afforded the measure
and benefit of the Laws to the Irish and Papists, even to those who had been in
Rebellion, whenever they came in or submitted.

It is not then to be wondered at, that the chief and most of the English
Nobility in Ireland, and the generality of English, Scotch, and Irish
Protestants of all qualities and degrees, sooner or later, opposed both the
Cessation and Peaces, as destructive to them, and derogatory to the Crown, in
which number we find, the Earls of Kildare, Thomond, Cork, Barrimore, Drogheda,
Donnagall, Claubrasill, Mount Alexander, etc. The Viscounts of Valentia,
Conoway, Ranelagh, Kinnelmeky, Shannon, etc. Barons or Lords Elsmond Juchequin,
Blaney, Broghill, etc. But it were endless to name all, and of no use to your
Lordship, who know this as well as I.

By this it appears how ungratefully the Irish did requite the Marquess of
Ormond, for his unwillingness that the whole Irish Nation should ruin
themselves by their persisting in Rebellion. And now, whether it was their vain
confidence to carry the day, or what else occasioned it, they lost the
opportunity of deliverance, which the Marquess of Ormond being related to so
many of them by Blood and Alliance, had compassionately designed for them,
though with great hardship and damage to the English. And whatever grounds the
Marquess of Ormond had for the Cessation and Peaces (by which he could have got
nothing, but would have incurred manifest loss) which it chiefly concerns
himself to vouch, that in the eye of the World he may stand clear, as a true
English Man and faithful Subject. It is apparent, that now by the Forfeiture
and Punishment of the Irish, his Lordship and Family are the greatest gainers
of the Kingdom, and have added to their Inheritances vast scopes of Land, and a
Revenue three times greater than what his Paternal Estate was before the
Rebellion; and most of his increase is out of their Estates who adheared to the
Peaces, or served under his Majesty's Ensigns abroad; which shows, that
whatsoever of Compassion or Natural Affection, or otherwise, might incline him
to make those Peaces, he is in Judgment and Conscience against them, and so
has since appeared, and has advantage by their laying aside. The like may be
said of the Duke of York, the Earl of Arlington, Lord Lanesborough, and others,
who have great Estates of the Irish freely given them upon the same foundation.
So that it is to be hoped whether the Bills already come over to confirm the
forfeited Rebels Estates to English and Protestants, will do the work or no:
That his Grace, or whosoever shall succeed him in the Lieutenancy, will in time
transmit such Bills as shall do that work effectually, and unite and strengthen
his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, to oppose and break the further Designs of
that Rebellious Generation, which they will never keep free from, so long as
they acknowledge and obey a Foreign Head.

I shall make no reflection at this time upon the Peace called Glamorgan's
Peace, but what your Lordship gives occasion for by mentioning it, viz. That it
was the most destructive of all to the English and Protestants, but suited best
with the Confederate Design of establishing the Romish Idolatry, which your
Lordship in your Oath of Association engaged as deep in as any, excepting the
first foundation laid in Blood, a fit basis for a Faction, only supported by
Fraud and Cruelty.

One passage in your Lordships Memoires I cannot but take notice of, for your
Honor, as an English Man, That when the Marquis of Ormond in his extremity,
between the Nuncio party and the Parliament of England, asked your Lordship
with which of his Enemies he should treat. You answered, That you were
confident he had resolved that before, there being no question in the case;
when it was no question with your Lordship, I wonder how it came to be one with
his Lordship; but the success of your Council was happy, and founded upon solid
grounds of Reason.

Your Lordship sees I can but glance at particulars in this Letter, and being
(by so noble a Pens engaging in justification of a Quarrel, which casts
reflection upon all that took contrary part to the Irish, of which number I was
one) contrary to my first intention upon the matter, necessitated (in
vindication of as just a cause as ever was managed under the Sun) to hasten out
the last part of the general History of Ireland first (Wherein I shall so
impartially make relation beyond all possibility of contradiction, that I doubt
not your Lordship will reflect with remorse upon what you have done and
written, wherein I differ from you, and the World will know exactly the truth
of that sad story.) I shall in the mean time, only as in an abstract, ser these
things before you, and upon the whole matter in answer to your Lordships
specious justification, and for your present mortification, let you know that
by Judgment of the King and his Privy Councils and Parliaments in both
Kingdoms. You are involved in the guilt of Treason, and under forfeiture of all
you have, and as a friend, yet advise you to get his Majesty's Pardon, if the
Acts of Parliaments have not precluded you; for its more than I know if all
your Lordships active Services in Ireland be not yet liable to the utmost
penalties and Severities of the Law. So far are they from being fit to be
offered as entertainment to his Majesty by an Epistle Dedicatory, as your
Lordship has done.

I find your Lordship in several places reflects upon those who broke the first
Peace, and call it unparalleled breach of Faith, punished by heavy Judgments
from Heaven; and yet this was the Confederates own Act. But as if the breach of
the Oath of Allegiance by the Irish, and their treacherous and bloody defection
from the Crown of England, were a Peccadillo, your Lordship hardly takes notice
of it, but repines at the forfeiture of Estates grounded thereupon, though God
and Man agreed in that Vengeance and Punishment.

And let this Rebellion be compared to all before it, there will not appear,
since the English Title to Ireland, so just and clear grounds of forfeiture and
extirpating a Nation, as have done upon this; but the King has mingled Mercy
with Justice; and though by a Providence from Heaven to the English, the
Marquesses of Ormond and Clanrickard, his Majestles chief Governors, encouraged
the Irish to keep up a War against the English, wherein they were so much
hardened to their ruin, that they were at length entirely subdued, without
condition to any save for life, and left to be as miserable as they had made
others in all other respects, yet multitudes of them have been restored, and
must yet own their Lives and Estates to the Clemency of the King, and the
mildness of the English Government, which they had cast off, and put themselves
under a Foreign Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. The
Wisdom of God thus punishing one sin of theirs with another, till they are
scarce a People; and the English and Protestant interest never more flourishing
in that Kingdom. Insomuch, that it would be now the greatest folly imaginable
in the Government of England and Ireland, ever to suffer the Papists to grow
capable of raising such a Rebellion again, which they will certainly do when
able; Bigottery and sottish Ignorance, both of Priests and People in Religion,
being the growing root of mischief there.

Upon the whole, since the Cobweb excuses your Lordship has made, cannot cover
the Blood that has been shed, or bring quiet to the Consciences of any that
had hand therein; and since your Lordship so well knows the Temper and
Constitution of the Irish, by your long continuance and interest among them, I
cannot but yet hope and therefore do with the most friendly adjurations beseech
your Lordship herein) that the zeal, which you yet seem to have for the King
his Laws, and the English Government, will incline you to let him know (the
truth you cannot be ignorant of) that they are a Nation never to be trusted
till reformed, that so his Majesty and his English Subjects may run no more
hazards of suffering by confidence in them, or regard to their Crocodile Tears
and groundless Complaints, by which they have deceived the English in all
times. And that by your Repentance, imitating your Ghostly Father Peter Walsh,
his Advice to his Country Men for Repentance and change of Principles, your
Lordship may give another instance to the World that Allegiance and the
Religion you profess may dwell in the same Breast, then which nothing can more
conduce to divert the Irish from future Attempts of Rebellion.

My Lord, I find many Queries fit to be made on your Memoires, and many other
particulars; a Redire therein, but you will, perhaps, think I have done too
much already. I shall therefore reserve these to another opportunity, and here
close in the wonted manner, with the assurance of my being (saving in the Irish
Confederacy and Matter of Religion)

My Lord, Your Lordships Affectionate Friend and Servant.

Postscript.
THis Letter was written, as appears, in August 1680, presently after the Earl
of CASTLE-HAVEN had Published his Memoires, with a Dedication only to the King;
but since his Lordships Receipt of this Letter, he was, it seems, convinced of
the necessity of writing the Epistle to the Reader, in Condemnation of the
Irish Rebellion, which his Lordship has since caused to be Printed, with the
said Memoires.

FINIS.

