MATTHEW. 14. 30.

London Printed for Henry Brom 1680.

F. H. Van. Houe Schup:



RELIGIO Clerici.

(...).

Epictet.

Take heed unto thy self and unto thy Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 16. LONDON: Printed
for Henry Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

TO THE Equal READER.
I Desire thee, Good Reader, (if thou must needs be judging) to suspend thy
Censure till thou have read the last Line of this little Book; or, if thou
think it not worth thy while to read all, prithee let me beg of thee not to
meddle with it at all. For that which may to a slight glance on single pieces
and Paragraphs seem disjoynted and irrelative, will perhaps in the whole appear
(to a steady Eye) to have suitable Symmetry and due Connection.

Some things, and those of moment too, I have but toucbt with short Hints, as
leaving the rest to the enlargement and amplification of thy better Ingenuity.

Brevis esse laboro, obscurus fio. Horat.

I design no Contest or Cavil in this Pygmie-Treatise, but a slight and sudden
Pourtraict in Miniature of naked Truth, as she lately appeared to the Author
in a thoughtful Retirement of his for a few days. If therefore some Lines in
this Draught seem (to Expert Artists) but very meanly descriptive of the Charms
and divine Excellencies of her immortal Beauty, they must pardon the young
Limner, since so much dazzling Luster might possibly confound him, and make his
unpractised hand shake.

Totus tremo horreoque postquam aspexi hanc. Terent.

And besides, this is but an Essay of Art, mere Trial of Skill, and the first
time that his Pencil has been public.

Thou know, Reader, that let Sham-truths be drawn as severally as men's
fancies and humors please, (yet) she herself has nevertheless one regular,
uniform, eternal Face. And there is most certainly such a thing as right
Reason, tho rational men (which I Will tell thee is very odd and amazing) by the
very self-same pretended Guide follow several distinct tracks, and all but one
Erroneous.

But thou may as well argue, that the Pole Star is not steady, since many are
bewildered and bemir'd by an Ignis fatuus, as rashly suspect true Reason,
because now adays Errors of all sorts do impudently assume its shape.

And there is as undoubtedly such a thing as true Religion, although ('it is
monstrous to consider that) we are at this very day, after near 1700 years
acquaintance, as hotly disputing where, and what she is, as if no man yet had
ever had a full and perfect view of her face.

This makes some licentious persons now a days, willing to suspect that all
Religion is but the general Laws of Nature, and (at the best) they reduce
Christianiry it self to the first stage from whence it long ago set out, viz.
Common Morality.

Disputes, Doubts, and Contests will, I fear, never cease, as long as Ambition,
Avarice, and Impiety bear sway in the world. But should perverse differences by
endless superfetations swarm still daily more and more (which God prevent) yet
may the most doubtful ignorant Soul take safe Sanctuary in this last reserve of
irrefragable Argument, viz. to follow still with generous and steadfast duty,
our Royal, our Noble, our Honorable, and our Reverend Learned Leaders, (till
we can demonstrate that they are in the wrong:) for thus at the very worst we
can hazard but a possible, pardonable mistake, and that too in dutiful
prosecution of our Christian Obedience, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.

To conclude, Reader, it is my hearty wish, that the meanness and impertinence,
the brevity and narrowness of this weak shallow discourse (that follows) may
not in the least eclipse the glory of its Illustrious Title: For I designed at
first (however I have failed in the publication) to speak to no body, of no
body, and for no body but my self. All its Errors I am ready to acknowledge,
which I fear are not a few; it being the Product of a dull melancholy Retreat,
and the hasty Abortive Result of a laboring mind, without borrowing the usual
help and concurrence of other men's thoughts: I only am therefore blameable and
responsible for all the mistakes.

I easily foresee, Reader, that some malevolent persons will (with railing and
detraction) tell thee, that my very handling it has soiled the dignity of the
subject. It Is true, I cannot prevent uncharitable Aspersions; but to the wise,
the good, and moderate, I say, What man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of man that is in him? 1 Cor. 2. 11. As for the rest,

Odi profanum Vulgus and arceo.

RELIGIO CLERICI.
IT proved matter of no small wonder to a good old Heathen, when he observed
such various appearances of different Opinions, Humors and propensions in his
Countrymen of Greece; especially too when he considered how that all these
Contrarieties and Disproportions proceeded from men begot, born, and bred in
the same Climate, under the same Laws, Constitutions, and Customs, and the
source of all whose Inclinations and passions resulted from one common
simplicity of the very same specific humane nature. But if he was puzzled in
the resolution of this scruple then, to what a far higher degree of
astonishment would his Admiration have risen, if he had lived in these days of
ours, when (as if some extraordinary malignant Conjunction in the Heavens did
in spite produce a general division on Earth, especially) in our poor Island
there are as many different Passions and Affections, Plots and Agitations,
Factions and Fashions, Opinions and Religions, almost as men. And when too the
Reasons and Advantages for Unity and Agreement both in Principle and Practice,
are far greater, and of a stamp more divine, than ever our Heathens Age or
Country could pretend to.

There are two or three Considerations, that might easily remove all this man's
Amazement at the different Phaenomena's of his Countrymens Carriage and
Conversation.

For, to be begotten and born in the same way and manner, Educated in the same
Country, and wearing all the same common humane nature, are concurrences it is
true that might happily cause some faint resemblances, but could not reasonably
be expected to create such a Unity of temper, as to counterballance those many
other accidents that urge the contrary.

The way of Man's Generation, and its attending Circumstances, seem alike, it is
true; but without doubt there is a certain Magical Influence of nature (derived
from Celestial Motions, or Extraduce) that tempers us all diversely in our very
fieri, and gives each of us a several tincture whilst we lie loose in our first
principles: and thus each Individual being blended in a different fashion by
Natures Mysterious Art (as I may say) it proves as difficult to find two
Constitutions, as two Faces exactly alike.

From this various Contexture proceed our respective humors and Complexions,
which often prove a more forcible cause of our Opinions and Passions, and of
the dissimilitudes and contrarieties of them, than bare Reason and Freewill: It
certainly strongly influences those faculties in their operations, and in a
greater measure too, than many weak and unwary Mortals apprehend, to whom
ignorance in this point proves oftentimes a most unspeakable delusion and
prejudice.

From this secret work of our first nature it is, that Man is, (as it were) a
species to Man, and our difference is more than that of Numerical.

And by this means our Heathens Countrymen, (having no infallible rule of
Knowledge, nor steady guide of their Actions) might well be as different in
their Opinions and Practices, as they were in Natural Complexion, by which
their Reason and Will was so strongly led and biased.

For alas, their Reason was dull and blunt, having no better edge than what it
procured by frequent Collision and reflection on its self; by all which
notwithstanding, it could never arrive (even in the best of them) to so much
brightness and clearness, as to guide and fix them in the one steady Truth, (in
pursuit of which they ran into a thousand Superstitious and Idolatrous Errors)
nor to so much strength as to hold them to one constant regular Tenor of
Goodness and Justice.

Nor indeed was it possible it ever should; for they poor Creatures had as
large a dose of Natutural Corruption and infection derived from their unknown
Parent Adam, as we, and yet were destitute of those helps and antidotes that
have by Gods grace allaied the mortal malignity of the venom in us, and
lessened much that dominion and power, which Error and Vice naturally had over
the Reason and Will of all men before the appearance and Doctrine of the holy
Jesus.

But again, my honest Heathen never thought of the vast number of their
respective Gods and Temples, where each man worshipped this or that Deity as
his fancy led him, or the Choice and Custom of the City or Country directed
and required: surely no small difference in men's Manners and Opinions arose
from this.

But farther still, Greece was Cantoned out into many petty Polities, and
independent Commonwealths, governed by their proper distinct Laws and
Constitutions: this too must needs create dissimilitudes as to Civil
Observances, Customs, Practices, and Interests; though the common Education of
the Grecians, as to the main, might be much alike, which he urges, etc.

And lastly, the several parts men acted in their respective Political
capacities, and the many different Occurrences and Emergencies that daily
attend diversely the Life and Action, Commerce and Business of each particular
person, must accordingly modifie the Manners, Qualities, and Fashions of men.

When I weigh these Circumstances in my Authors Age and Country, truly his
wonder ceases to be mine, and a far greater arises: Miror magis undique nostris
usque adeo Virgil. Ecl. 1.
turbatur agris.

I wonder much more at the many diversities and divisions in our own Climate,
this poor Island, where most or all of the other reasons and occasions of
difference wholly cease: And I loose my self in a Maze and Labyrinth of
thought, whilst I strive to pursue the genuine cause of our diverse Opinions and
Practices, when (as one would think) all Reasons imaginable concur for Union
and Harmony.

We acknowledge all one God and Jesus, and have all one revealed will of that
God done into plain good English, free of distracting ambiguities (like the
Heathen Oracles) or perplexed and obscure significations.

We have all one and the same gracious King and Governor, the same Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, made by one consent of our ownselves, and not imposed
at the Arbitrary discretion of another: We have all one common Interest to
preserve Property and Peace, and are all shut up by Nature, and enclosed in one
Island; as if she designed universal Concord and Likeness, in exclusion of all
Foreign varieties and mixtures.

We have all one common Nature as Men, consisting of Reason and Will, the
Essential Faculties of one simple Essence the Soul; their respective objects
too are One, True, and Good: And we have all equally one Infallible Guide to
both these, the Book of God.

And yet from all these Essential simplicities, environed on all sides with
Circumstances pointing at Unity; through an odd Caprice of ill manage, and by a
monstrous Equivocal Generation, arise thousands of diversities.

The Reason of Men (in itself undoubtedly the same) shall yet, in disquisition
of its own object, Truth, make innumerable Excursions; I mean, as many men
shall have so many opinions about a single Verity; which is impossible, if they
did not act in spite of Nature, and argue more with their Will than
Understanding.

For, Positis omnibus ad agendum requisitis, Truth displayed is as much the
necessary object of our Understanding, as Light is of Eyes open and sound.

I confess endless Evasions, and contrary plausibilities may be opposed to
Truth, though never so clear; but it is apparent then, that Hypocrisy and
Subtlety, Arrogance and Obstinacy, not Reason or Judgment, hold the Cudgels.
And hence swarms, that daily spurious Issue of Answers upon Answers, and
Rejoynders upon Rejoynders, which our Modern Dissenters oppose to the Sober
Assertions and Loyal Vindications of our Church and King. Answers indeed they
call them, and they are so as far as the Title Page goes, but no farther, alas!

I have methinks so good an opinion of the Judgment of two or three of the
chief Oracles that head and lead our modern Schismatics, that I will never
grant their private thoughts and public writings to run parallel: such strong
and plain truths as are daily urged to them, must of necessity carry
Confutation (and should of right Conviction too) along with them.

No, no, they are loath to leave their old Associates, and a shame-fac'd
reluctance restrains them from giving themselves the Lie: They will not now
desert the old Cause, though she have lost the field Spiritual and Temporal
too; nor lay down their Weapons, though Conquered, and generously received to
Grace.

But by their leave, if this be true, the Case is worse and worse; their Faith
is Faction, their Reason Rancour, and their Courage Contradiction. And we must
beware of such sly Combatants; for though they have lost the Field, they may
still by Stratagem gain the Battle: Such Exploits have been before. We fairly
Conquered them once, it is true; but not following Victory home, we now run the
same Fate, and suffer the same Judgment the Israelites did, by permitting the
Canaanites to dwell among them, viz. many of us have been enticed to go a
whoring after their Gods, and as the Angel told the people at Bochim, they
Judge. Chap. 2. v. 3.
are left to be thorns in our sides.

It Is now 1700 years very near, since Christianity was promulgated; and not
much less, since the true Model and Platform of it was delivered into our
hands, to be for ever the Architype, Rule and Standard of Faith and Practice.
And yet from this plain and uniform Model, designed for the help and rule of
our Edification, have in all Ages been drawn by the warm fancies of busy
Enthusiasts, and the like, such monstrous Medlies, and odd Landskips of
Opinions, as (in another kind) the most extravagant Conceptions of Poets and
Painters have never equaled. And truly I think one and the other have some
grounds much alike for their Whimsies; I am sure they have each of them had too
much of one privilege, and that is the Quidlibet audendi Horat. de art. Poet.
Potestas.

Christianity, I say, is now almost 1700 years old; and though it, as its
Author, is ever one and the same, yet what by the Supineness of its true, and
what by the devices of its pretended Professors, it is at this day so
overgrown with thorns and briars, and the mossy Excrescences of rotten and
Corrupted Skulls, that (had not our God been very gracious) we should hardly
distinguish and discern its genuine beauty and Native Luster through the
Rubbish and Barricade of Schism and Heresy.

I always thought Gods holy word so plain, that to invent an Heterodox
Doctrine, we must do a violence to that, and our own Reason too: And yet what
nice diffections have been made of these Scriptures, by too bold and curious
Inspectours into the Secrets of God? How many Texts have they set upon the
Rack, and endeavored by cruel and unnatural distortions, to make them say as
they would have them, and confess what they never knew? from whence have
followed such rents and dislocations in some Members of our Religion, as (I
fear) are almost become past Cure.

I would fain know what one thing material has been discovered by the noise
and bustle of all these busy and subtle Pates, that was not as well or better
known in the very first Centurie. I believe that in all the whole prodigious
Catalogue of Voluminous Tracts, and labored Controversies, (enough at this day
to make Joh. Chap. last v. last.
good St. John's Hyperbole) you cannot find one new Truth of any import or
significancie to our Religion, which was not known 1500 years ago. On the
contrary, I am sure they have, together with a thousand falsities, invented
perplexities and empty trifles without number, which the purest ages of
Christianity never dreamt of.

Some have stretched their brains to grasp Mysteries beyond their reach, and
would crowd the Infinite Essence, and Ineffable Attributes of that great God
into the senceless rules and terms of their Schools, whom the Heaven of Heavens
cannot contain.

What horrid Heresies have men run into, by presuming to fathom the Mystery
of the blessed Trinity! and whilst they have forcibly pressed Reason on to take
as large a step as Faith, they have stumbled and fell, to their utter confusion.

My humble (yet steadfast) Faith in the hidden Things of God, can rest fully
satisfied in the (...), without presuming (to no purpose) so far as the (...).
nay, and my Reason too (if it must needs be meddling) does here most justly
acquiesce, without farther scrutiny, in this conclusion; It Is certainly so,
because God has said it.

And thus I can easily believe that the Godhead consists of Three Persons,
without the help of (...), persona or suppositum: and the Incarnation of my
Savior is a Mystery indeed in Divinity, but none in Philosophy to me; for that
tells me, 'twas as easy (to speak more humano) for the Almighty to set Nature
at work in Holy Mary's Womb to frame a man of her Seed, as to make a Woman out
of the side of Adam.

But it is my opinion, that the truest Faith supersedes all arguing about the
Mysteries of our Religion; and when St. Peter bids us be ready to give a
reasonable account, it is not of fathomless Secrets, but of our Hope and 1 Pet.
3. 15.
Faith in Jesus. Yet that Faith (I am persuaded) was always most acceptable
with our Savior, that acknowledged him with a plain and simple sincerity,
without a why, or wherefore: And I believe the nimble Confession of Nathaniel,
Joh. 1. 49, 50.
though upon a slight occasion, was better approved of by Christ, than the
cautious proceed, and deliberate advances of Judicious Nichodemus. 3 John 9.


However, I like not that high flight of the Father neither, Certum est, quia
impossible est; nor his who said, there were not Impossibilities enough in
Religion for an active Faith: such Hyperbolick strains do Christianity no
kindness I am sure, especially in the Mohammedan and Pagan world.

For were Socrates, Cicero, or Seneca now alive, I might with far better
success attempt their Conversion, by the rehearsal of Christ's Sermon on the
Mount, or St. Paul's Epistles, than by assaulting rashly their unprepared Reason
with the difficulties and seeming contradictions of the Athanasian Creed.

It can no ways properly be said, that there is any one Impossibility in the
Bible: For if the Letter and matter of fact be true, (as it may on that score
justly claim a stronger title to verity than any Book of longer or later date,
which yet we own without scruple) then the Concession that 'twas of Divine
Inspiration easily follows; and then the consequence is as necessary, That
whatever it contains must be of infallible truth and certainty.

And what if we cannot solve its Mysteries? Their first design was to be
objects of Christian Faith and humble acquiescence, not of Pert and Curious
Argumentation. If we will believe nothing, but what we can make out, and clear
of doubts, (ay and strong ones too) even in things obvious and familiar, and
with which we converse every day, we must shut the whole Visible World out of
doors, and sit down content with absolute Skepticism.

I declare I have as even a notion of Spirit as of Body, and understand
Cogitation fully as well as Extension: I am no more privy to the Mechanism of
my own hearts Motion, than I am to the Mystery and feats of Memory and
Imagination, or to the way how my Soul by a detachment of nimble Emissaries,
commands my foot to move in an instant. In a word, I understand nothing of this
kind by adequate and Commensurate Science, but by Philosophic guess, or
Allegorick representations. 11 Eccle. 5.


I remember that a now Reverend and most Learned Prelate, (at whose private
Lectures I had the honor long ago to attend) amongst other most excellent
notices, told us, that Immaterial, Infinite, and the like, were Negatives
indeed in words, (for the barrenness of Language, and our own weakness and
ignorance) but properly and in themselves they were absolute Positivities; and
again, that their Contraries, Finite and Material, were pure Negations in
respect of the other.

Descartes, who opened the way to his Philosophy by stopping his Ears and
closing his Eyes, and stripping himself naked to bare Cogitation, found out one
Original Truth (as he thought) viz. Cogito, Ergo Sum: what a prodigious
fallacy past upon this acute man! he might as well (in that case) have argued,
Curro, Ergo Sum; the argument had been as good, though it lay at a little
farther distance. Thus are we all weak and blind in Natural and Divine Secrets
and Mysteries. 8 Eccle. 17.


The Canon of Holy Scripture is without doubt so plain, as to Essentials of
Faith and Practice, that I cannot persuade my self to believe there was ever
such a thing as Nuda Haeresis: I am rather inclined to think that Secular
Motives of pride, discontent, and avarice, raised the boiling ferment in
ambitious and restless heads; as was most notoriously apparent in the business
of Arrius. This Spirit that agitated in the first Ages of Christianity, works
now still in the Children of disobedience: And when good and Learned men offer
at a Cure by public writing or dispute, the bad success and fruitless
consequence shows, that the wrong remedy is applied; the malady lying more in
the perverseness of the Will, than the mistake of the Intellect.

And by this means, Demonstration itself often fails of Conviction; and the
strongest and plainest Truths urged home to Schismatics, stay not, but are
sent back daily in a faint retort, stuffed more with weak Evasion, and peevish
Cavil, than Right or Reason. Just thus it is at this very Juncture, and (if in
this case Inferences de facto are good consequences) is like always to be.

I wonder that Constantine should so far countenance that damnable Heresy of
Arrius, as to allow it the dangerous scope of a free Debate in the Council of
Nice. Had not Royal Restraints, and legal Penalties, been a safer and more
Orthodox way to repress an Error so palpable, that it carried its Confutation
in its own face? No doubt but some Plenipotentiaries of Heaven itself assisted
at that Spiritual Treaty, yet (as far as I understand) their strong and zealous
Arguments could hardly reduce the contrary faction to an amicable and Christian
compliance; whom pride had fore-armed with resolution to demur at
Demonstration, and cavil at Conviction. However, with much ado, after a tedious
debate, they composed the Catholic Creed, that bears the name.

Disputes in Religion are often fruitless (because improper) Applications, and
serve but to increase the heat and feud of Opiniatours: They may indeed confirm
the Right, but very rarely convince the Erroneous party.

I conceive the Emperor was in a manner forced to give this Heresy so much
loose Line as a fair debate; its Contagion began to rage in the Christian
world, and like the Jewish Idolatry, it had seated itself in the high Places
too: besides, its high pretenses might incline him to think the occasion worthy
the solemnity of that famous confluence: for although the contest was comprised
within the narrow compass of two Greek words, yet the controverted point was of
no less importance, than the Divinity of our God and Savior. Yet that all this
was the wrong remedy for that disease, appears plainly from its breaking out
with re-doubled heat and violence in the succeeding Reign of Constantius.

The edge and keenness of our present divisions, we may chiefly date from the
late Act of Toleration: Such allowances proceed from Royal mercy and
tenderness, it is true, but the mischiefs that always ensue are innumerable, and
grow to a formidable stature by insensible degrees, till at length they suck
themselves into a state and habit strong enough for Rebellion, even from the
breasts of Royal Indulgence. My opinion is, (in all deep humility) that by such
condescentions of Grace, Princes act against their own power, and elude their
own Authority; they give License to worship the righteous God a wrong way, and
establish Schism in Church and State by a Law. Concessions of this kind
Extorted (as it were) from Royal Clemency and pity may indeed confirm present
Impunity, but cannot give Innocence to Dissenters: To whom we may boldly and
justly rejoyn, whenever they plead the Kings Grace, in the words of our Savior
to 19 Matt. 8.
the Pharisees, Moses because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you this,
(to put away your Religion) but from the beginning it was not so.

It Is now a Solecism in Christianity to talk of a weak Brother, and Liberty of
Conscience is nonsense totidem verbis. God forbid that at this day, after 1600
years, there should remain any doubts or scruples unresolved in our Religion,
when it is openly displaied to the view of all men, without shades or
obscurities, in most clear and lively colors.

If the good and wholesome Act for Uniformity had continued still in full force,
it had in time found men's Purses more tender than their Consciences: At least,
it would have done so much good, that the old Pique had been buried with this
Generation, and the next would have Conformed of course. Whereas now I fear
this new Liberty has fixed the Contagion in the very Vitals of our dissenting
brethren, and their Children will be tainted Ex traduce.

Disputandi pruritus est scabies Ecclesiae, said a Learned Countryman of ours:
It has certainly been a great promoter of Schism, and the fuel of Faction. To
see the Elaborate follies of the subtle Schoolmen, and the quirks of Polemical
Divinity (what an odd word that is to affix to the plain and easy Religion of
the meek and humble Jesus?) their curious niceties in researches of matters,
either altogether above, or else not worth our knowledge; their pretty Mazes
and Labyrinths drawn by Art in puzzled and bewildred Thought; but above all,
their slippery evasions, and nimble escapes, (like Hercules's Protean
Antagonist) when pressed hard by close and solid reasoning, this is all matter of
as great diversion, as it had been to have been present at the odd posture of
Circumstances in the first confusion of Tongues at Babel.

It Is pretty to observe their Schools; in what order and awful silence
non-Entities sit ranged into Classes according to their proficiency or quality,
and not one dares move till called out to Say, and then they speak in the
Language of Vtopia. They can (with strange dexterity) make an apposite Answer
to an unintelligible Question, and will argue pro and con whole hours together,
about what was never seen, felt, heard or understood. It Is impossible to pose
them; for when they cannot enodate your Argument, they serve you with a
distinction the same trick that Alexander did the Gordian knot. They can as
readily describe the parts and proportions of a Chimaera, as you can of a man
or a horse. But their masterpiece lies in this, they can understand words that
signify nothing, or (which is much the same) signify they know not what; and
yet they have a slight to make the same words mean any thing. But this you will
say is very strange; take any common ordinary truth or Proposition, strip it
naked of its plain English, and send it to be dressed in their Fire-room, its
Port and Garniture shall immediately become so majestic, that (though you were
never so well acquainted with it before) you shall gaze at it with as much
Ignorance, as the honest Countryman did at the Powder of Album-Graecum, before
he understood the trick on it.

These men can baffle Truth in what fashion and to what degree you please; as
also advance a Falsitie how far you will, to probabile, verisimile, and (upon a
good occasion) to absolute demonstration.

From their Repositories, men of ambitious and working Pates have been
furnished with Tools and Instruments of all sorts and sizes, to form and
fashion, file and vary Doctrines and Opinions suitable to the design and work
in hand: Here are Moulds fitly prepared to cast any Schism or Heresy in; and
in short, all Enginery and Artillery that the Church (militant too much in this
sense) can possibly want upon any occasion, they can readily produce out of
their Polemick Magazines.

With what sly and subtle Artifices these men have infected Christianity, or
furnished others with means and methods of doing so, is beyond my power to
declare; yet I doubt not but the spring and head of our many modern Sects and
Schisms might in some measure be traced up to these Fountains.

The Romanists I am sure are very sensible of the great advantages their
monstrous Tenets receive from hence; they observe it seldom to fail at a dead
lift; by its assistance they often confound the simple, and not seldom amuse
even the more knowing. However, they can make a safe retreat hither, when
beaten out of the field; and their boldest Champions, to avoid the danger of a
close pursuit, muce nimbly, and sculk in the subterfuges of this thorny
wilderness.

It comes in my head here, to say, (though it is not much to the purpose, you will
think, but that is all one; and yet you may perceive it bears some squint
relation to this discourse too) I have often admired why Aristotle's Philosophy
should be (to so great a degree) the chief darling of so many Learned and
Reverend men among us. They deduce all things from his Text, reduce all to him,
as the infallible Test of universal truth. I am but a very mean Judge, I
confess, but yet I know there are some things in him very weak and shallow,
many palpable Errors and notorious falsities; and in what he is most
Excellent, the same has been long ago, and is now found in two or three other
Languages, without any the least dependence on the Philosopher, and this in a
far greater degree of perfection too. But alas, the choicest truths and best
Observations in Italian, French, Latin, or English, relish not near so well,
nor have they half the poynancy, as when served up with Grecian garnish after
the Attick Mode.

I had sometime since an occasional discourse with a good and Learned man, who,
upon quoting some saying of Aristotle's, immediately (with emphatick admiration)
subjoyns, The very same, says he, with that of the Apostle! I have quite
forgot the words, but 'twas some moral doctrinal Precept I remember, which a
thousand men might have spoken as well as the Philosopher; such Propositions
being (we all know) the impresses and common notions of Rational Nature: but
Aristotle spoke Greek too, and therefore imitated the Apostle a twofold way.

Who would have thought that old Homer should ever have arrived to so much
Honor and Excellency as Evangelizans imports! that late good man and excellent
Grecian was in so high a degree his admirer, that thinking he deserved better
preferment than the first of the first rank of Poets, he would needs place him
among the Gospellers too. We are all apt to admire, then dote upon, and at
length Idolize this or that part of Learning that has mostly engaged our Time,
Labor, and Study: The reason is obvious, because in that we can play a game to
advantage with any Antagonist. So natural even to the best of men is Vainglory.

Not but that I am a great admirer of Learning, and adore it at an awful
distance almost to Superstition: Learning, I say, not in hypothetick fancies,
dry empty Notions, and fruitless researches, but in solid practical Truths,
reductive to the service of God, and the innocent profits and pleasures of
Humane Life. The rest may be the diversion and accomplishment of such as enjoy
Wealth, Ease, and Vacancy: but for my part, I declare, I had rather feel the
warmth of the Sun, when I am very cold, than know whether Ptolomie, Tycho, or
Copernicus come nearest the truth. For when Wise and Learned men are poor and
hungry, (which God knows too often happens) I observe that they study more to
find out a good Dinner, than the Longitude; and to Compass a round sum of
Money, rather than to square the Circle.

I observe too, that young men fledged and flown from their nest of Notions in
the University, when they come abroad quickly find, that Mathematical
Demonstrations, and Logical Axioms are the same neither genere, specie, nor
numero, with Meat, Drink, and Clothes; this engages them to a study of that
which bears a nearer relation to self-preservation, and they (for the most
part) take the old road of Mankind to purchase honest profit, and the Comforts
of life, without much consulting their old Acquaintances Aristotle, Plato,
Descartes, or the like. For as a Modern Satyrist says well in that,

Forcing our Nature never yet did good;
We must fall back to our old flesh and blood.
This puts me in mind of the real disgrace and detriment our Church suffers,
by reason of the superfluous number of young Divines; some with slender parts
and mean Abilities; others without Experience and Conduct; and in these latter,
a rude mass of barren unadjusted Notions, gives such an unsavory dash, and
ridiculous odd kind of Air to their discourse and deportment, as always minds
me of what Charron says, Fair De la Sagesse Live. 3. Chap. 13.
quelque chose en Clerk, c'est le fair en Sot.

But the worst is, that many are without Employment suitable to the great
Character they bear, how slightly soever esteemed of in our degenerate days.
From each of these, many great mischiefs and inconveniences follow. How many
are forced to take shelter as 1 Samuel 2. 36.
Tutours or Chaplains in ill-affected Families, where their Stipend being often
Arbitrary, and their dependence almost necessary, they are obliged to do their
work after what fashion they please, in whose hands their Salary and livelihood
wholly depends: And when they have served the turn they were first entertained
for here, (or perhaps for some little peevish Caprice of the Godly old Lady)
they are forced to march off with a cold Compliment: But if in this devout
Family they have gotten some proficiencie in Extempore praying, prating pretty
well without the Book, and the like, they are excellently appointed to be
received into some blind Assembly or petty Conventicle, at least as
Probationers, and so on, etc.

Others again cross the Channel, (presuming, forsooth, that they may see
fashions on free-cost) with Omnia mea mecum porto; but when Cold and Hunger
pinches, and the Philosophic Portmantle comes to be examined, not one rag or
single stiver is to be found amongst all Bias's baggage. Then they are forced
to express their wants very politely in the universal Language, and (like
Vagabond Polanders here) they beg forma pauperis Scholastici at some Convent or
Monastery; where (as the case now stands) the matter a hundred to one comes to
a bargain, and they prove Converts: and so having in time imbibed pernicious
Principles, as well as learned the art of putting them in practice, fraught
with mischievous Machinations, and seditious designs, they are delegated hither.

But I fear the Air of old England does not reduce one of twenty at their
arrival to such an happy reconversion, as by especial Influence it did the good
Dr.

But a Malady beyond all redress is the near dependence our Clergy have for
the most part upon Lay-Patrons and Benefactours: The servile awe and confusion
that possesses the young Divine whilst he Preaches before them, is altogether
inconsistent with that modest boldness and temperate Assurance that ought (of
necessity) to attend the Word, whether we inform or reprove. For if by chance
our youth touch never so little upon what thwarts the private opinion, or gauls
any one irregular practice of his Patron (though in never so general and
distant a way) he shall be sure of such a sour look, and correcting regard
from his Worship at Dinner, as shall quite dash the Countenance, and turn the
stomach of our new dignifie, maugre the comfortable accession of the late
Benefice.

In this Case I wish all men were as happy as my self, in bearing relation to a
most Orthodox, Loyal, and pious honorable good Gentleman, etc.

To conclude all this, our own Soldiers for want of due pay and encouragement,
turn often Renegadoes, and by deserting us become so many fresh supplies to our
sworn Enemies the Pirates of Rome and Geneva. This advantage (superadded to the
force of the old Pique) enables them not only to fight at distance, but makes
them so hardy as to board our torn and leaky vessel, the poor Church of
England; and it is all she can do, with invincible courage to clear her decks of
these furious Assailants.

I look upon the Romish Religion as the exactest piece of State-Policie, and
the best contrived Mystery of infallible Rule and Dominion, that ever yet
appeared in the world. I always considered it under this notion, without any
other regard or relation whatever: Its subtletenets and deep Maxims speak it
such; its ways and methods to preserve and continue itself where it is already
planted, and of propagating itself where not, do plainly show, that the true
design of it is merely Secular, contrived wholly for Temporal ends and purposes
of Dominion, Avarice, Lust, and in a word, of Universal Tyranny over the Souls
and Bodies of Men and Women.

I verily believe its greatest and most Learned Ecclesiastic Assertours see
and know the trick well enough, though they keep the Mystery as safe in the
Conclave, as the Trojans did the Palladium in Minerva's Temple.

No Cabalists of State could e're trepan,
With such firm subtlety as Rome's Divan, says one.
And thus the main System of their Religion being wholly relative to Political
practicks, no wonder that all our Disputes ablest Writings, and truest
Remonstrances against them do so little good: They may indeed debar them from
proselyting men so easily as before; but the two Poles shall sooner meet, than
the strongest Truths and Demonstrations shall reduce one of the great Churchmen
of Rome.

Alas, the Case is quite of another nature: nor do they themselves think it
worth while to enter the Lists of public Disputation, or answer the repeated
oppositions of our Learned Churchmen, unless (as our chief Dissenters) it be to
comply with the Expectations of their own Herd; and then too, the main design
is (not to argue impartially and solidly) but still more and more to amuse and
entangle the poor ignorant Admirers of, An Answer to Dr. etc.

Si Pergama dextra defendi possent, etc. comes always in my mind, when I
consider that the present posture of affairs is rather worse than better, and
at the same time think on the Writings of Bishop Jewel, Laud, and those other
Hero's that did and said all that was possible almost, to little purpose alas!
and pray what can we do more?

They will not so much as argue to satisfy any scruple of their own Disciples;
the device of Implicit Faith supersedes their trouble as to that. And if by
chance among them a gaul'd Conscience offer to kick, (though never so sorely
pinched) one sharp word or frown of the Inquisition, silences the poor Soul
better (to their purpose) than a thousand Syllogisms: And thus these men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil.

How quite contrary to all this, is the proceed of our Church? how different is
her Carriage? how frequent, earnest, and tender are her applications to the
Dissenting Brethren? With what reluctancie and force to herself, (after all
means fail) are restraints and penalties gently applied as the Ratio ultima
rerum, which she is far from making the Inscription of loud and infallible
Artillery?

And yet what Seditious Murmurs do these men return to her soft and passionate
Invitations? What Innovations and Changes do they not secretly attempt? What
evil Representations of Church and Government do they not scatter? What
shuffling peevish returns do they make to the Writings and Sermons of good and
wise Men, in vindication of regular Piety and true Loyalty? And they are so
bold too, as to press Gods holy Word for the justification of all this
obstinacy; but it is not the first time that Holy Scripture has been the
Argument, when the destruction of the Allegatour has proved the consequence. 2
Pet. 3. 16.


Our Church, by applying the soft and gentle Remedies of Statutable
punishments, and legal Mulcts, never intended to force gross blindness, or
impose the Tyranny of Implicit Faith on any man; but rather the quite
contrary, she carefully and wisely considered that a little smarting might make
the scales peel off from their Eyes, and by some little bitterness she designed
no more harm to them, than Tobias did to his Father, by throwing Gall in his
Eyes to make him see.

And here I Will presume to insert the words of a Learned and Reverend Gentleman
now among us: We, says he, that are Ministers of the Church of England may be
content; nay, we may really wish that all our Laity had as much true solid
understanding in Religion as our Clergy. We can get no advantage by your want
of knowledge, no more than you can do by ours: We have no Spiritual Cheat with
which to delude you, for the representing of which we should stand in need
either of darkness, or of a false light. We have nothing in our public
Profession which the wisest men, the most pious Christians may not outwardly
practice; nothing in our Faith which they ought not inwardly to believe. We
know and are well assured, that the only reason why our Church is not more
generally embraced, and admired, is, because the purity of its Doctrine, the
sobriety of its Devotion, the moderation of its Discipline, the largeness of
its Charity, are not more impartially and calmly examined, more generally
understood.

Our Church in its Spiritual State as you are Christians, is most conformable
to the rules of Christ, to the Apostolic practice, to the Primitive
Institutions: In its rational State as you are Men, its Doctrines are very
agreeable to the reason of Mankind; its Precepts most becoming the purest and
strictest Laws of Nature, Virtue, and Morality: In its Political State as ye
are Englishmen, its Interest is inseparable from that of our Nation and
Government.

We are therefore so far from being jealous of your most curious and exact
search into the Practice and Principles of our Church, that we desire it; nay,
we most earnestly beseech it. We are in no danger from Men's most subtle inquiry
into it; we may be from their utter carelessness, and indifferency toward it.

We are not against any Man's seeing Spiritual Truths; only we would not have
the blind presume to teach others to see: We would not have Men think they see,
when they do not, which is the most certain way for them never to see at all:
we would have you know as much as you can; only we would have you believe that
both you and we may know much more than we do: we entreat you to strive to know
all in a right way, by sober Dr. Sprats Sermon at Whitehall before His Majesty.
degrees, for right purposes, uses and ends.

I will here be bold to subjoin by way of Corollary to the foregoing excellent
words: It has puzzled my nearest and nicest Inquisition, and plunged my closest
scrutiny in deep amazement, when I have considered that so many of our
Countrymen should out of an odd peevish humor, and most unaccountable Caprice,
forsake that sober, decent way of Worship, which the Established Law presses,
which their gracious King and Governor himself strictly observes, together
with the Loyal Nobility and Gentry, and the Reverend and Learned Clergy of this
Land; that they should (I say) leave these good, these great, these wise
Examples, contrary to the obedient humble temper of Christians, contrary to the
prudence and interest of rational men, and contrary to the honest good nature
of true Englishmen: And all this out of a blind and ignorant compliance to the
Insinuating hypocritical persuasions of a few leading prejudiced Presbyters.
For, true scruple of Conscience cannot be said to urge them to this
Nonconformity; not one of five hundred understanding the intrinsic state of
the Question, or the true nature of the Controverted point, any more than they
do Arabic: But granting that they could plead Christian Scruple, how far would
even that fall short of Justification, seeing that the Commands to Obedience
are so absolute, so plain, so positive, and the reasons for Nonconformity
(even at best) so obscure, so weak, so dubious? In a word, the Faith of our
Separatists is as blind and implicit as that of the Papists; the design of
their Doctrines as Subtle, Sensual, and Secular.

But to return to the Romanists: that the trick should pass upon the common
Herd of the Ignorant and Credulous, is not at all strange, nor that the
well-contriv'd Imposture should go down pretty cleverly with the middle sort of
Mankind, is it much to be wondered at; but that so notorious, so bold, so saucy
a cheat, should engage the Wise and Noble, nay Kings and Princes, to a
compliance so mean and servile (as heretofore especially) this is a perfect
Prodigy to me.

What depth of subtilty is employed in the Doctrine of the Popes Supremacy and
Infallibility, the basis of implicit Faith, indisputable obedience, and
absolute dependence on the Church and Court of Rome? What great and glorious
Scenes of pomp, pride, and splendor, are consequential to the necessity of
making all deferences and humble appeals to his Holiness?

The Doctrine of Purgatory is a most excellent bait for a wealthy sinner on his
deathbed: how eagerly and zealously he exchanges his Bags for Masses, that he
may not be stopped at that hot stage, but be immediately dispatched to the more
agreeable warmth of Abraham's bosom? Thus by a pretty kind of Platonic
Chemistry, the subtle Priest makes real Gold, by an imaginary and fictitious
fire.

But above all, to dive into and discover the Tempers and Inclinations, Designs
and Contrivances, Actions and Passions, nay the most retired Thoughts of Men
and Women, Auricular Confession is an unparalled device: It Is certainly the
most impudent Incroachment and unnatural piece of Tyranny that was ever imposed
on Mankind; I mean, as it is abused and disfigured by them, from its first good
design and Institution.

I will now end these brief Remarks on the Romish Religion, with one Trick more
of theirs, which appeared in the Death of Mr. Langhorne and the late Jesuits;
which has afforded matter of much discourse to all, and of no small wonder and
amusement to some. For my own part, I verily believe, that if the Depositions
of the King's Witnesses (as the Law always allows and supposes them to be, so)
were not de facto true and evident; if the Proceedings of the Court were not
most impartial, just and steady, and by consequence the Parties brought in
guilty by an honest and unbiassed Verdict; if all this (I say) were not so,
then there is no Truth or Certainty under the Sun. And therefore that Learned
and Rational Men should at the point of Death fondly conceive, that any
Dispensation from Rome, or their reciprocal Absolutions, could possibly expiate
the Guilt and Crime of a positive, deliberate, mortal sin (I mean, the steadfast
Abjuration of true matter of Fact) this is a Presumption of that Force and
Contradiction to the Genius of Christianity, and so contrary to the very
Essentials and Fundamentals of Humane Nature; that I know not what to resolve
it into, but a total dereliction of God Almighty, or some latent Frenzy in
those wretched Delinquents.

I have indeed heard some Learned Men urge the strong force of Education and
Institution, as a competent cause to rivet this Principle into the persuasions
of the Romish Agents: What e're it is, it affords matter of mysterious
difficulty to me; and what Principle soever it owns, certainly the resolute
Effects it produces, must needs belong to a very forcible Cause, since we see
this firm Obstinacy retains its Vigor in Attempts of the last danger, and at
the dreadful point of unavoidable Death too.

It Is true, that the Bishop and Spiritual Senate of Rome exhibit all the
Machiavilian Maxims, (which they without exception call in to establish and
advance their Secular and Ecclesiastic Polity) under the specious stamp of
Divine Authority, and crown the most horrid Enterprises and unnatural Villainies
with the additional advantage of Merit; this (if firmly believed, but there
lies the difficulty) must needs infuse as much Courage and Resolution, as the
Arabian Elysium did into the Primitive Assassins, or Mahomet's Paradise does
into the Ottoman Soldiers. For Superstition of this kind deeply grafted, has
always proved the strongest spring and most vigorous motive of desperate deeds
and devices: Besides, the indisputable Obedience that the Jesuitick Order is
sworn into to their respective Superior, is of no ordinary force and influence
to these Exploits, and of grand import to the purposes of the Roman Conclave.

And this suggests how furiously in opposition to this extreme of blind
compliance, some of our present Fanatics run into the other contrary, and
flatly deny that there is any Ecclesiastic Superiority at all; others affirm
that the Episcopal Function is at best distinct, not in Degree and Fact, but in
Title and Dignity only, to that of Presbyter; contrary to the plain usage of
the Catholic Church, and the practice of Antiquity in all Ages. And with these
men forsooth (...) is no more of Divine Right, than the little Office of
Overseer (its namesake) in some of our Parochial Societies.

The redress of this, as of other crazy Opinions of our modern Sectaries, is
apparently Eccentrick to the power and force of Argument; the proper Remedy and
effectual Cure belonging most certainly to a smarter Application, than that of
soft and gentle Reasonings.

And now it is high time to tell you, how that by these brief occasional remarks
on the corruptions of Christianity from the Ambition and Avarice of some
Professors, from Enthusiastic whimsies, from the senceless Subtleties of the
Schoolmen and Casuists, from some cramp words and forced Allusions out of
Aristotle, from the Romish Impostures, and Phanatick Hypocrisy, I have at
least hit my design in the Negative, by which you may guess of what Religion I
am not of.

Truly, I am heartily sorry that the true Tree of Life, Christianity, should
be branched out into so many Divisions, and that our grand Enemy has not only
sowed tares in our field, but inserted spurious graffs here too: however, my
firm and faithful dependence is on that Branch which has an undeniable rise
and growth from the old Catholic and Apostolic stock, and from whence
(Zacheus-like) Luke 19. 4, 5. I have a Call (I hope) as well as a full and
perfect View of my blessed Savior, from amongst the vulgar crowd of Schisms
and Heresies: In a word, I am not so much of Education, much less of Interest
or Coaction, as of free, yet firm and rational choice, a Member of the Church
of England, as now by Law established.

And yet Education, by an Epidemick Calamity, has in all Countries and Ages
been the best Title perhaps, that the Bulk of Mankind could plead to their
Religion: That it is so now amongst the grand Monde of Mahometans, Jews and
Pagans, is I think not to be disputed. And indeed the difficulties are so
great, and the methods so nice of disengaging natural Reason from the strong
entanglements of Prejudice, Education, and National Interest, that I think it
to be almost morally impossible (all circumstances weighed) for these Infidels
to raise and refine their gross Apprehensions to a due and sober Scrutiny of
Christian Truths: And therefore to talk to them of the Trinity, Incarnation,
Crucifixion, Resurrection, and the like other Mysteries of our Religion, would
but produce the same incredulous wonder, as to repeat and plead for some Fables
in the Metamorphosis.

For if the ripe reason of learned Nicodemus (in the very midst of Miracles)
could at best but arrive to a doubtful Question, Joh. 3. 9. How can these
things be? puzzled (as appears) by the one only Doctrine of Regeneration; if he
could hardly relish these Living Waters at the Fountainhead, well may the
Streams run muddy through our shallow conveyances, and prove insipid, if not
nauseous and ridiculous to these senceless, stupid mortals.

What shall we judge then of the gross and mass of mankind, who lie under
prejudice or Ignorance invincible? What distinct Regions of Immortality can we
assign to many millions of the so long undiscovered Americans? Amongst whom
were found not only the common Rules, but strict observances Mountaign
too of Justice, Veracity and Sobriety?

In what classis and degree of Felicity or Misery can we range the good old
Heathens Socrates, Seneca, etc. who living up to the height of their Principles
(as some think, tho I have good reason to doubt it) were a Law unto themselves.
Romans 2. 14.
There is no other name given among men, whereby we must besaved, says the
Apostle, but the Name of Jesus, Act. 4. 12. What, shall we fondly seign a
middle state, a Limbus Philosophorum? For it is uncharitable to conclude
absolutely and cruelly, that the Merciful Good God will destroy the work of his
own Hands.

Perhaps the most rational refuge in this case, is to presume, that our
gracious Father by ways best known to himself, might impart (if not a
Revelation, yet) an Application of the Name and Merits of the holy Jesus to
these just and sober Moralists, if they were indeed really so.

But as to my unspeakable Peace and Comfort I am a Christian of the Church of
England; so to my inestimable honor and glory, I am a Priest of the most High
God, and received my Authority and Commission from my Lord and Master Jesus,
rightly and truly, by the hands of Episcopacy and the Presbytery.

And as I then felt no unusual Impulses of an extraordinary Spirit, no new
Light or Revelation, nor any other Enthusiastic Emotions of an overheated
Imagination: so neither did I rudely and rashly intrude without Call, amongst
my Masters hired Laborers: For I had a fair Invitation from Gods ordinary
Goodness and Providence to work in his Vineyard, and I found in my self an
honest Resolution and hearty Inclination so to do; which truly I looked upon as
a sufficient warrant and justification for my Affirmative Answer to that first
Ordination-Question, Do you think in your heart that you be truly called, etc.
to the Order and Ministry of Priesthood?

And now as I verily believe this divine Character to be indelible, so I esteem
of it as the most noble stamp and Impress humane Nature is capable of, whilst
clothed with clay. I am not so much surprised as troubled, to see the common
derision and contempt that attends the Clergy: For those Scorners that cavil at
the very Faith, and question the Doctrine itself, cannot reasonably be expected
to regard and reverence the Dispensers. And since this Town and Kingdom is
infested with such swarms of Deists, Socinians, Atheists, and others, that not
only violate the undoubted Regalia, but with treasonable Blasphemy dispute the
Divine Sovereignty of Jesus; how should they not affront and outrage the
Ambassadors of Christ? We are, I fear, making fair Advances, and by very
sensible degrees too, to that dismal state of Insidelity, the prospect of which
made our Savior exclaim long ago, When the Son of Man comes, shall he sinde
Faith upon Earth? Luke 18. 8.

And yet I have observed, that our Adversaries raise much of their pertness and
audacity to despise and abuse us, from a certain sheepish dejection of spirit
that possesses many: Thus we our selves, by a base and dastardly Cowardice,
antedate our own contempt, and poorly fancying our selves always liable and
open to affront, like suspicious easy Slaves, we (by this means) become of our
Enemies party, and invite and anticipate the approaching Despite, by letting
our Countenances fall, and seeming little in our own Eyes: This is exactly to
make a gap for every insolent pragmatical Ass to tread over. Instances of this
kind I have not seldom seen in some mean-spirited, poor Divines, whose little
Souls ebb and flow with the changes of Fortune, and who want a true sense of
the Excellency and Noble worth of their high Calling, servilely valuing
themselves by the false measures of this silly, unreasonable, degenerate Age. I
find that a man in this case has just as much respect as he gives himself;
and a manly Confidence and well-bred Assurance here, is not at all inconsistent
with Christian Meekness and Humility. But alas! We have too many creep into the
Priesthood, and steal into the Sanctum Sanctorum of the Christian Tabernacle,
young and raw, hardly yet Masters of common Philosophy, but in fruitless
Theory; nor are they arrived to the proficiency of the poor Stoics, in
opposing a steadfast Courage and Equality of Soul to the rude shock of Contempt
and Poverty: How then shall they retain Breath and Patience sufficient to run
through those several rugged stages of Self denial and Mortification, which the
proud and insolent dealing of this world requires, and the Doctrine of Jesus
proposes? Contempt, Poverty, and Death, (that dreadful Triumvirate of mundane
Terrors) which the courageous Reason of the old Philosophers could baffle, is
too hard for the Reason and Faith too of many fresh water Soldiers in our
Church-Militant.

It Is possible, it is true, for a wise man by a steady course of manly conduct
to escape Contempt; but the approaches of Poverty are often unavoidable, and
the rudeness of its attendants almost insufferable. This state and condition
(especially if successive to late Wealth and Honor) is the best Test and
Touchstone of true worth and Magnanimity:

Hic animus opus, hic pectore firmo. Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.

It Is an easy matter, when full of Riches and Honor, to fancy we have all
Virtues; and the fawning world shall avouch it too.

-- Omnis enim res
Divitiis parent, quas, qui construxerit, ille
Claerus erit, fortis, justus, sapiens, etc. Horat. sermon. lib. 2. Satyr. 3.

Yet I fear, not one of five hundred that rowls in wealth and affluence, has
well Conned the hard Lesson which the honest Stoics taught in their (...). But
granting we have arrived to some proficiency in the Abstinential Virtues, we
must not therefore conclude our selves truly approved, till we have tried our
Strength and Patience to the quick in the sharp exercises of Versues other
branch, the Tolerantial part, the (...) also: or, till with St. Paul we can
truly say, I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound, both to be
full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need, Philip. 4. 12.

With what Assuming Gravity and Magisterial A we have I heard rich and great
men censure and expose small miscarriages and weaknesses in poor and mean
Persons; when at that very time, the Reprover himself has been guilty of the
same Crime, and greater too, with some little Alteration of the guise only;
nay, and the advantage shall be so dexterously managed on his side, as to make
it Virtue and accomplishment.

Vos o Trojugenae vobis ignoscitis, and quae
Turpia Cerdoni Volesos, Brutosque decebunt. Juven. Sat. 8.
And thus the rich and honorable have not only all Virtues (of course) in the
Vogue of the world; but they fancy themselves very devout and religious too;
at least if their odd kind of Faith can make them so; for they pray most
commonly without doubting, especially when they say, Give us this day our daily
bread, (knowing their Barns to be full;) and forgive us, etc. as we forgive
them that trespass against us, when they find that no man dares affront them.

But to harbor no anxious solicitude for the morrow, nor in extreme and
helpless Poverty to entertain any peevish distrust of Divine Providence, but to
have a cheerful Faith and reliance on Mat. 46.
my Heavenly Father, this is Religion: And freely and frequently to forgive my
Lives aggressour, or the malicious disturber of my peace, without any the least
reserve of Revenge or Rancour, this is Christianity.

I have been too much intimate (in vain youth) with the most familiar Pleasures
of humane Nature; and yet by sudden and frequent Intermixtures, as well
acquainted with the Troubles and Crosses of this fickle and unconstant world:
But, I thank my God, when Fortune has made the most Vexatious Doubles, she
could never run me to a loss; nor has she made one wrinckle of Sorrow or Fear
the more in my face, when she has turned her own into a thousand frightful
Grimaces. I declare ingenuously, that my Soul has ever kept a steady Poise,
(if not inclined to the impatience of Prosperity) and the most stunning
Accidents never benumbed my presence of mind so far, but that I have perfectly
reassured my self, softened the most piquant Passion, and smoothed the roughest
disorder of thought, by an hours Retreat and Meditation, saying with old Eli,
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Or to the same
purpose with the wise Stoic,

(...), Epict.

To end all this, in my very worst Calamities, I always concluded, that there
was need of the greatest Courage; for then to despond, is to be on my Enemies
side, and by my faint resistance to double the force of the Assault: but to
despair is Frenzy, and poorly to yield the stakes, before the Game is up. For
what an extreme Madness is it to be frighted with the advantages on the
contrary side, supposing ten thousand to one against me? Why (pray) may not
that one still happen? No man is undone, till he thinks himself so. Ita est
vita hominum quasi cum ludas tesseris, si id quod maxim opus est jactu non
cadit, id quod cecidit forte, art ut corrigas. Terent.

There is no doubt, but the chiefest, if not only design of our Priestly
Ministry, is that which our blessed Savior by most passionate inculcations
urged to Peter, Joh. 21. 17. To feed God's sheep. And to this end, the
frequency of the Word, and Sacramental Duties, of Prayer also, often public,
without ceasing private, is of indispensable Necessity: It Is we more
especially, that are to make Prayers and Supplications for all men, for Kings,
and for those who are in Authority: It Is we 1 Ti. 2. 2
that must make Intercession for the People, when God's Judgments are abroad;
it is we that must with Faith and Courage stand in the gap, when Wrath is gone
out from the Lord, and the Plague is begun, Numb. 16. 48. It Is we that must be
always ready to give a reasonable account of our Hope, and with undaunted
arguings urge the Doctrine and Faith of Christ (to some now a days a
Stumbling Block, to others Foolishness, 1 Pet. 3. 15.) against the growing
oppositions of Atheism, Heresy and Profaneness. It Is we that must Preach
plain, practical Truths to the people, with the Rules and Fundamental Reasons
of Obedience, Justice, Sobriety, Charity; and all this in easy and familiar
(yet powerful) Applications; not in Rhetorical Harangue, or Affectation of
Speech and Gesture, which does but make the ignorant gape, and tickles the Ears
of the more knowing; producing perhaps a plausible persuasion in the one, but
scarce true Christian Edification in either; and better becomes the old Roman
Rostrum, than the Christian Pulpit.

And since the unreasonable Prejudice of people seems now adays to make it
almost necessary, we should endeavor to obtain the Custom and Habit of talking
to them in a familiar way of converse as it were, (salva majestate verbi) and
(if it may be) wholly without Book.

It Is true, that when the Preachers Eyes and Gestures are pointed directly to
the Auditory, they are the more likely to give their regards and attentions to
him: but again, it is strange to me, that these silly Souls should fancy, that
the effects of a nimble Invention and unsteady cursory Effusion to be more the
Word of God, than the best of a man's sober thoughts squared exactly by the Holy
Scripture, in Methodick Writing. Matters of Controversy we ought wholly to
decline; for, (besides that it is easy to prate where there is none to oppose)
the people would be kept more obedient and safe, if they could altogether be
kept ignorant that there is any opposition in any kind to the truth of our
Doctrines: besides, what necessity is there of telling them (to their dangerous
amusement) what is wrong, as long as we continue them in the right Belief and
practice of what we know to be true and right?

But now I better think on it, since our Schismatical Dissenters Compass Sea and
Land to make one Proselyte, Mat. 23. 15. and indefatigably take all
opportunities by partial and detracting misrepresentations to tell their own
Tale first, to our no small disadvantage; it might be perhaps of some good
consequence, if our Loyally-affected Ministers would take frequent Occasions
(not in their public Pulpits, but) in their ordinary familiar Communications
with their Parishioners, to explain and enlarge upon such Points of Public
Duty, and sound Belief, as these few following; that the good People might be
disabused from the insinuating Cheats and Impostures of these deal-board
Mountebanks, and dissuaded from giving their Money for that which is not Bread,
Isai. 55. 2.

I. That the Power and Authority of Kings, is from God.

II. That Prerogative is accountable to none but God, Psalm. 51. 4. But Property
and Privilege in many cases forfeitable to the Crown.

III. That to Depose Kings for fear of Arbitrary Government, is as unjust as to
suppose a man feloniously-affected, and so hang him aforehand, lest he should
Steal or Murder.

IV. That to draw Arguments from Precedents, and conclude de facto ad jus, is
as unjust a proceeding in Politics, as it is often in Law.

V. That to fear Arbitrary Government, or its Tyrannical Effects, in a King of
Great Britain, is to suppose a Moral Impossibility.

VI. That the Kingly Government of these Realms, as it is contemper'd with the
Rights and Liberties of the Subject, is the happiest Policy in the world.

VII. That Major singulis, minor universis, is bad Logic and worse Divinity, 2 Samuel 18. 3.

VIII. That it is unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever, for the Subject to take
up Arms against the King.

IX. That Rebellious Innovations always end in Confusion and Anarchy; and
redress of Grievances that way, has proved worse than the Disease.

X. That the Church of England (as now by Law established) retains the true
Catholic and Apostolic Faith.

XI. That our Gracious Sovereign is in all Causes Ecclesiastical (as well as
Temporal) Supreme Governor.

XII. That a Subjects wisest and surest way is to adhere to the Established
Religion (in these Kingdoms) without the least Cavil or Dispute, if he believes
he may be saved therein.

XIII. That no pretense of scruple whatsoever, without plain proofs and
demonstration, can excuse any Subject from the positive Commands to absolute
Obedience in all things Lawful or Indifferent.

XIV. That Separate Meetings, and Fanatical Conventicles, have been known
lurking-holes and refuges of Romish Priests and Jesuits, and (of consequence)
Nurseries of Actors upon the Stage of Rebellion.

XV. That, upon an exact review, we have great reason to conclude our present
divisions to belong to a Principle very different from that of Scruple and
Tenderness.

XVI. That Ambition and Avarice are the two great Wheels of the Devils Chariot.

XVII. That when our grand Adversary designs most Mischief, he always hangs out
the white Flag of Religion.

XVIII. That Liberty of Conscience commonly proves License to be Seditious.

XIX. That our Dissenting Zealots who plead for it most, have been observed to
grant it least.

XX. That the People of this Nation are acquainted with much more than they
should know, and much less than they should practice.

XXI. That we can never have peaceable days, as long as Bulkers and Cobblers are
Preachers and Couranters.

XXII. That Vox Populi is not always Vox Dei, Mat. 27. 22.

XXIII. That the Stool of Repentance and illegal Impositions of Oaths on King
and People, is a greater piece of Arbitrary Tyranny, than French Monarchy, or
Kissing of the Pope's Toe.

XXIV. That the Kingly Government of this Nation is equally inconsistent with
Popery and Presbytery.

XXV. That the Power and Riches of the King is the Peace and Prosperity of the
People.

XXVI. That it is impossible for Peace and Godliness to continue long in Church
or State, under a general Toleration of Schismatical and Factious Opinions in
matters of Religion, Mat. 12. 25.

These short Aphorisms I presume to insert by way of Essay only, and as
imperfect Hints of what wiser Heads and abler Judgments may do in stronger and
more suitable Applications to the good People of this distracted Kingdom.

But before I wholly leave this point, it may be worth while to observe, by
what an ignorant, silly Mistake, the dull Teachers in our Separate Assemblies
conclude of the Power and Prevalency of their Doctrine, from the sullen
cloudiness of Countenance, and tumultuous disorder it causes in the Passions of
their Female Anditory, rather than from any Serenity and clearness of Mind and
Understanding: For I have very good grounds to believe, that all this noise
has left the Intellect untoucht, and that it has not in any degree reached the
Seat of their Reason and Judgment. And thus such Artists as can best by tender
Expressions, and passionate Applications, soften, mellow and dissolve the loose
and easy Passions of silly Women, are (forsooth) the only able, powerful men,
and they (good Souls!) can Edify under none but them: When alas, all this
seeming effectual Operation, is no better than just thus; viz. the whining
Holderforth and the Female Congregation being at that time tuned (like two
Viols) exactly alike by the Magic of Enthusiastic Sympathy, their Notes
correspond of course, and the Canting of the one immediately begets Sighs and
Groans in the other.

I am of opinion, that the highest Paroxysms of Vulgar Quakerisme have much the
same Cause, as Dancing to Music in Fits of the Tarantula: For I have with pity
and pleasure both observed, that the malignant Ferment has been by degrees
exhaled by their violent Sudorifick motions; and when the poor Soul has spent
his Spirits, and is tired at his very heart, then (as he fancies) the Spirit
goes off and leaves working. And I am inclined too to think, that the cooler
habits of this Religious disease in many of them are to be cured by Medicinal
Drugs, and a regular course of Pill, Potion and Phlebotomy.

A timely Visitation of the Sick, as it is a charitable duty almost necessary,
so it belongs as properly to the Function of a Priest, as to the Profession of
a Physician; and the careful Visits of a Ghostly Father should (of right) be
more welcome and comfortable, and accounted of higher import, as the care of
our Souls ought to be of dearer concern to us than that of our frail Bodies:
and yet with us, Vbi desinit Medicus, ibi incipit Theologus, is a common woeful
practice. For my own part, I should think my self obliged by a timelier
Assistance to mind my ghostly Patient of the dangers of his long Journey, urge
him to hearty Confession, give him comfortable Absolution, and Communicate to
him the strengthening Viaticum of the Body and Blood of the Adorable Jesus. How
busy the restless malice of the Enemy of Mankind may be at this time to
insinuate Suggestions of Despair, or presumptuous hopes of longer Life, into
Sick persons, I know not; but surely I am bound to examine the case, and by
seasonable Anticipations prevent (at least) the success of Satan's devices.

That the Devil by Injection can modifie our Thoughts, and in a great measure
rule the Faculties, (especially of weak sick persons, who are now more retired
within themselves, and free from the sensible amusements and diversions of
worldly objects) I verily believe; for he may make a very malicious and
mischievous use of the advantages he has over our Souls (himself being a
subtle, powerful Spirit,) and (therefore) by eminency of like nature, may have
a very forcible Influence upon the Operations of our Spirit; as (to take a
parallel Analogy from what appears in matter, the contrary essence) the
Pressure or Collision of a stronger body alters (we see) the Figure of
Extension in a weaker; or as the dimension of soft Wax is (by my hands) now
square, then round, and presently triangular or oblong.

Now the Advantages of these frequent Visits will not only be so to the Sick,
but will produce in us forcible habits of undaunted Indifferency against the
Fears and Apprehensions of Death in general, and the nearer Approaches of it
too, when our selves are assaulted. Our most proper Titles are Ghostly,
Spiritual, and such like; to intimate, that it is our Trade to be familiarly
present and frequently assistant at Nature's grand Dissection of Soul and Body:
It will the better improve our Theologick Knowledge and Skill, as an accurate
diligence in Anatomick Exercises does that of the Chirurgick; besides that the
company of a Divine Physician suits well with the Soul, as she is ready to be
dismantled of her walls of flesh, and transmitted to the better Colony of the
new Jerusalem.

To men of our Function, the sight of Death should be no more terrible than
that of our Breath; and we may be ashamed, that our professed hopes of the Bodies
Resurrection, and the immediate Felicity of our Soul, falls short of the
courageous Gallantry of many Heathens, in braving the ghastly King of Terrors
to his very face, upon no better or very little more assurance of Immortality,
than that of surviving Fame and Glory, or a fruitless Nomen crit indelebile
nostrum.

I have known some of us, that not want of Christian Charity, but Courage (in
this point) has withheld from paying their last dutiful Offices to Sick
persons; and when a silly common Nurse shall attend alone in silent, dismal
Night-watches, these men could not approach in open day, without apparent damps
of Consternation. And yet it is (doubtless) as natural to die as to live, or as
it is to be born: and the sight of a Coffin alters me no more than that of a
Cradle. Certainly, if the strange appearance of the object startled us, a silly
Midwife has greater reason to be scared at the odd and uncouth Circumstances
that accompany Natures thrusting a Child into the world, than we in duly
preparing a departing man or woman for the familiar Womb of our common Mother.

I find little more surprise or alteration in my self at the sight of a
deceased Man, than of any other dead Animal: Nay, why should I not (on the
contrary) be much more amazed at this, than that? Since this is an absolute
object of irreparable Mortality, and a total Privation appears here; in the
other, of one Moiety only, and that but to the general Resurrection.

It Is Opinion, not Reason or Religion, rules men. Dying has been the common
trade and way of all flesh, for almost Six thousand years; and more dye by
Weekly Computation than are born: Nay, this Champion has made one single Field
such a glorious Scene of his Pomp and Luxury, that 500000 Spectacles of
Mortality have been at once offered as Victims to the insatiate Fury of one
bloody Battle, 2 Chronicles. 13. 17. And in such a small Circumscription of time and
place as this, I suppose we never heard, nor ever shall, of an equal number of
Nativities.

To me to dye is gain, says St. Paul, Phil. 1. 21. which besides an
Enfranchisement and release from the many troubles of this Life, and the
acquisition of eternal Joy, does also import to me, That by Death and
Separation this Concrete becomes two distinct Essences; and we are so far from
vanishing into nothing, that by the advantageous division of Soul and Body, one
single Being branches into a duplicity of Existences. For our Corpse, tho silent
and unactive in the cold Lap of common Fate, looses not a whit of its title to
Existence; nay, even in this ghastly Privation, there still appear some weak
remains and faint efforts of a Vegetative Soul.

But our Spirit shall mount up like an Eagle, Isai. 40. 31. on the wings of
celestial activity, and greedily grasp all the pleasures of a perfect
Intelligence, ranging at large in the infinite Abyss of immortal Light and
boundless Aboads of Angels. There she will clearly discern the nature of her
own Essence and Faculties by reflex Intuition on her self; or else (perhaps)
see the perfect Image of her self, and of all things past, present and to come
(to her infinite satisfaction) in the glorious Mirror of the Eternal Godhead.
Nor will she then owe her knowledge to the gross Communications of material
objects, through the weak conveyances of bodily sense.

I could (in some fits of contemplative Melancholy) fall asleep as soon in a
Charnel-house, as in my Bedchamber; and am often so weary of dull Life, that
my greatest delight is in such objects as speak most to its disadvantage. The
state and magnificence of a Tomb or Monument, steals a secret wish from me to
be Tenant to that quiet, silent Pomp, more than the sight of a sumptuous
Palace, to be Lord and Master there.

I know that I carry a Ghost always about me, and that I my self am a walking
Spirit: This thought allays in me those vulgar fears of the haunts and visits
of Specter. And as I am not at all afraid of my self (unless, when God lets
loose his terrors upon my Soul, and my Conscience lashes me for my sins, Job
18. 11.) so I am very little apprehensive of Apparitions: Nay more, I could
wish the Communications more frequent betwixt us and the Inhabitants of the
upper world: It would harden our Christian Courage, familiarize to us the
thoughts of Separation; and create in us a passionate Love of that Country,
from the good report of these spiritual Spies, making us say with courageous
Caleb, Let us go up and possess it, Numb. 13. 30.

I could (I thank God) stare a reputed Witch full in the face, with as little
terror as I look upon a sucking Infani; and boldly retort the poisonous
emissions of her malicious Eyes. For in this I take Balaam at his word (who
without doubt had tried the Experiment) that there is no Enchantment against
Jacob, neither is there any Divination against Israel, Numb. 23. 23.

I pretend not by the Title of this small Treatise to any extraordinary Scheme
or new draught of Religion for the Clergy, much less would I be thought slily
to suggest any neglect or deficiency of theirs in the practice of the Old: I am
very very well assured, that Religio Clerici is a direct Tautologie; and yet I
detract no more from the Sanctimonious Worth of the Clergy, by the conjunction
of these two terms, than I deny the Sun to be the Fountain of Light, when I
say, Lumen Solis. Only I could wish that we were all, not only good and
virtuous, but eminently and in the last degree so too; and that all the lesser
Christian Luminaries might more and more derive Light from us. I would have all
the Wisdom and Virtue that ever appeared in the guise of true Reason in the
world, summed up and amassed in a Christian Priest; especially in a daily,
sincere contempt of this world. We should strive clearly to demonstrate the
certain hope we have of Eternal Felicity after Death, by being very careless,
if at all sensible of this Life. And in this let us soar a pitch beyond the
highest flights of the wisest Heathens, and outdo in very fact their utmost
Ideas and Hyperboles.

The excellent Speculations of some old Philosophers arose ('it is true) to a
very great height, and their refined Reason was exercised in most divine
Contemplations: But alas! the better and purer their Notions were of Virtue and
Sanctity, they became so much the more impracticable to them, and they fell
short in the performance of their own Rules and Dictates. The Cause of this
natural inability and latent impotency of their Wills, they were altogether
strangers to; and tho they knew in effect most Doctrines of Christian Morality,
yet having not the Faith of Jesus, nor by consequence the assistance of God's
particular Grace, their knowledge was but of small import and significancy; nor
could it in the very best of them produce actions acceptable to God, unless his
secret infinite Mercy gave some gracious allowances for that natural corruption
which they knew nothing of, and which was cured but in a poor degree by
universal Grace.

And this Notion I have framed to my self of the Heathens Morality, enclines me
to believe, that our Wills derived from Adam's disobedience, a depravity double
to that of our Intellects; for as we see by these Pagans, their Understanding
could excellently distinguish, and were (in the Serpent's words) as Gods
knowing good and evil, yet were the Imaginations of the thoughts of their
hearts always evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. But we Christian Priests, that have
successively received all the gradual Communications of Divine Grace, and
Sanctifications of the blessed Spirit, from the Font to the Ministry of the
holy Altar, are doubly obliged, as we transcend the best of them in the sublime
Mysteries of our Faith, so to outstrip them in the most excellent practices of
Evangelical Morality; and not them only, but all others also.

Non possumus perficere bonam actionem sine adjutorio Gratiae, is rightly
opposed to Pelagius; nor is the proposition only notional: for besides that our
Savior tells us, without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. And St. Paul, that
it is God which works in us, both to will and do, Philip. 2. 13. I have often
observed, (in my own narrow economy) that the clearest Convictions of Reason,
and strongest Moral Resolutions, have proved weak and of small force against
the power of most sins; especially against the violent assaults of a
complexional Vice: We may sin and resolve to the contrary, and resolve and sin
again in infinitum, till with Jacob we wrestle with God, (Genesis 32. 26.) as well
as resist the Devil; until by violent Prayer we take Heaven by force, (Matthew.
11. 12.) and draw down the assistance of Divine Grace, all our other strongest
and most vigorous Efforts will prove feeble and ineffectual. The very
Experience of this has confuted Pelagianisme to me, better than a thousand
Syllogisms.

I have seldom gone to Bed (in the days of loosest Vanity, and before I was so
happy as sincerely to espouse the Predicate, much less had the honor to wear
the subject of this Books title) without Pythagoras his (...), etc. Aur. Carm.
My reason has upon an impartial summing up that days Evidence made my own
Conscience a severe Jury against me, in pronouncing a perfect dislike and
condemnation of such proceedings: I have then made applications of (as I
thought) strong resolves to observe its dictates for the future; and this has
in some measure assuaged the smart of my mind then. But alas! my trial all
this while being at the wrong Bar, I could never obtain a true Pardon for old,
nor strength against new Lapses: My Inclinations to sin have doubled upon me;
and when they felt the Curb of Reason pinch them, they began to be resty; or as
if a plain discovery had more and more hardened their countenances, the
Sensualities which they privately stole before, they began now to act with
remorseless Effronterie; nay more, they would mutter Arguments for their
Justification also: This indeed alarmed me to the quick; I examined my self
immediately by the standard of the Sanctuary; fell prostrate at the Throne of
Grace, and obtained Balm from Gilead to cure the Wounds of my repeated
weaknesses. And (by this new method) I felt more strength in a short time from
a single, but hearty Prayer, Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from
evil, than from all the clearest and nicest reasons and persuasions of the
Peripatum, or Porticus.

Not but that these Ethics, together with a rational and impartial survey of
ourselves, may produce stronger and better effects in others than they did in
me; but we must not rely on the guidance and conviction of these alone to amend
us; lest we make no better advances than mere Ethnicks, by the force of
Free Will, and conduct of humane Reason: Common Moralities belonging not
(perhaps) to the same species with Evangelical Graces, but differing from them
as much in essential Beauty, as these do from the perfection of Angelical
Obedience. For (I say once more) my Opinion is, that our Wills received a
deeper tincture of corruption, and a far larger Dose of Depravity from Adam's
Fall, than the Intellectual Faculty; forasmuch as we find the former strongly
averse to observe and practice those Doctrines, which the Religion of Jesus
teaches, and which some Heathens had a rough draught of from Natural Reason, I
mean the Theorems of Morality, and that in no mean measure neither: for
excepting such revealed Mysteries as have a peculiar relation to the
incomprehensible Theanthropy, What sublime Doctrine of Christian Philosophy
have they not hinted? Even so far, as to the forgiving and loving their
Enemies. But yet, I cannot believe that their actions were in a suitable degree
correspondent to their Principles, nor did their practices make advances equal
to their Speculations and Theorick Knowledge. Why should any man therefore
vainly rely upon that pretended mighty thing, the natural strength of
Free Will? Let us Christians rather exclaim, Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, etc.

If it were possible to incline me to the Predestinarian Opinion, the urging
the ninth Chapter to the Romans would not work half so much upon me, as our
Lord and Savior's Answer to that Question, Lord, are there few that are saved?
Strive (says he, Luke, 13. 24.) to enter in at the strait gate, for many (I
say unto you) will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

And truly when I consider the little sense and knowledge which most Christians
(to omit by ten times the greater part of mankind) have of the Divine Life,
how deeply the generality is immersed in the prejudices of Nature, clouded with
dull grosness of Intellect, and inapprehensive Ignorance of the true state of
Nature, and the Methods and Conditions of their Redemption; Slaves to Vices of
Constitution or Habit, diverted by necessary cares and worldly business,
entangled in (almost) unavoidable Injustices of Commerce and Traffic, and
wholly taken up with affairs of Natural or Political Life; in a word, led
captive to sin, by the Lusts of the Flesh, the lusts of the Eye, and Pride of
Life, 1 John 2. 16. When too, I observe the natural aversness of our Wills, the
many exact circumstances required to complete a good action, Bonum ex integra
causa, malum ex quolibet defectu: When I regard the way almost of all Flesh
since Adam, how senceless and careless of celestial business; but above all,
when I think on the most incredible obstinacy (had not God said it) and
prodigious perverseness of the ancient Jews, under the palpable sense and ocular
Convictions of Miracles and Judgments: When I read Adam stumbled and fell
amidst all the Rays of Divinity in Paradise; that Peter with cowardly Perjury
could deny his Master (Mat. 26. 74.) the known Son of God, contrary to fair
warning given him by his Lord, and all his late bravadoes of Fidelity even to
Death, Mat. 26. 34, 35. and more than all this, contrary to his great and
glorious Confession, Mat. 16. 16. That wise Solomon sacrificed to the Devil,
although he had seen God twice, 1 King. 11. 8, 9. When, I say, I sum up all this
together, I wonder (with deep adoration of God's Mercy) that any one man is
saved, and snatched from amongst the strong Entanglements of the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, whose indefatigable temptations, and sly Devices to
entrap us, I forgot to mention.

But again, when I ponder the methods of God's gracious dealing with us in the
infallible Revelations of his Will in his holy Word; his passionate
Expostulations, and kind Invitations, by promises of Eternal Life and
Felicity; his disswasions from Sin, by dreadful Threats of endless Misery, all
which in all other Cases are the first and most forcible Motives of humane
Actions: But above all, when I reflect upon the stupendous Mystery of the
Godhead's becoming Flesh for our Redemption, the Ineffable Majesty; grand
import and significancy, strong and comfortable Efficacy, and the final End and
Design of that incomprehensible piece of Mercy, together with the helps and
comforts of the holy Sacraments, those sure Conveiances of assisting Grace, the
inward workings of the Holy Spirit, together with our own strong Convictions,
and the Panacaea of all desperate repeated Falls and Apostasies, (God's
gracious acceptance of true, though never so late) Repentance; considering (I
say) all these, it is a Miracle to me, how any Rational Man should finally
miscarry to damnation, much less that after all this, the surplusage of number
should still lie on the side of the castaways. And I am more and more plunged
and puzzled in this point, when I narrowly consider the Motives and Reasons of
humane Actions, and the true nature of Free Will. The bare freedom of our Will
has certainly all reasons imaginable to balance it on the side of Virtue and
Piety; it is not only cured of its natural corruption by Grace, but the power
of this Grace must be allowed to have the prevalency above the force of any
temptation, Romans 5. 20, 21. For it is derogatory to our Savior's Merits to
imagine, that we are still left to struggle with sin upon unequal odds.

Their Notion of Will who suppose it a Faculty distinct from the Intellect, I
approve not of; and to call it a blind Power, yet allow it liberty of
Election, is beyond my understanding to apprehend. I rather understand the Will
to be the last resolution of the Intellectual Faculty, as it tends to action in
exerting its power: So that I think Intellectus practicus may include Will too
well enough; For what ever humane action proceeds from rational Volition, is
supposed (more or less) to have passed the deliberation of our Understanding;
that is, the very same power of a reasonable Soul (for I think not the
Faculties distinct) first considers and judges, then determines it self to
action.

Yet there are some humane Actions where violent surprise or the forcible sway
of a constitutional Vice may hurry the Will to sudden choice, before the
Intellect in that confusion can appear at the Election; as in Fits of Choleric
or Lustful Passions: But these seem to me actions of the Animal rather than the
Man, and more properly spontaneous than free: And yet we have a few Instances
of the Triumph of Grace over sudden provoking Temptations even of this sort, as
in David's patient Meekness in the business of Shimei, 2 Samuel 16. 9, 10. when
Abishai (tho not pointed at) was all on fire with bloody rage and fury, as
indeed it was his duty: And Joseph's resisting the importunate Solicitations,
and at last almost Ravishment of his Masters Wife in instanti, contrary to
Flesh and Blood, Interest and Ambition, that with joint forces assaulted his
Honor and Honesty all at once, as the case then stood. But to return, I
suppose an humane Soul to be a Simple Thinking Essence, that judges and acts
with rational deliberation, and which has more and stronger Motives ab intra
and ab extra so to do, in matters of Christian Duty, than in any other
occasions of Life whatsoever. By all this I mean, in a word, if there be
greater Motives in Religion to incline this free thinking Soul of ours
(according to her own common natural way of working) to good actions, than any
other Principle can pretend to, to declien her to bad, (and which motives she
firmly believes and assents to) how can we in Reason, Religion, or Philosophy
solve the general Inclinations of Christians in the gross the other way, when
the more forcible poize lies here; unless we make her freedom (like that of
Fortune's) the most senceless indifferency imaginable; and that she has no
regard or dependence on knowledge or persuasion, but lets her actions out loose,
and at rovers; which is Nonsense to me.

But farther still, to choose a finite good before an Infinite, a temporal
before an eternal, that is (in short) a less before a greater; nay more, to
choose in effect willingly her own destruction, for the sake of a present
Pleasure or Interest, this is all to act quite contrary to all her other common
Methods of proceeding in any other cases whatsoever. To say she could not
absolutely be free, unless she could do thus, (i. e. act against the very
Principles of her being, and those of Self-preservation) and that such a bare
indeterminate Power is the especial Prerogative of her freedom) is nothing but
what I will grant; but yet still for all that, it is natural and rational to
presume that this absolutely Free will should rather, and most generally, in
most Cases be directed (in Religion especially) by the dictates of clear
Judgment, and convictions of Understanding: And since these in the business of
Christianity bend (confessedly) to the side of Virtue and Goodness, Why are not
the most of men (according to this explanation of our Wills motion and
operation) balanced rather that way, than the other, as we see daily? If any
one urge here the natural impotency in our Wills derived from Adam's
corruption: I rejoyn (as before) that the Death of Christ and God's Grace does
abundantly poyze that Infirmity, nay more, helps our Will to advantage above
that. But farther still, it is our nature to be rational; it is highly rational
to be religious: what an excellent consequence does now naturally follow? and
yet (I fear) a thousand to one de facto miscarry: Little Flock, says our
Savior, Luke 12. 32. that startles me.

These Considerations, that the generality of Mankind (Christians I mean) act
according to their Capacities in the true discernment of the Colors of Good
and Evil, in all (or most) cases but Religion, (which nevertheless is their
greatest Interest, by confessed plain Conviction) this, I say, general
miscarriage of Free Will, together with our Savior's aforesaid Answer to the
Question, Luke 13. 24. inclines me to fear (till I am better informed) that few
men are happy in the absolute use of unrestrained Freedom, but that in most
there is a secret imperceptible clog upon humane Will in its tendencies and
operations.

To sum up all, if our Will be free, and that freedom not simply blind, but
naturally (much more spiritually) directed by Understanding; and that
Understanding informed by the confessed Truths and strong Convictions of Religion
(tending to Self-preservation Positive and Negative in the highest degree) and
these again assisted and inclinable to action by Divine Grace; and if there be
a present Redress and effectual Remedy by Repentance for all possible Lapses;
How comes the generality of us to force Nature, Reason, Religion, Conviction,
Demonstration and Interest to act directly against their respective proper
Principles? How is it that the true Israelites pitch like two little flocks of
Kids; but the Syrians fill the Country? 1 Kin. 20. 27. How is it that the
number of the Goats so far exceeds that of the Sheep? The secret things belong
unto the Lord our God: but those things which are revealed belong unto us, that
we may do all the words of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Such Contemplative Perplexities as these, do sometimes entertain my private
thoughts, I confess, but I make no farther Consequences than what you have just
now read; nor do I harbor the least surmise that touches the Justice of the
most Just God, or deduce any Inference that may have a bad influence on my
actions; nor do I follow the lewd humor of this Age in urging Necessity and
Impossibility, as Compurgators for their habitual wicked practices. I conclude
no Necessity, or irreversible Decree absolutely from these and such like
Meditations; but think when I am most puzzled, that then my poor weakness and
Ignorance appears most.

I believe my Will absolutely free in all actions barely Moral and Political;
and in Divine, that there is a concurrence of my freedom with supernatural
Grace. If I did not credit the former, I should make my self a Machine, mere
Clockwork; and if I distrusted the latter, the Book of God and Religion seems
Imposture and Delusion. All my Amusements arise from hence, that (in all
appearance) a thousand to one miscarry, when (if all had a free use of their
principles) there seems to be a thousand to one that they should not.

I will now return to what engaged me in this casual digression, (which yet was
so great a block in my way, as that I could not well step over it) viz. That I
would have all things Sacred, Wise and Virtuous, included in the very name of
Christian Priest. And since all the true Philosophy (Divine and Moral, I mean)
that has ever been since Adam, is sublimated by the refined Doctrines of the
great Messiah, I would have my Priest a magnifying Mirror of it all; or in our
Saviors words, Be the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14.

It Is a dull thing to jog through all the stages of this Life in the common
Road of Nature, and to live over again the vulgar ordinary Life, that the
generality of Men have done since Adam, to be governed by Sense and
Convenience, and look no farther than the Sun, Moon or Stars; unless likewise
we refine our Thoughts and Wishes to the last degree, mould our gross Natures
anew, and create a difference as great betwixt the vulgar herd of Mankind and
our selves, as is betwixt them and Brutes: Let us but truly regard the
transcendency and nobility of our Function, whose Heraldry cannot be Blazoned
beneath Saturn. We may (in this case) invert the sense of our Savior's words,
and say, No Prophet has Mat. 13. 57.
honor but in his own Country. Heaven is the Kingdom from whence we are
delegated as Ambassadors of Christ, not as Residents; and we should long to be
called back. If we Priests are indeed in good earnest as to the business of the
upper world, it is a wonder to me, that our most passionate Desires make not
good the words of St. Paul literally, in wishing to 1 Cor. 15. 31.
dye daily.

The enjoyment of my Savior in the Heaven of Heavens, in his Humane Nature,
whereby he is graciously pleased to become not a Mediator only, but Interpreter
also betwixt my Soul and the incomprehensible and unintelligible Godhead,
raises Ecstatick Languishments often in my longing mind to adjourn from this
gross body, and I desire to depart and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.

The Joys of the Heavenly Jerusalem as they are supernatural, so contrary to
the nature of all other Objects, they increase and magnify by distance;
appearing so much the bigger to me, because I cannot see them at all: and when
my Eye has passed the Regions of the Stars, which show still less and less by
length of prospect, all things above them increase by divine Contemplation, and
grow greater and greater, till I am lost and swallowed up in the Infinity of my
Maker. The bounds of my Native Country begin, where the biggest of the fixed
Stars would be invisible, and the Frontiers of Heaven lie beyond the Ken of
Sense. These thoughts run me almost to raptures unawares. But as I was saying,
since our Faith has Mysteries beyond the highest reach of Plato's Ideas, and
that our Doctrines are refined above the purest of the great Aristotle's
Ethics, and our Precepts of Self-denial, better and more agreeable to Humane
Nature than the impracticable Apathie of the Romantic Stoics; Let us outlive
the Wisdom and Philosophy of the whole world, and outdo them all at their own
weapon. In order to all which, the skill of a Christian Priest can no ways
appear so clearly, as in a perfect contempt of this world; in which there is
nothing worth the regards of a wise man. It Is true, we find a continual
longing in our Souls after some thing, which we cannot meet with here; and
therefore we trace the summum bonum (to no purpose) through all the various
Mazes of Nature, till the repetition of the most delightful objects turns
nauseous, and leaves us more to seek than when we first began: We never run in
View of it here (when we are most pleased) but after all our tiresome Courses
find in the close, that we have all the while hunted our selves weary by a
wrong Scent.

Nay more, the very keenest pleasures of Nature, and such as the greatest
Sensualists rhodomontade most upon, affect us least, when they are greatest,
and glut but Sense to an Insensibility; or else they vanish in the embrace, dye
in the grasp, leaving not the least track of flavor or sweetness behind, but
rather a dissatisfyed and still craving Appetite.

Besides all this, the pleasures of this life concern the brute more properly
than the man; nor do the highest sensible joys touch the better half of humane
nature, unless it be to its abatement and disadvantage: for Reason is always at
the lowest ebb, if not quite extinct, in acts of the greatest sensuality.

But that the people may verily believe us, when we promise to carry them to a
Land flowing with milk and honey; that they may indeed think us in good
earnest, when we tell them, that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. let none of us in any fashion cast a longing look
backward on the fleshpots of Egypt, in our advances to the heavenly Canaan. And
above all, we must express lively the deep sense and steadfast trust we have of
heavenly treasure, in being regardless of this worlds wealth, and of the Mammon
of unrighteousness: to set any extraordinary value upon which, is in all men
irreligious, in a Cburchman abominable and odious; it is base Idolatry, Col. 3.
5. and blasphemy to Divine Providence; it is to unravel the peculiar principle
of Christianity, and run retrograde to the steps of the holy Jesus: it is to set
up golden Calves in Bethel, and by ill example to hinder the people from going
to Jerusalem to worship. The vulgar expect, and justly too, somewhat
extraordinary in the Priests; but when they see them tempted in all things like
unto themselves, and yet not without as great sin; when the same corrupt
passions and worldly affections appear in them, how should vulgar prejudice and
ignorance believe their Doctrines, or not despise their persons? We are obliged
above all men to approve our selves the Disciples of Christ, by imitating in a
due measure the simple meanness and plain poverty of our Saviors Life and
Conversation; at least (when our accidental grandeur is greatest) we must be
poor in Matthew. 5. 3. spirit. No eager pursuit, or restless intemperate desire
of wealth or honor, must be harbored by us, who are to fix Heb. 11. 16 our
whole hopes on another Country; and we should confess our selves strangers and
Pilgrims on this Earth, by the precept and examples of all the holy Prophets
and Apostles throughout the whole Book of God. But if our heavenly Father have
blessed us with affluence and increase, it is impious to let his bounty beget a
base and sordid parcimony in us, whom by this he designed as dispensers and
stewards of his goodness and providence to the poor, the Fatherless and the
Widow. Pure Jam. 1. 27. Religion and undesiled before God, says St. James, is
to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction. And St. John, Whosoever
has 1 John 3. 17. this Worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and
shuts his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him?

We are the poor man's Advocate and Solicitor with others, and our selves are
the proper Channels and Conveyances through whom God derives his refreshing
streams to the needy; and if, in their running through our hands, they leave but
enough behind them to satisfy our own necessary wants and occasions, it is all
we can in duty call ours.

For the rich therefore among us to be closehanded, and niggardly toward the
want of our Brethren, and to fancy we have performed our part in Preaching to
save their Souls, when at the same time we let their Bodies starve; this is a
Crime of a deeper die than to fall under the notion of common Avarice; it is
with Sacrilegious hands to stop the current of God's Goodness, and to rob the
public stock of Providence. But a Discourse of this kind here, I hope is al
ogether needless; And these brief Hints are designed more to prevent oversights
of this kind that may happen, than to suggest any neglect that now are.

I am naturally inclined to Tenderness and Pity, and therefore consider it not
in my self as a Virtue. The Pain of a Brute methinks touches my sense in the
remote relation of animality: But as I am included in the mass of Mankind, and
am a piece of the Species; so again I think each part of that (in a manner) a
piece of me; at least it is a member of that whole, whereof I my self am also a
part: And therefore I cannot see a Wound, or Hurt, or Grief in another, but I
fancy I feel it in my self; and a certain sensible Pain is derived to me by
Sympathetick Communication, as I have one share in the whole. And thus methinks
in easing the Grief, or want or pain of another, I apply a Remedy to my own
Sore, and assuage the smart of that Pain, which I feel in the great body of
Mankind.

But still farther: the Sufferings of another affect me (yet still) by a nearer
and more tender concern, and as I am a Member of Christ's Mystical Body, the
least Dolor in any other part touches me to the quick, and I easily Sympathize
with the wants of a Fellow-Member; otherwise I should fear I had no part with
my Savior, or as a dead Member had lost all sense of the Divine Life.

And now (Reader) to sum up all (tho much more might be said on the noble
subject of this Treatise) as I entertained thy first glance with a Figure at
the beginning, so I will conclude all in presenting thee a slight Pourtrait of
a true Clergyman.

He is one that fears God and the King, and meddles not with them that are
given to change; he believes and can prove, that the King is Head of Church and
State immediately under God, and that He is accountable to none but Heaven. He
zealously asserts the Royal Prerogative, and reveres the Fundamental Laws of
the Land, and that for Conscience sake; yet neither basely fawns, nor busily
rails himself (the better trick of the two) into Preferment. The Word of God is
his Compass, and his Conscience the Needle by which he steers as steady a
Course in the most tempestuous, as in the most serene and calmest Weather. He
knows his Commission runs high, and his Character to be great, as he is the
Ambassador of the King of Heaven; and therefore he dares not stoop out of base
fear to any unwarrantable compliance to the dishonor of his Master, as also
pretends not a false License by an assuming Pride to affront the Princes that
give him Audience. If by his Prudence and Conduct his Embassage meets with
success, and answers the desires of his Master, he is joyful; if with neglect
or contempt, he rails not: but at his recalling home (he knows) must make his
Report at his Master's Court. If any miscarriage have happened through his folly
or fear, he knows very well that the punishment is Capital. He strives not to
make himself revered by a starcht Deportment, affected Gravity, or a mortified
Grimace; but by acts of Piety, Loyalty, and Charity: and his Motto is Semper
Idem, as having the same meek even Temper of Mind when Bishop, as when Vicar.
If he be not very Learned, he is nevertheless honest and painful in his
Calling: if he be, he is not assuming or dogmatical, much less an ill-bred
pedantick Opiniator. He is dutiful to his Diocesan, and obedient to his
Ordinary; and his Conversation toward his Flock is an equal mixture of
Affability, Gravity, and Meekness. He carefully calculates his Sermons for the
Meridian of his Parishioners, and reproves their Irregularities with awe and
reverence from the Pulpit, where it is the word of God; but with a more familiar
Gentleness in private Converse, where it is his own. If by chance he light into
Company profane or obscene, he expresses a dislike rather grave than morose;
and can tell when to reprove with Raillery, when with Severity: He knows too,
when to rebuke one Oath will occasion half a score, and an affront to the
Parson to boot; this boisterous rude company of all he shuns, where contempt
must needs follow both ways. He can easily and adjustly act the Scholar or the
Gentleman, as occasion requires; but his general Conversation has a due
mixture of both. At Table his discourse is the most savoury Sauce, and here he
is liberal and hospitable, as knowing very well that Principles of Obedience
and Conformity work best, when they are taken down in good Meat and Drink
gratis. He is dutiful and thankful to his Patron, yet cannot connive at, much
less flatter his Vice: In a word, he has true Christian Courage, and fears not
man that can kill the body and do no more.

The End.
Some Books Printed for Henry Brom.
DR. Comber's Paraphrase on the Common Prayer, in four Volumes, in Octavo.
Seneca's Morals in three Vol. Octavo. Dr. Heylin on the Creed, in Folio. The
Fathers Legacy to his Friends, containing the whole Duty of Man. Dr.
Du-Moulin's Week of Prayers. Christianity no Enthusiasm. Dr. Woodford on the
Psalms. -- His Divine Poems. The Guide to Eternity. Precepts and Practical
Rules for a truly Christian life. Mr. Camfield's Discourse of Angels. The
Reformed Catholic, or the Love of Jesus. The Lives of the Grand Viziers. The
History of the Savarites. Bp. Wilkins Real Character in Fol. -- His Natural
Religion. The History of the Irish Rebellion in Fol. The Life of the Great Duke
Espernon. Montluck's Commentaries, fol. Bp. Cousens against Transubstantiation.
Mr. Simpson's Compendium of Music. His Violist. Dr. Comber 's Advice to Roman
Catholics. Dr. Lloyd's several Sermons and Tracts in Defense of the Church.
Dr. Spratt's four Sermons. -- His Plague of Athens. Speed's Maps in Fol. and
his Epitom. Six Witty Conversations. Pharmacopoeia Londin. fol. Spencer's
Works, in fol. Mr. Banister's Airs. Dr. Whitby against Host-worship. The Fair
one of Tunis. Mr. Hickman's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. Dr. Glanvil's zealous
and impartial Protestant. Barbett's Practice of Physic. Vossius of the Winds
and Seas. Pool's Parnassus in English. The Scholars Guide from the Accidence to
the University. Plots and Conspiracies. Counter-Plot. Way of Peace, Love and
Truth. Centum Fabulae. Anatomy of the Elder. Artis Oratoriae. Skinner 's
Lexicon in Fol. Education of Children. Sir Kenelm Digby's Receipts. Virgil
Travesty. Lucian Burlesque. The Exact Constable. Dr. Starkey's Apology for the
Church. The Planters Manual. The Complete Gamester. Dr. Glisson's Anatomy.
Glisson's Common Law Epitomis'd. Dr. Ford's Sermon on the Man whose Legs and
Arms rotted off. Boscobel, or the Kings Escape at Worcester. Study to be quiet.

