ANIMADVERSIONS On a late BOOK ENTITLED THE REASONABLENESS OF CHRISTIANITY As
delivered in the SCRIPTURES.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon. Lichfield for George West, and Anthony Piesley,
MDCXCVII.

THE PREFACE.
I Need make no Apology for the following papers. The Liberty which the Author
of The Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. has taken in delivering his
Thoughts to the World, gives every man a right to examine them, that proposes
no other End than to enquire after Truth: which I have endeavored with as
sincere a design, as I hope he published them.

I have followed a method which His Treatise naturally led me into, and have
chose to build my Observations upon the same Authority, on which he has
founded his Rule of Faith, that of the Scriptures; rather than upon any Systems
drawn from them, which I must confess my self to be but little acquainted with.
And this I cannot but agree with him to be the most rational means of silencing
all Religious controversies. For if all Parties would join Issue in this, that
nothing ought to be required to be believed, but what is enjoined by the clear
and express declarations of Scripture; nor any Article rejected that is there
plainly delivered, there might be some probable grounds to hope for a happy
Conclusion of all disputes of that nature, in a very little time. For certainly
God has not made it very difficult for us to determine, what we are to believe,
how inconceivable soever the manner of some things may appear to us.

The main design which the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc.
seems to have had, is to lay down such a Scheme of Faith only, as he finds
delivered in scripture, and not to rest satisfied with those Collections of
Articles, which are to be met with in the Common Systems, without any
sufficient warrant from scripture. And to this End he has run through the
Gospels and Acts to discover upon what Terms our Blessed Savior, who first
founded, and his Apostles, who afterward built up Christianity, admitted men
into that Religion. And having declared at large all that he can find required
by them to make a man a Christian, which he tells us was only the Believing
Jesus to be the Messiah; he concludes that nothing ought to be made necessary
to be believed now, which was not so then; nor any Articles imposed upon us,
which are not enjoined in order to salvation in those parts of scripture which
he has considered: which alone, according to him, declare the Conditions, upon
which men are denominated believers or Christians.

This way of examining our Faith by the scripture, had been an unexceptionable
Method for fixing the measure of it, if he had omitted no Articles which are
there made as necessary to be believed by all Christians as what is observed in
His Treatise. For that there are others required even to make a man a Christian
in these parts of sacred Writ, from whence he has extracted his Article of
Faith, is what I propose to make appear in the following Observations. As also
to show that there are some distinct Articles from what are set down in the
Gospels and Acts, delivered in the Epistles, that are absolutely necessary to
be believed to salvation; in answer to that assertion of our Author, P. 295.
That it is not in the Epistles that we are to learn what are the Fundamental
Articles of Faith, with some others of the like nature. Which is the Reason
that I give the Title of a Vindication of the Epistles to the former part of
these Papers.

In the next place I have considered the Reasons our Author has assigned for
Christ's coming into the World. And how necessary it was to examine both these
in order to a more exact consideration of that one Article this Author has so
much insisted on, the Reader will easily apprehend.

He tells us in his Vindication, p. 6.
that he designed the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. chiefly for those
who were not yet thoroughly and firmly Christians. I shall not dispute the
sincerity of his Intention, though I find no such Intimation in the Treatise it
self. Yet a well-meaning Author, who has appeared very warmly in defense of it,
Mr. Bold.
believes that to be his only design, though he tells us he had considered it
with very great care and Application.

This Author also is of opinion that there is nothing more required to make a
Man a Christian, then the believing Jesus to be the Messiah. But had he given
himself a little more leisure to consider into what faith he himself was
baptized, or into what he baptizes others; he must have acknowledged, that the
Explicitly believing in Father and Holy Ghost is as much required of every one
initiated into Christianity, as believing Jesus to be the Messiah. For the
Faith in the Holy Trinity has always been required in order to Baptism. Indeed
at the first, men might be denominated Christians, upon the bare believing
Jesus to be the Messiah; yet when there was more revealed concerning Him, and
consequently a larger faith required, they could no more have continued
Christians, if they had not believed this also, than if they had still been
altogether unbelievers.

I shall make no other Observation upon what this Author has urged but this,
that he has been a little too hasty in concluding, that if the Reasonableness
of Christianity merits no worse a Character upon any other Account, than it
does justly deserve for advancing this point, P. 52.
that Christ and his Apostles did not propound any Article as necessarily to be
believed, to make a Man a Christian, but this, that Jesus is the Christ or
Messiah, I think it may with great justice be reputed one of the best books
that has been published for at least this sixteen hundred years, since I
suppose he will hardly deny that Mr Hobbs writ within that space, who
maintained the very same Assertion, as I have farther observed in the following
Remarks, though I am afraid with a far worse Intention, than the Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity etc. seems to have had in that Treatise. I need
reflect no farther upon any thing propounded by this Author, not only because
his Papers came abroad after the following Remarks were drawn up, but because
there does not seem to be any thing very material, which was not before
observed in the Reasonableness of Christianity etc. or the Authors Vindication
of it.

I hope there is nothing in the following Papers that will be mistaken for a
Reflection; for I am sure there was none designed. For I think an Adversary
ought to be treated with respect, how wide soever his Notions may be from
Truth, if his design be sincere. Which I must confess I cannot but believe of
the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity etc. And though I cannot join
in his opinion, yet I think my self obliged to have so much charity as to
suppose, that he would not maintain what he was fully satisfied was an Error.
Whether I have said enough to convince him he has been in a mistake, I cannot
promise. For I may fancy that a demonstration to me which may be no proof to
others. I have endeavored to represent his sense with the utmost justice and
sincerity, and if I have any where mistaken it, I can only say it was both
against my Intention and Knowledge.

And now I have only thus much to assure my Adversary of; that I have not made
any Observations upon his Book, out of bigottry to a Party, or prejudice to any
set of opinions. For I have no other Interest to serve than that of Truth: nor
have I any Bias to incline me besides my own Impartial Enquiries. And if they
have misguided me, I shall be very ready to submit to better Information.

THE CONTENTS.
I. A Vindication of the Epistles Page 1. II. Of the Reason of Christ's coming
into the World. page 53 III. What we are to believe concerning Christ. page 64.
A VINDICATION Of The Epistles, etc.
WHatsoever Design the Author of The Reasonableness of Christianity might
propose in Publishing that Treatise, whether it was for the Benefit of those,
who were not thoroughly and firmly Christians, or to be a General Rule of Faith
to all sorts of Men, it does not seem to give such satisfaction to an
Inquisitive Mind, as might prevent all Exceptions against it, in relation to
either of those Ends. Not only because it introduces a new Scheme of Belief in
opposition to the anciently received Doctrine of the Church, but because it
does not answer the full Sense and Intent of Revelation, which is the only
Reason and Measure of our Faith.

I shall not make it my Business to compare it with the Socinian, or any other
Hypothesis, or enquire to what Sect or Party the Author seems most inclined,
but shall only so far consider his Opinions, as they seem to me to be
inconsistent with Truth.

For I cannot think my self obliged to fix any Man to a Party, which He will
not own himself to be of, though some of his Opinions should chance to have a
Tendency toward it. For that is so unfair, as well as an undecent Method of
managing a Dispute, that instead of stifling the old, it may serve only to
provoke fresh Opposition; and inflame, where perhaps milder Reasons might
convince. And besides, since every one that publishes his Thoughts with no
other Design, than for the Benefit of others, or to the End he may be better
informed if he be in the wrong, has a right to be treated with equal Charity,
or Humanity at least by others, it can certainly be no Prejudice even to the
right side, to allow him a Civility, which he has so just a claim to. And
therefore I shall think my self concerned to examine the Reasonableness of
Christianity with such an impartial Temper, as it may justly challenge. And to
be the more distinct and methodical in my Examination, I shall consider the
chief Parts of it, which are these.

First, To show the Reason of Christ's coming into the World. Which the Author
tells us, was to restore Mankind to that State, p. 3, 4, 5. etc.
which was forfeited by the Sin of our First Parents. But as he makes Adam's
Punishment to consist only in a Temporal Death, or a total ceasing to be; p. 10.
so does he confine the End and Design of our Savior's coming into the World,
to the freeing us from such a Death only, and restoring us to that Immortality,
which our First Parents lost. Which overthrows the Notion of our Savior's
redeeming us from an Eternity of Torments, and makes the effect of Original
Guilt no more than becoming subject to Death; and so destroys in a great
measure the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction. But how agreeable this will
prove to the Tenor of Scripture, I shall enquire more hereafter.

Second Principal Part of it is, to show what Faith is required to make a Man a
Christian. And that he asserts to be only the Belief of this one Proposition,
That Jesus is the Messah, p. 30, 31 32. etc.
or (which he thinks signifies the same) the Son of God. He does not deny other
Doctrines to be true, but maintains that this alone is absolutely necessary to
be believed. Indeed we all acknowledge this as the Fundamental Article of our
Faith, as Christians, that Jesus is the Messiah, the Prophet that was to come
into the world. But here the difference lies between us; Whether there is not
something more required, as necessary to be Believed: As that this Messiah was
God, as well as Man, and that through the Merits of his Satisfaction, he
redeemed us from Eternal Misery, etc. For the Decision of which we can only
appeal to Scripture.

Third and Last Part of it, which I shall have occasion to take Notice of, is
this: That whatsoever is necessary to be believed to Salvation, is contained in
the Holy Gospels, and Acts of the Apostles: p. 291, 292 etc.
And that the Epistles, which were only occasional Writings and Directions to
particular Churches, were not designed to deliver such Fundamental Articles as
must necessarily be Believed explicitly by all Christians. And therefore an
actual Belief of any of the Doctrines therein mentioned is not absolutely
required to make a Man a Member of the Christian Church: For, he thinks, a Man
may be a Christian, and a Believer, Vindis. p. 31.
without actually believing them; because those whom our Savior and his
Apostles, by their Preaching and Discourses, converted to the Faith, were made
Christians and Believers, barely upon the receiving what they Preached unto
them, long before any of the Epistles were written: Upon this Supposition the
other two Parts of his Treatise are built; and therefore it shall be my
Business in the first place, to prove that there are Doctrines in the Epistles,
distinct from those delivered in Gospels, or Acts, which are as absolutely
necessary to be Believed, and to be made Fundamental Articles of Faith, as any
other Parts of Revelation.

It may indeed seem an unnecessary Labor to Vindicate those Sacred Writings,
which have almost all of them been received, from the very first Ages of
Christianity, with as equal degrees of Assent, as all other Parts of Scripture,
and some of the Doctrines there set down, confessed to be altogether as necessary
to be actually Believed unto Salvation, as any whatsoever. For what should the
reason of all this be, if the Epistles were not real and essential Parts of the
Rule of Saving Faith? Was the Church then Imposed upon, or did it of it self
enjoin the Belief of any Doctrine as necessary to Salvation, when it had no
express Commission from God for it? For one of these we must grant, if the
Epistles were not designed to deliver Fundamentals to be actually Believed by
all Christians.

Now if several of the Doctrines contained in those Parts of Revelation have
all along down from the Apostles time been reputed necessary to be Believed to
Salvation, then certainly they ought not to be denied to be absolutely
subservient to that End, without the Proof of one, or all of these things.

First, That the Authors were not Divinely Inspired: But this is already
granted us by our Author, that they were Holy Writers inspired from above, p.
297.
who writ nothing but Truth. But what sort of Truth he here means, shall
hereafter be enquired into.

Or Secondly, That the Apostles had no Authority, or Commission to deliver any
thing for a necessary Article of Faith. But there can be no pretense for such
an Assertion, since it is granted by our Author, that their Doctrine, as
delivered in the Acts, does require our actual Belief. Since then what they
taught in their Preaching was of so great Authority, why should not their
Writings be of the same Consequence, especially since they are allowed by our
Author to be of Divine Inspiration?

If then the want of sufficient Commission does not seem to be an Argument
against the Doctrines contained in the Epistles, it must be made appear in the
Third Place, before they should be rejected, that none of the Doctrines were
writ with any design, that all Christians should be necessarily required to
believe them to Salvation. But how can this be proved? Are there any such hints
in the Epistles themselves, or have we any footsteps of a Tradition that
informs us, that the Apostles left them to be received with such an
Indifference? For if neither of these can be shown, or if the contrary is
evident, Namely, that the Apostles did not submit their Doctrines to Men's
choice, whether they would Believe them or not, without hazarding their
Salvation; and if it appear from the design of the Epistles, and from many
places of them, which I shall hereafter mention, that they did enjoin the
explicit Belief of several of their Doctrines, without which Men could not be
saved, then we have still the more reason to be confirmed in acknowledging them
for Fundamentals of our Faith.

Fourthly, Then there must be some Contradiction in the Epistles to the other
parts of Scripture, that can prevent their Doctrines from being as necessary to
be Believed, as any other the most important parts of Revelation. But as this
can never be made appear, so it is not possible to suppose that the Epistles
should contain Contradictions, if we allow what our Author has granted, p. 297.
that they were Divinely inspired.

Then Fifthly and Lastly, The only Plea remaining why the Doctrines delivered
in the Epistles are not to be received with the same degrees of Assent, with
those in the Gospels and Acts, or that particular Article so much insisted upon
in the Reasonableness of Christianity, must be, because they are none of them
of equal necessity to be known to make a Man a Christian. But how does this
appear? Are there no great and fundamental Truths inserted in the Epistles, as
well as in the Gospels? Vindic. p. 16.
But it is urged, That they are promiscuously set down, and have no such Mark
of Distinction, as his Article is found to have in the Gospels and Acts. But
this Objection seems too precarious. For I question not but I shall make it
appear, that there are Doctrines in the Epistles, that are as much
distinguished by the great importance which they are declared to be of; and by
the necessity that is laid upon all Christians of actually Believing them, by
the Inspired Writers, as any other universally acknowledged Article of our
Faith. Indeed they are mixed with other things, which are not of such immediate
concern to us; but so are the Doctrines contained in the Gospels. And therefore
if this is a Prejudice to one, it must be so equally to the other.

Indeed this seems objected, That though the Apostles were Divinely Inspired in
their Epistolary Writings, and although they had a Divine Commission to teach
what was necessary to Salvation, yet their Commission did not extend to the
making any other Article necessary to Salvation, than what our Savior had
already declared to be sufficient for it. And this is manifest from the whole
Tenor of the Epistles, where there are no Doctrines proposed to be Believed
upon the absolute Promise of Salvation, and nothing declared to be so much a
Fundamental, distinct from what is delivered in the Gospels, or Acts, as that
we cannot be saved without an explicit Belief of it. Since therefore the
Apostles have not laid such stress upon any Doctrines in their Epistles, we
ought not to do it. And therefore of what use soever the Epistles may be to us
otherwise, for the resolving Doubts, and reforming Mistakes, which are of great
Advantage to our Knowledge and Practice; p. 295.297.
as also for the expounding, clearing and confirming the Christian Doctrine,
and establishing those in it, who had embraced it, yet there can be no distinct
Truths contained in them of so great Consequence, in order to Salvation, as
there are in the Gospels and Acts, were all that is necessary to be Believed,
to make a Man a Christian, is declared to be sufficient to that End; and
Eternal Life proposed upon such a Faith, and Eternal Damnation denounced upon a
Disbelief; which are not annexed to any of the Doctrines in the Epistles. And
therefore we must be very unwary Christians, to lay a greater force upon any
Doctrines, than the Apostles have done, or make any Terms of Salvation, or
Church Communion absolutely necessary, which were never by the Apostles so
declared.

For an Answer to this, it will be material to Examine, first, whether nothing
is absolutely necessary to be Believed to Salvation, but what is declared to be
so, or whether any Doctrine, upon which Salvation is proposed, is singly of it
self sufficient for it. And this seems to be a Query of no small importance.
For if this is made the only Rule whereby to judge of Fundamentals, viz. A
Doctrine's being expressly declared, to be necessary to be actually Believed to
Salvation, we should, I fear, by this means raise several Exceptions against a
great part of Religion. For if this must universally hold in matters of Faith,
it must also in those of Practice, most of which would unavoidably lose their
Force and Obligation, if the Observance of no other Duties was required of us,
but such alone as the Scripture had declared to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation. In like manner, if in matters of Faith, nothing is to be required
for a Fundamental, but what is so proposed, and to which Salvation is expressly
annexed and promised, it would very probably make way for a very unintelligible
Faith, in which Christians could not possibly agree. For if nothing more is to
be Believed as necessary to Salvation, than what is so proposed, then it will
follow, that no more than the bare Proposition, which is declared to be of that
great Importance, is to be assented to. As suppose in that Proposition, which I
shall hereafter have more occasion to consider, He that believes that Jesus is
the Messiah, has eternal Life; if what is there required to be believed, is
singly of it self sufficient to Salvation, then it must be so, as it is there
proposed, without any farther Explication of it; because there is no
Explication proposed to be believed upon the like Promise. From whence it will
follow, that the bare Proposition is alone necessary to be Believed, without
any other Interpretation, if any at all may be admitted, than what is agreeable
to the particular Humors of Men; the unhappy Consequences of which, will be
endless Wranglings and Distractions. For which reason it seems evident, that
all the Fundamental Parts of Faith cannot be comprehended in those Texts alone,
which are declared to be of that important Nature, unless the full Extent and
Meaning was there set down and delivered; which I cannot find. And therefore it
cannot be denied, but that the other parts of Scripture, which relate the
Grounds and Reasons of such a Faith, which is required to Salvation, and that
explain the Nature and Extent of it, are to be looked upon as equally
Obligatory, whether expressed in Gospels, or Epistles.

For besides, if every Text of Scripture must be looked upon as sufficient to
Salvation, upon the Belief of which Eternal Life is promised, even the very
Scripture will hardly be found reconcilable to it self. For though in some places
Salvation is promised to those who believe Jesus to be the Messiah, yet in
others it is declared to be Life Eternal to know the only true God, as well as
Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Both of which places, if they must be
understood in their limited Sense, will be almost found contradictory to each
other. Because the one proposes a larger Faith to Salvation, than is required
by the other. Wherefore it seems more reasonable to understand these, and other
places of Scripture of the like nature, in that Sense which is applied to
Faith, Fear of God, Love, Hope, and the like, when singly made use of to
express the whole Duty of a Christian, viz. That one that is endued with such a
Faith, or such Virtues, cannot be defective in the Belief of all other
Articles, or in the Practice of all other Duties. For as any of these Virtues,
when mentioned alone as sufficient to save us, cannot be understood exclusively
of all others; so when Believing in Christ, or any other Proposition of that
nature, is alone required to make a Man a Christian, we ought either to
understand it as spoken conditionally, upon a supposition of the Belief of all
other Articles of the Christian Religion; or else, as designed to denote, that
as the believing Jesus to be the Christ, is the first step to Christianity, so
he that is once firmly and thoroughly convinced of that, will not deny his
assent to any other Article of Faith in the whole Christian Profession, that
shall be required of him.

From all which it is natural to infer, that there must be other Articles of
Faith in the Scriptures, that are as absolutely necessary to be Believed to
Salvation, as those to which Eternal Life is expressly promised; and that many
of those Texts of Scripture, which are required to be believed to Salvation,
are not of themselves, exclusive of all others, sufficient for that End. So
that though it should be granted, that there are no Articles of Faith in the
Epistles so expressly enjoined to be Believed to Salvation, as some delivered in
the Gospels and Acts, yet it will not follow, but that some of them may be of
as important a Nature, and as much to be thought Fundamentals.

But however it must be considered, Secondly, that if it should be granted,
that no Articles were absolutely necessary to be Believed, but what were
expressly so declared by the Inspired Writers, yet there may be produced some
Articles from the Epistles, that are as much required to be actually believed
to Salvation, as any of those delivered in the Gospels or Acts, as I shall show
in its proper place. So that for both these Reasons, some of the Doctrines
delivered in the Epistles ought to be as earnestly pressed, and enjoined to be
explicitly Believed upon hazard of Salvation, as any found elsewhere in
Scripture.

There are indeed a great many Truths both in the Gospels and Epistles, which
are only to be Believed upon the general Ground of Faith, which is the Veracity
of God. But those of a higher Nature, which have an immediate Tendency to the
Salvation of Mankind, and the Method by which our Savior has obtained it for
us, are to be explicitly Believed by all, in order to their Salvation. So that
in both Gospels and Epistles there is a twofold Faith required; the one depends
upon the general Ground of our Belief, which relies upon the Veracity of God,
that every thing which he has Revealed is true: The other respects the End for
which he has Revealed any thing to us, and that is only the Eternal Benefit and
Happiness of Mankind. So that whatsoever in Scripture relates to this End, is
of more absolute necessity to be Believed to Salvation. And this may serve for
a General Direction, whereby to distinguish fundamental Truths, either in
Gospels or Epistles, or any other parts of Divine Revelation. For whatsoever is
proposed to our Belief, as a necessary Condition in order to our Happiness,
must be included under this saving Faith.

And therefore I shall now proceed to show that the Epistles have as much Right
and Title to our Faith, as it may be considered in this last sense, as any
other parts of Revelation; since they equally treat of the Covenant of Grace,
and the Means of Salvation. For whatsoever it is that is required of us to be
actually believed, as a Condition upon which our Happiness depends, must be
made a Fundamental of our Faith. And therefore if the Epistles contain in them
any Doctrines of this Nature, they cannot be disbelieved, without great hazard
of our Salvation.

First, that the Epistles are to be made part of the Rule of Faith, by which
alone we are to be saved, as well as the Gospels, or Acts of the Apostles, is
evident from the Nature of Revelation. For if it can be proved, that the
Epistles are as much a part of Divine Revelation as the other, it will be no
easy Task to demonstrate, that they are not equally to be received; especially
if it can be made appear, that the End of their Revelation was the Eternal
Happiness of Mankind, which I shall speak to hereafter.

Now this is the very Reason and Foundation of our Belief of the Christian
Religion; first, that it is Revealed by God; and secondly, that it has the
Attestation of Miracles to confirm it; such as can be done by no other Power,
but Divine. For without this we could have no Obligations upon us to believe
it, because we could have no certain assurance, that it came from God. But
whatsoever is thus Revealed to us, we are under a necessity to believe, upon
the Veracity of Him that Revealed it. And here we are not so to divide our
Belief, as to confine it to one part of Revelation, and deny it to another,
unless we are assured that it has different degrees of Evidence.

For this would destroy the force of Revelation, and resolve all Religion into
the Wills and Humors of Men. There are indeed (as has been before observed)
different Acts of Faith required of us, according to the different Matter of
Revelation. But where the Matter is of as great importance in one place, as in
another, there also must our Assent be equal: Unless we can prove that there is
not the same certainty for the Revelation, i e. That there is not the same
Testimony of Divine Miracles to assure us of the Truth of it.

But here it is not material to examine, Whether the Apostles worked Miracles,
to evince the Truth of their Doctrines in the Epistles: It is enough that their
Miracles attested their Divine Mission, and were sufficiently demonstrative,
that their Doctrines had a Divine Authority, and Original, and were confirmed
by a Divine Power. For the Design of their Miracles was not to give Authority
to such a particular Doctrine only, but to testify in general, that they had a
Commission from God, to teach what was necessary to be believed, or practiced
to Salvation.

Now that the Apostles wrought many Miracles, such as were before done by our
Savior, for the Confirmation of their Mission and Doctrines, is undeniably
evident from the whole History of the Acts, where they are said to heal the
Sick, raise the Dead, and to be endued with all other supernatural Gifts, which
might be sufficient to convince the World, that they received their Mission and
Authority from God. But to what End should the Apostles work Miracles, if after
all their Doctrines which they delivered for Fundamentals, were not absolutely
necessary to be believed? Now Miracles are never wrought but to convince Men of
some great Truths, which would be of great Importance to them, and which
perhaps they would not otherwise be induced to believe. If therefore the
Apostles had such a Power of working Miracles committed to them, to confirm the
Truth of their Doctrines, we are under as great Obligations to make them
Articles of our Faith, especially if they were designed for such, as any other
parts of Holy Writ. Now what Reason have we to believe the Holy Gospels, but
only the undeniable Attestation of Miracles. But are there not the same for the
Confirmation of the Epistles too? That is, Were not the Authors Divinely
Inspired, and did they not work Miracles, to show that they were so? If then it
be granted, that the Apostles had this supernatural Power given them, to be an
unquestionable Evidence of their Inspiration, this alone is sufficient to
enforce our actual Belief of the Doctrines in the Epistles, as much as in the
Gospels; unless we can show, that the Apostles were not Inspired when they writ
them, or that their Power of working Miracles, to convince the World that they
were so, was then ceased, or else that they did not design any Doctrines in
them to be necessary to be believed. But if none of these can with any
tolerable Reason be pretended, there can be little excuse for our not admitting
them, as necessary and fundamental Parts of the Rule of Faith.

And this moreover ought to make us very cautious how we rejected them, because
if we deny such an Authority to the Epistles, as requires an absolute necessity
of believing any of the Doctrines as therein contained, we shall have no very
strong Arguments remaining, whereby to defend those of the Gospels; which have
only the Authority of Inspirations confirmed by Miracles; so that they must
unavoidably stand, or fall together. For if it be granted, that the Evidence
for the Truth of both be the same, and the same Divine Authority stamped upon
both, we cannot deny that the Measures of our Belief must be equally taken from
them both, where the Matter is of the same importance; And this will
necessarily lead us to these Conclusions:

First, That whatsoever we are firmly assured is Revealed by God, we are
obliged to believe it upon his Veracity, since he neither can, or will Reveal
any thing but what is undeniably true.

Secondly, That whatsoever is made by this Revelation a fundamental Article of
our Faith, we cannot be ignorant of, without great hazard of our Salvation.

Thirdly, and Lastly, For the true Knowledge of any Article of Faith, we must
not judge of it from some particular Place, but from the universal Consent and
Harmony of Revelation.

And now, since the Epistles must be granted to be a particular Revelation, I
would ask to what End there should be this Revelation, and several Doctrines
therein delivered, which concern both our Faith and Practice, if there was no
necessity for them in order to Salvation? 1 Cor. 14.37.
Why should the Inspired Writers give any Instructions to a Church for the
Commandments of God, if yet without the least hazard of Salvation, they might
be ignorant of them? For it does not seem consistent with the End, or Nature of
Revelation, which under the Christian Dispensation was designed only for the
eternal Advantage of Mankind, that no parts of it delivered in the Epistles,
which are all of them of Divine Revelation, should be absolutely necessary for
that End; and that those who had the Name and Benefit of Christians, should not
be indispensably obliged to form their Faith, or govern their Practice
according to its Directions. Certainly any one that reads, and considers the
Epistles impartially, must judge, that the Authors did design some parts of
them, at least, for Rules to guide Men in the way to Happiness; without the
Observance of which, those to whom they should be known, could not be saved.
For if all the Instructions in the Epistles might be safely disregarded, then
their Inspiration was in vain. Since if Men might be as easily saved without
them, the Revelation must be confessed to be superfluous.

If it be said, that the Doctrines were only writ for the use of particular
Churches, yet that (though it should be granted, which there is no reason for,)
will prove nothing, unless it appears, that there were no general Directions
designed, which are of the same importance to all Christians now, that they
could be of, to any particular Church then; for certainly what was necessary to
be believed to Salvation by the Members of a Church in the Apostles days, must
be so now, and to the end of the World.

If it be demanded, that if there are any such Fundamentals in the Epistles, as
we contend for, we should draw out a Scheme of them, just so many, and no more,
that are to be explicitly believed to Salvation, and which will equally oblige
all Mankind; though we should not be able to satisfy this Demand, yet it will be
sufficient to our present Purpose, if we can produce any Doctrines that are
absolutely enjoined to be believed by all Christians; and that are either
distinct from, or more fully expressed, than any of those contained in the
Gospels, or Acts; as I shall hereafter endeavor to show there are some of that
nature, without the Belief of which, though we may grant Men might be saved
before they were known, yet when they were divulged, they could no more be
styled true Christians without the Belief of them, than if they had not at all
believed. To instance in a like case: None could any longer be called
Christians, or admitted into that Communion, after that form of Baptism was
required, in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, though they might have that
Denomination before, who did not acknowledge their Faith in the Holy Trinity;
since as none could be Baptized Christians, without the Confession of that
Faith, so none could continue in the Number of Christians, that denied it. But
of this more in its proper place.

And thus we may be convinced, from the Nature of Revelation, that all the
parts of it have an equal Authority, and that where the End of the Revelation
was the Glory of God, and the Salvation of Mankind, (as I shall hereafter show
was the Apostles Designs in writing their Epistles) there the same Acts of
Faith are required of us.

But before I proceed any farther in the Vindication of these sacred Writings,
it will be necessary to consider an Objection, or rather an Evasion of our
Author's, in his Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity, Vindic. p.
19.
which may seem to render what has been hitherto urged superfluous; since it
intimates that he believes as much of the Epistles, and in as true a sense as
any man whatsoever. And for the Proof of this, he cites what he had before
declared in the Reasonableness of Christianity it self, p. 299. These Holy
Writers, (viz. The Penmen of the Scriptures) inspired from above, writ nothing
but Truth, and in most places, very weighty Truths to us now, for the
expounding, clearing and confirming the Christian Doctrine, and establishing
those in it, who had embraced it. And again, p. 299. The other parts of Divine
Revelation are Objects of Faith, and are so to be received. They are Truths, of
which none that is once known to be such, i. e. Revealed, may, or ought to be
disbelieved. And if this (as he goes on) does not satisfy you, that I have as
high a Veneration for the Epistles, as you, or any one can have, I require you
to publish to the World, those Passages which show my contempt of them.

Indeed if he said no more concerning the Epistles, than what is mentioned in
these Passages, there would not have been so much occasion for a Defense of
them. But however even these do not seem altogether unexceptionable; for though
these allow the Truths contained in the Epistles, to be Objects of our Faith,
yet they do not suppose them, or any parts of them, to be more so, than any
other places of Scripture, which have no relation to the Salvation of Mankind;
and which we are only bound to believe to be true, upon the Veracity of God
that revealed them. For that this is all which the Author meant, is very plain
from what he maintains a little after, Vindic. p. 31.
viz. That all the rest of the Inspired Writings, or if you please, Articles,
are of equal necessity to be believed, to make a Man a Christian, with what was
preached by our Savior and his Apostles, (by which he only means what is
recorded in the Gospels and Acts) that I deny.

So that it plainly appears, that all the Respect which he professes for the
Epistles, consists only in this: That he believes them to be true; but that the
Doctrines contained in them are no more necessary to be actually believed, or
to be made fundamental Articles of Faith, than any indifferent or Historical
Matters in the Bible; all which we believe to be true, because they are
contained in that Book, which we are fully persuaded is the Word of God. So
that a bare Assent to them only, as they are true, is no higher an Act of
Faith, than the believing that there was such an Apostle as St. Paul, and that
he was the Author of such Epistles.

But if our Author does indeed believe that all is true which is contained in
the Epistles, why should he deny that any of the Truths therein mentioned are
to be made Fundamentals? For methinks it would be no great Imposition, to be
obliged to believe that as a necessary Article of Faith, in order to Salvation,
which he is already persuaded is a real Truth.

But besides, this is what we contend for, that there are Doctrines contained
in the Epistles, that are of equal necessity to be believed, to make a Man a
Christian, with those in the Gospels, or in the Acts of the Apostles, as being
of as great Importance to us; and therefore they are also to be believed upon
another Ground, besides that of mere Revelation.

Go and teach all Nations. And elsewhere, Mat. 28 19. Joh. 20.21.
As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. Which Commission as it invests
them with as full a Power of Teaching whatsoever was necessary to Salvation, so
it lays as great a necessity upon others of Believing them, as if Christ
himself had taught in his own Person. For whosoever acts by another's
Commission, acts in his Name, and whatever he does by virtue of that
Commission, it is looked upon to be his, who gave him such Authority.

Now that the Apostles did not exceed this Authority, or teach for Doctrines
the Commandments of Men, is very evident, since it is granted they were
Divinely Inspired, and taught nothing as necessary to be believed, but what
they received from God. So that all that can be here objected, seems to be
this; That the Apostles had no Commission to write any fundamental Doctrines in
the Epistles, but only in their Sermons, which are set down in the Acts of the
Apostles. If this indeed could be proved, it would be a material Objection, but
if there is not the least shadow of Reason to countenance such a groundless
Supposition, without showing that the Apostles did exceed their Commission,
though at the same time they were Divinely Inspired, then we are bound to
acknowledge that the Epistles, as well as the Acts, are an indispensible part
of the Rule of our Faith; for God himself has put no difference betwixt them.

But there is yet something more to be observed in the Epistles written by St.
Paul, (which are much the greatest part) and that is, that he received his
Doctrines therein contained by a more particular Revelation, than any of the
other Apostles. For he was neither instructed by Christ himself while on Earth,
as not being his Disciple; nor had he any account of the Doctrines which he
taught, from those Apostles who had constantly heard him, but he received all
his Instructions immediately from Heaven, as he himself has told us in the
first Chap. of Gal. 11 and 12. Ver. But I certify you Brethren, that the
Gospel which was preached of me, is not after man. For I neither received it of
man, neither was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ. From
whence it is plain, that his Doctrines were of equal Authority with what were
taught by Christ himself; and that the things which he writ (as himself
testifies of them in the 1 Cor. 14.37.) were the Commandments of the Lord, i.
e. Were of as great necessity to be believed to Salvation, as any other parts
of Revelation; which cannot in the least be doubted, if we also consider, that
Men are to be Judged by that Gospel which St. Paul taught, at the last Day: As
he assures us in Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of Men
by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, which Gospel he must mean that Epistle
to be part of: for he had taught those at Rome no otherwise than by this
Epistle; for he never had been there when this was writ, nor do we know that he
had sent them any Epistle before it.

But besides, the Doctrines which St. Paul has delivered in this Epistle to the
Romans, are no more than what he had before taught to others, as is plain from
his own words to the Elders of Ephesus, Act. 20.27. That he had not shunned to
declare unto them all the Counsel of God. Which he would not have said, if he
had a Commission to make any thing necessary to be believed to Salvation by
others, which was not revealed to them through his Ministry. So that as both what
he taught, and writ in his Epistles, are the same Doctrines, so are they both
equally Obligatory.

But Lastly, There is this more remarkable of St. Paul, that he was the Apostle
of the Gentiles, and for the most part the first that had preached the Gospel
amongst them. And therefore what he taught could be the only Rule of Faith to
them, especially till the Gospels were written, which none of them were, till
some time after he had begun to preach the Gospel amongst the Gentiles. From
whence it follows, that as what he taught was the only Rule of Faith to them,
before they could have the Gospels, so neither would his Doctrines after the
publishing the Gospels, be less necessary to be believed; since their Authority
would be much rather increased than lessened, by the assistance of so great a
Foundation as the Gospels to support them.

What I have here said of St. Paul, is not with a Design to lessen the
Authority of the other Epistles; for they are all Inspired by the same Holy
Spirit, and are therefore equally necessary to be believed; but only as we have
a greater Number of his transmitted to us, than of all the other Apostles, so I
thought it most necessary to show, that the reason why we are obliged to
believe them to Salvation, was as great as can possibly be produced, for any
thing of that Nature.

And thus I hope I have made it fully evident, that the Apostles had a
sufficient Commission from God, to make those Doctrines which they taught in
their Epistles absolutely necessary to be believed to Salvation. And that they
did declare some of their Doctrines to be of this Nature, I shall come now in a
little time to prove.

Thirdly, The End and Reason for which the Epistles were written, will make
this more fully appear. For to make any thing more firmly believed and assented
to, there is not only required a certain knowledge of its being Revealed, but
also of the End for which it was Revealed. Now nothing can be more worthy of
God, and more beneficial to Man, than the revealing the Conditions, which he
has made necessary for our obtaining Happiness; and this is fully done in the
Covenant of the Gospel. And as the Conditions are necessary to be known before
we can perform them, so God has taken sufficient care to give us a full
Revelation of them: First, In a large History of the Method that Christ made
use of, for the purchasing our Redemption, and the Miracles which he wrought,
for the Confirmation of his Mission and Doctrine. And Secondly, In a more full
and clear Manifestation, by the coming of the Holy Ghost, of all those things
which were required of us to be believed. And this he entrusted to the
Apostles, who were to that End both Divinely Inspired, and had the Power of
working Miracles committed to them, to establish and confirm the Truth of their
Doctrines. So that it may be no very great Absurdity to affirm, that all things
which are necessary to be believed to Salvation, are not fully and clearly
contained in the Gospels.

Indeed Tota Religio Christiana, omnia illius dogmata fidei and praecepta vitae
ad salutem necessaria, quatuor Evangeliis, imo unico Mathaei Evangelio
continentur: neque ex Epistolis Apostolorum, imo nec Apostoli Pauli ullum dogma
ad salutem creditu necessarium proferetur, quod non antea in Evangelio clare
expressum exstat. -- Ausim itaeque dicere etiamsi sola quatuor exstarent
Evangelian os perfectum habituros Canonem seu Regulam fidei ac Morum, p. 189.
Limborch in his Conference with a Learned Jew, in his Book De Veritate
Religionis Christianae, seems to have granted more than he had Authority for,
in asserting, that All the Doctrines of Faith and Practice necessary to
Salvation, are contained in the four Evangelists, or even in St. Matthew only;
and that none of the Epistles of St. Paul, or the rest of the Apostles, contain
any Doctrine necessary to be believed to Salvation, which was not clearly and
expressly set down before in the Gospels, etc.

Whether all the fundamental Doctrines of Christianity were before laid down in
the Gospels, is indeed made by some a matter of Dispute, but that many of them
are not there so plain and intelligible, as in the Epistles, is none. For it
may be very justly questioned, if the Epistles had not been written, whether we
should not have remained wholly ignorant of the true meaning of several things
in the Gospels. Particularly as to the Reasons of the Death, and Resurrection
of our Savior; for I much doubt whether we should so unanimously have
believed, that Christ's Death was a Sacrifice for our Sins, or that by virtue
of his Resurrection alone, we should all be raised again at the last day, from
the alone Declaration of the Gospels. Since neither of these can be so clearly
proved from the Gospels, as from the Epistles; the latter of which is, I think,
no where mentioned in the Gospels, and cannot directly be proved from them. So
that all our Belief of it must have been by far-fetcht Inferences, which very
probably we should never have thought of, had not the Epistles been written.

This forementioned Concession of Limborch's, seems occasioned by the Jew's
asserting, that all their Religion was contained in the five Books of Moses,
and that they were not obliged to the Observation, or absolute necessity of
believing any of the rest as part of their Rule of Faith, and thereupon he
prefers their Religion before the Christian, as being much more easily
understood, because contained in a much lesser compass.

But in Answer to this, Limborch was under no necessity in order to prove the
Christian superior to the Jewish Religion, on the account of its Brevity, to
confine all the Articles of Christianity to one, or all the Gospels. For he
might very fairly have denied that Assertion of the Jew, for it was only one
Sect amongst the Jews, that of the Sadducees, who were of that Opinion, and who
gave such Preference to the Books of Moses. The Pharisees, the more numerous
Sect, paid the same Respect to all the other Inspired Writings and Prophecies,
and placed their Religion, as much in the Belief of them as in those delivered
by Moses. And indeed if no other Books of the Old Testament were to be received
for Canonical, or part of the Jewish Revelation, they must have but a very
small Esteem for the Prophecies concerning their expected Messiah, in which a
great part of their Religion, that wherein their Faith was concerned, ought to
consist. For the believing that the Messiah would come, is declared by Porta
Mosis, p. 176.
Maimonides to be one of the Fundamentals of the Jewish Religion.

But if it be Limborch's Design in this place (as indeed it seems to be) to
vindicate the Honor of our Religion, by contracting all the Articles of it
into a very narrow Compass, that they may be more easily known; I think that
this does not much advance that End. For it seems more for the Honor of God
and Religion too, that all the parts, both of Faith and Practice, should be
laid down in the largest and plainest Terms imaginable, to take off all
occasions of Errors and Mistakes: Which Men would almost unavoidably fall into,
if all Matters of Belief and Practice were delivered like the Heathen Oracles
of Old, in a short and consequently obscure Form. Indeed it is necessary that
there should be a Summary of all the Articles of our Faith, which might be
easily remembered by every Capacity: But it is as necessary also, to prevent
all Disputes concerning the Meaning of every particular Article, that we should
have Recourse to a large, full, and infallible Explanation of them, such as is
all the parts of Divine Revelation.

But that the Gospels do not fully and clearly contain every thing that is
absolutely necessary to be believed, seems plain upon many Accounts.

1. For first, If in the Gospels, or particularly in St. Matthew was contained
the whole Rule of Faith, then the Doctrines therein taught by our Savior were
a sufficient Rule of Faith to the Apostles themselves; but if they were not so
to them, they cannot be said to be so to any others. But that they were not so
to them before the coming of the Holy Ghost, seems plain from their
misunderstanding the Reason of Jesus's being the Messiah; they thought it was
to re-instate the Jews in their Temporal Grandeur and Glory: As is evident from
that Question they put to our Savior, Lord will thou at this time restore the
Kingdom to Israel? But besides, those Words of our Savior, I have many things
to say unto you, but ye cannot hear them now, necessarily suppose, that there
were other Doctrines yet to be known, besides those he had already taught them.

2. The Gospels are for the most part Historical, and contain an account of our
Savior's miraculous Birth, the Miracles which he wrought, to confirm his
Mission from God, his Sufferings, Resurrection, and Ascension etc. are
intersperst with many excellent Precepts, but contain but few, however not all
the Matters of Faith.

3. Our Savior generally delivered himself very mystically, especially about
those things which concerned Himself: And left Men rather to draw Conclusions
from his Actions, for their Belief of him, than from any clear Manifestation of
himself. So that no adequate Rule of Faith could be drawn from the History of
Him.

4. The Inspired Penmen of the Gospels were only to draw up the History,
without their own Remarks upon it; and therefore were not in that to tell us
what we were to believe, any farther than our Savior had already done through
the Course of his Ministry. And therefore our Faith is not to be measured by
the Gospels only. For though St. John, in the beginning of his Gospel, gives us
larger Proofs of Christ's Divinity, than is to be found in any other parts of
the Gospels, by introducing our Savior with such Names and Titles as were
usually by the (...). Philo. Lib. de Some. And in another place. (...). Lib. de
Agric. 'o (...). Lib. de Some. In some places he calls the (...), as Plotinus
has also done. En. 5. lib. 5. c. 3.
Jews appropriated to their expected Messiah, and by which both they and the
Platonists meant a Divine Person, and which they were at that time commonly
known to signify; yet he has not there delivered any adequate Rule of Faith.

Fifthly and Lastly, The Promise which our Blessed Savior made to his
Disciples, to send them the Holy Ghost, to instruct them farther what they
ought to believe concerning Him, and to guide them into all Truth, (which
cannot signify bringing all things to their Remembrance, but teaching them all
things, Joh. 14.26.) plainly intimates, that there was something more required,
as necessary to be believed, which himself had not fully declared to them. And
we no where find, nor have we any reason to think that the Disciples
themselves, who were constantly with our Savior, had any full and distinct
Notions of all that was necessary to be believed concerning Him, till they had
received the Holy Ghost. And therefore all that our Savior himself taught in
his own Person, or what is revealed in the Gospels only, cannot be made any
adequate Rule of Faith.

But however should it be granted, That all things necessary to be believed to
Salvation, are contained in the Gospels; yet still it might be justly
questioned, Whether the Epistles also, together with the Gospels, are not to be
looked upon as part of the Rule of Faith, and whether the Explanations and
Illustrations contained in the Epistles of Doctrines more imperfectly set down
in the Gospels, are not equally to be believed with the Evangelical Writings.
And therefore though it should be admitted, that all, or most of the Truths
delivered in the Epistles, are only Explanations of something before Revealed
in the Gospels, yet since the Authors of them were Divinely Inspired, they are
to be received as part of the Rule of Faith, as well as the Gospels themselves;
since an infallible divine Explanation of a Doctrine is as necessary to be
believed, as the Doctrine it self. So that if it should be granted, that this
was one End of writing the Epistles, to set those Things in a clearer Light,
which were before taught by our Savior, yet this will not be sufficient to
invalidate their Authority, or render them less necessary to be believed.

For thus far Verum tanta est erga genus hominum benignitas divina, ut quae in
Evangeliis plene ac perfect tradita sunt, etiam in Apostolorum Epistolis
saepius repeti, and a variis objectionibus Vindicari, ad majorem fidelium in
fide confirmationem ac constantiam, singulari Providentia voluerit. ibid.
Limborch seems to have granted, That though all the Doctrines of Christianity
are fully and perfectly delivered in the Gospels, yet God has so much expressed
his Goodness toward Mankind, as to take care, by a particular Providence, that
they should be very often repeated in the Epistles, that they might be freed
from all Objections, to the greater strengthening and confirming Believers in
the Faith. And thus it seems very evident for many Reasons, that the Gospels
alone are not to be made the Measure of our Faith.

Nor will the Acts of the Apostles, together with the Gospels, afford us a full
and clear Scheme of whatsoever is necessary to be believed. For these also are
chiefly Historical; and contain an account of the Mission of the Holy Ghost, of
the Miracles that were done by the Apostles, of the Converts they made to
Christianity, and where they Preached; but we have not there any full and large
account of their Doctrines. We are indeed told, that they Preached Faith in
Christ Jesus, Act. 20.21.
and Repentance toward God: But few or no particulars of those Duties, or how
far they extended; which seem on purpose reserved for the Epistles, where they
are more fully treated of.

But it is urged, That if the Apostles Creed is a Summary of all that is
necessary to be believed; and if all the Articles of that are to be found in
the Gospels, and Acts of the Apostles, then it is in them alone that we are to
look for Fundamentals. To this it may be answered, That it can indeed hardly be
denied, but that we may draw most of the Articles of the Apostles Creed from
the Gospels, and the Acts of the Apostles; but these are not to be looked upon
as the only Fundamentals, unless we also firmly believe the natural
Consequences and Conclusions from them, and the frequent Explanations of them,
which are set down in the other parts of Revelation. To instance only in the
first Article, I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
Now we cannot be supposed to be confined by this to the believing just so much
of Him, and no more: For we are to understand by these Words, whatsoever is
implied in them, and whatsoever else the Scripture has revealed to us
concerning Him. And the like Rule must be observed in all the other Articles.

And besides, this is justly believed to be the first Fundamental of all
Revealed Religion, which is supposed in our Creed, that the Scriptures are of
Divine Inspiration, and that whatsoever is there laid down as necessary to
Salvation, must be believed as such: And upon this it is that the Creed is
built. So that as we must believe, That Summary of our Faith to be taken from
Revelation, so also that the only true Explanation of it is to be found there.
For necessary Deductions from such Truths, are as much Fundamentals as the
Principles from which they are drawn. So that we cannot in a true Sense believe
all the Articles of our Creed, unless we also are persuaded, that those places
of Scripture which contain a full and express Explanation of them, are
necessary parts of our Faith.

But our Author urges, That if all, p. 297.
or most of the Truths declared in the Epistles, were to be received and
believed as Fundamental Articles, what then became of those Christians that
were fallen asleep ( as St. Paul witnesses in the 1 Cor. many were) before
those things in the Epistles were revealed to them? Most of the Epistles not
being written till above Twenty Years after our Savior's Ascension, and some
after Thirty.

To this we may answer, First, That some of the Epistles were written before
some of the Gospels, particularly that of St. John, which was not writ till
almost Threescore Years after our Savior's Ascension. So that this Argument
will exclude that Gospel from containing any part of the Fundamentals of Faith,
as well as the Epistles. Secondly, It is to be considered, that a great many of
the Epistles, as the first and second to the Thessalonians, which were writ
sooner than Twenty Years after Christ's Ascension, as also the first and second
to the Corinthians, to the Galatians and Romans, were all written before the
History of the Acts of the Apostles, which is continued to the time of St.
Paul's being first at Rome, which was not till near Thirty Years after our
Savior's Ascension; and therefore that History which takes in all that time,
cannot be thought to be of greater Authority, than those Epistles which were
writ much sooner. So that this Argument, if it is at all to the Purpose, must
give the Preference to some of the Epistles, at least before the Acts of the
Apostles. But Thirdly, It cannot be supposed but that many Christians were
fallen asleep before the writing any of the Gospels, since St. Matthew's
Gospel, which was the first, was not written till about Eleven Years after our
Savior's Ascension. So that neither can this Argument be any Prejudice to the
Authority of the Epistles. And therefore Fourthly, It remains that all the Rule
of Faith to the Believing Christians, that were Converted for some Years after
our Savior's Ascension, must be taken from what was taught by the Apostles.
And therefore if what they then taught was the Rule of Faith to those who were
Converted to Christianity, it is very reasonable to suppose, that the Epistles,
which without doubt contain the very same Doctrines which they then taught, are
now to be received as absolutely necessary to be believed. For this we may be
certain of, that the contrary can never be proved, that the Apostles, upon
their receiving the Holy Ghost, taught the very same Doctrines wherever they
Preached, which they afterward delivered in their Epistles. And therefore if
they writ no other Doctrines, than what they taught, and what they taught were
Fundamentals, then what they writ must be the same too.

And if this should be granted, which the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity so much contends for, p. 294.
That the Epistles being all written to those who were Believers, and
Christians, the occasion and end of writing them could not be to instruct them
in that which was necessary to make them Christians; Yet this seems rather to
strengthen than lessen the force of the Argument, that the Apostles had taught
those same Doctrines for Fundamentals before, which they afterward
communicated as sacred Depositums of their Faith. For it is strange to suppose,
that a Doctrine should cease to be a Fundamental, to those who had known it
before. For though the Epistles might not be written to those who believed all
the Truths contained in them, to instruct them in any thing which they were
ignorant of; yet it might be for this End, to put them in remembrance of all
the parts of their Profession, to prevent all Disputes that possibly might
arise; and to remain as exact Rules and Directions how they might convert and
instruct others.

But says our Author, p. 294.
If those to whom the Epistles were written wanted not such fundamental
Articles of the Christian Religion, without a Belief of which they could not be
saved, it cannot be supposed that the sending of such Fundamentals was the
reason of the Apostles writing to any of them. But how can it be proved, that
all those the Epistles were written to, understood all the Fundamentals of
Religion? May there not be supposed to be some less knowing amongst them, and
some who would not thoroughly believe several Doctrines of Christianity, without
such an Authority as the Apostles had, to convince them of the Truth of them?
But however if this Argument of Men's knowing the Fundamentals contained in the
Epistles, before they were sent to them, may be sufficient to overthrow their
Authority, the Gospels also I am afraid will not escape much better. For we
cannot suppose, but almost all Christians were very well acquainted with the
Doctrines taught by our Savior, before the Gospels were written, but it is to
be hoped that they ought not upon that account to be thought less necessary to
be believed, even by those who had been already converted to the Faith. For
certainly they cannot be supposed to contain less fundamental Truths, because
they have delivered nothing but what was received before for the Doctrine of
our Savior. Nor can it be imagined that the Gospel of St. Luke, which was writ
with a particular Design to Theophilus, who was already a Believer and a
Christian, should contain less fundamental Truths, or less necessary to be
believed, than those which perhaps were written with a more general Design. The
Acts were also written to the same Theophilus; and therefore if our Author's
Argument will prove any thing, it must exclude both that, and the forementioned
Gospel, as well as the Epistles from being any part of the Rule of Faith. For
they were more certainly written to a Believer and a Christian, and One who
wanted not the fundamental Articles of Christianity, without a Belief of which
he could not be saved, than can be proved of so much as any of the Epistles.

And therefore it will follow, notwithstanding all our Author has urged to the
contrary, that it is from the Epistles as well as the Gospels, that we are to
learn what are the fundamental Articles of Faith. For if in the History of the
Evangelists and the Acts, all things are so plainly set down, that no Body can
mistake them, it must unavoidably be granted, That the Apostles, though Inspired
by the Holy Ghost, were yet very unfaithful to their Trust, in clogging Men's
Faith with unnecessary Points of Belief: Since they could not be ignorant that
what they writ would be as much thought necessary to be believed, as what was
taught by our Savior himself. And therefore the Apostles ought certainly to be
blamed for writing such Doctrines in their Epistles, which though they were not
necessary to be believed, might yet give occasion to a great many unwary
Christians, to think far otherwise, and embrace them as firmly as any other
Doctrines whatsoever.

But if it can be proved, that the great and principal End of the writing their
Epistles, was, to deliver several Doctrines that should be necessarily believed
to Salvation by all who were Converted to the Faith, we are obliged to receive
them as such. And this might be made appear from very many places of them: St.
Paul thus expresses himself, 1 Cor. 14.37.
That if any Man think himself to be a Prophet, or Spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things which I write unto you, are the Commandments of the
Lord. And in the beginning of the next Chapter, Moreover Brethren I declare
unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, by which also ye are saved, etc
For I delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that
Christ died for our Sins according to the Scriptures. By which Words he
re-minds them of a Primary Article of their Faith, without the Remembrance of
which, he shows they have believed in vain. For the design of the Apostle's
Argument is to acquaint them, that they could not be saved, without they kept
in Memory what he had before Preached unto them, v. 2. which was amongst other
things the forementioned Article, the Belief of which, if there is any Force
in his Argument, he declares to be absolutely necessary to Salvation. After
this he mentions to them some other Articles, which he enjoins them to believe,
that their Faith might not be in vain. And these are the Belief, not only of
Christ's Resurrection, but that by virtue of his rising from the Dead, we also
should be raised again. And also that in Adam all die: For since by Man came
Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead. For as in Adam all die,
even so in Christ shall all be made alive. And these are Articles that are
absolutely necessary to be believed; for upon these the Apostle lays the great
Foundation of Christianity; and yet the Two last of them are not to be found
either in the Gospels or Acts. There are also other places in the Epistles,
which are expressly required to be believed to Salvation, as Romans 10.9. For if
thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in thine
heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. And that in
Timothy, Without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, that is, of the
Christian Religion. God was manifest in the Flesh. And in St. Joh. Epist. 1. C.
4. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh is of
God, and he that does not confess it, is not of God, which shows the necessity
of believing Christ's Incarnation. And again, We have seen and do testify, that
the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. And whosoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God; which
is a distinct act of Faith from believing him to be the Messiah, as I shall
show in its proper place. These Places of Scripture now mentioned are
sufficient to show, that there are Doctrines in the Epistles, that are required
to be explicitly believed. And the Apostles did certainly design this End in
writing their Epistles, as in the 2 Cor. 1.13. For we write none other things
unto you, than what you read or acknowledge; and I trust you shall acknowledge
even to the end. And in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, Chap. 2. Ver.
15. Therefore Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have been
taught whether by Word, or our Epistle. All which Places, with innumerable
others which might be cited to the same Purpose, undeniably prove, that the
Apostles enjoined the Belief of what they writ in their Epistles as necessary
to Salvation. And it would be absurd to imagine, that the Apostles should fill
their Writings with any of the Doctrines of Christianity, if they did not
impose a Necessity upon Men of believing them. And here it is not material
whether the Epistles were written to those who were already Christians, and
whether designed to teach them any Doctrines, to instruct them in what was
necessary to make them Believers; but it is sufficient that they could not
continue true Christians or Believers, without acknowledging the Doctrines
there delivered for fundamental Articles of Faith, and necessary to be believed
by all Christians.

But however the word Christians is often used ambiguously, and is
promiscuously given to all who are Baptized into the Christian Faith. And
therefore though most of the Epistles might be written to those who were called
Christians, yet they might not be thoroughly so, i. e. They might not have a
perfect knowledge of all the Articles of Faith. As is particularly plain in the
Thessalonians, by St. Paul's first Epistle to them, Chap. 3. Ver. 10. Night and
day praying exceedingly that we might see your face, and might perfect that
which is lacking in your Faith. So that our Author's Argument from the Epistles
being written to those who were already Christians, is also upon this account
very insufficient to weaken their Authority.

But he farther urges, That the Epistles were writ upon particular Occasions,
p. 295.
and without those Occasions had not been writ, and so cannot be thought
necessary to Salvation. But how can it be proved, that all the Epistles were
writ upon particular Occasions? For the contrary seems plain in several of the
Epistles. For, though they were directed to particular Churches, yet were they
designed for whole Provinces; as the Epistles to the Corinthians were intended
for the Province of Achaia. That to the Galatians for a whole Country; and
those directed to the Thessalonians and Philippians, were designed for the two
Provinces of Macedonia. It being usual with the Apostle to give such
Pre-eminence to the Metropolis of any Province, as to direct to that, what he
intended for the whole: Which is sufficient to show, that those Epistles were
not writ upon any particular Occasion to those Churches they were sent to,
since they obliged a great Number equally with them. Nor can we suppose them to
be designed for those particular Provinces only, though they should be known to
others; for if they only were obliged by them, then no one could be required to
observe them, any longer than he continued in such a Province. For if they
affected none out of the Province, then those who went from that to another,
must also be freed from all Obligations to them; which is too absurd to imagine.

The like Observations may be made upon other Epistles. The first Epistle of
St. Peter is directed to the Strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia. His second Epistle is likewise General, and so
are the Epistles of St. James, and St. Jude. But there is nothing that can be
more General than the first Epistle of St. John, which though occasioned by some
new raised Heresies, yet is directed to all Christians, to give them true
Notions of the Divinity and eternal Existence of the Son of God, which are
proved at large in that Epistle, in Opposition to all Heresies that then were,
or that possibly might arise concerning them. For all which reasons it is
evident, that a great many of the Epistles were designed for all Christians in
general. Those indeed to the Romans and the Hebrews seem to have some things in
them, which particularly relate to those Churches. But yet there are a great
many Truths in them of general use and importance, which seem to be designed on
purpose for all Christians in general.

But to look a little back upon the Epistle to the Hebrews; which if well
considered, cannot be denied to contain some Doctrines absolutely necessary to
be believed to Salvation by all Christians, if this may be granted, that the
same Faith was required, after Conversion, both from Jew and Gentile. For the
design of that Epistle was not only to convince the Jews, that the Reason of
the Ceremonial Law was ceased, and consequently that they ought to discontinue
their observance of it, and that the Aaronical Priesthood was abolished by our
Savior's Entering upon his Priestly Office, but also to obviate (which the
Author has done with very great care) two Conceptions which Men might be
tempted to have of our Savior. The one was to think him some Angelical Being,
the other some great Prophet, like Moses, or superior to him. Now the Author of
that Epistle does plainly deny our Savior to be of that sort and order of
Beings, that either Angels, or Moses was, in the first, second and third
Chapters, etc. He does not only set him above them all in a Style that imports
Superiority and Pre-eminence, but does it in a set of Phrases, that show him to
be of another Nature than they. And to evince the Truth of this, a great part
of this Epistle was designed. For there was a Sect amongst the Jewish Converts
to Christianity, that were not only for continuing the Observation of the
Mosaic Institutions, but who also opposed the Divinity of our Savior; and
against these the Apostle seems professedly to argue in this Epistle: Which if
looked upon to be writ with this Design, is as full a Proof for the Divinity of
our Savior, and the necessity of believing it to Salvation, or without which
Church Communion cannot be maintained, as need be desired for any thing of that
Nature.

But besides this Epistle to the Hebrews, there is no question but the very
first Christians thought almost all the Doctrines in every Epistle, of general
Concern, by their constant reading them every Lord's Day in all their public
Assemblies; which was done not only amongst those to whom they were written,
but also amongst all those who had Copies of them. And that an Epistle which
was writ to one Church, should also be read amongst others, (which would never
have been commanded, if they were writ upon particular Occasions to any
Church,) is enjoined expressly by St. Paul himself, in his Epistle to the
Colossians, in these Words, Col. 4.16.
And when this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the
Church of the Laodiceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea,
which very probably is that which is now inscribed to the Ephesians. For it
seems most likely that it was sent to those of Laodicea, where St. Paul had
never been at that time, they having lately received the Christian Religion;
and had a wrong Inscription put to it, by the Collector of the Epistles, into
one Body: Which was an easy Mistake, considering that a Copy of it was very
probably at Ephesus, as well as Coloss (as appears from the C^ose of that
Epistle) and other places. Some indeed are of Opinion, that St. Paul did not
write any Epistle to the Laodiceans, and that the Passage in the Colossians,
that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea, must mean an Epistle writ by
the Laodiceans to St. Paul: Of this Opinion is Baronius Annal. Tom. 1. ad Ann.
D. 60.
Baronius, and cites both Chrysostom, and Theodoret for it, who thought that
St. Paul never writ any Epistle to the Laodiceans.

But there is little ground for this Opinion, especially from the Words in the
Colossians, that from Laodicea, for the natural Meaning of them is, that they
of Coloss should receive that Epistle which was writ to Laodicea from thence,
and read it in their Assembly. And this meaning Dr. Hammond applies to it in
his Note on the Place. And he is of Opinion, that a Copy of it was sent from
Ephesus to Laodicea, since Tertullian affirms that the Epistle which is
inscribed to the Ephesians, was sent to those of Laodicea. But he thinks this
solves the Difficulty, that Ephesus being the Metropolis of Asia, and Laodicea
being a Church within that Circuit, it might not only be designed thither as
well as Ephesus, but that it was also Copied out, and communicated to them, and
so might be called the Epistle to the Laodiceans, or which the Church of
Laodicea had received.

But though indeed it might have been so, yet I think it most probable, that it
was writ only to those of Laodicea, and not to Ephesus. For as it is certain
that St. Paul did write an Epistle to the Laodiceans, which we have not under
that Title; so is there great reason to imagine, that this Epistle was not writ
to the Ephesians. For St. Paul had lived three Years at Ephesus, as is plain
from the History of the Acts, and therefore it is not probable that he would
write to them there, as in the third Chapter, If so be ye have heard of the
dispensation of the Gospel given me to you-ward. And besides it is very
strange, that if this was writ to the Ephesians, amongst whom St. Paul had so
long been, there should be no Salutations in it to any particular Persons,
which is so very usual in the rest of his Epistles. And thus it seems most
probable, that this Epistle was that which was mentioned to be writ to them of
Laodicea.

And this Remark is the more material, because if this Epistle is looked upon,
as it seems designed, to contain several Doctrines necessary to be believed by
a Church at its first Constitution, the Doctrines contained in it may carry a
greater weight with them, especially amongst those who will admit no other
Doctrines as necessary to be believed, but what have such a reason to confirm
them. But however it be, this is certain, that as this Epistle was writ by one
Divinely Inspired, so it is necessary to be believed to Salvation in those
places, where the Sense is plain and easy, and of the highest Importance to us,
whether it was written with a Design to instruct, or to confirm a Church in the
Christian Faith.

But to return; Let us suppose that some of the Epistles contain Matter proper
to those Times and Churches to which they were sent. May not the same Objection
be raised against the Gospels, most of our Savior's Parables, and very many of
his Discourses relate to the State of the Jews at that time, and the
Destruction of their Nation and Religion, which was soon after accomplished.

Now there is nothing in the Gospels, but what was thought at first by the
Apostles to respect the Jews only; nay, and for some time after the Mission of
the Holy Ghost, St. Peter particularly amongst the Apostles had such a wrong
Notion of our Savior's coming, as to imagine, that the Jews were only to reap
the Advantage of it; as may be seen in the History of the Acts.

But though in a little time the Reason of our Savior's coming was more fully
understood, yet at the first it was looked upon as particular, and all his
Discourses were interpreted to such a Sense. Which ought to caution us in
judging of the Epistles; which notwithstanding their Directions to particular
Churches, might be designed for general Instructions. And we have good Reason
to judge, that there are no Cases set down, but what may on some Occasions, be
of use to all Christians.

But what if it should be granted, that they were writ upon particular
Occasions, will this hinder them from being necessary to be believed? If it
will, then some of the Gospels must suffer too. For the Gospel of St. Luke
seems to be writ particularly to give Theophilus a more perfect knowledge of
those things, in which he had been before instructed, as I have already
observed of it, as well as of the Acts, which were writ by the same Evangelist,
upon the same Occasion. In like manner the Gospel of St. John was writ upon a
particular Occasion, to confute the Heresies of the Cerinthians, and Ebionites,
who denied the Divinity of our Savior (as is confessed by the most Ancient
Fathers, and has lately been very Vid. Dr. Williams 's Vindicat. of the late
Archbishop's Sermons, p. 16, 17, etc. Joan. Cleric. in 18. prima Commenta.
Evang. Joan. p. 15, 16, etc. 80.
Learnedly proved) and must it upon this account be rejected as not necessary
to Salvation? So that if all parts of the Scripture must be laid aside, that
were writ upon particular Occasions, our Faith would lie indeed in a much
narrower Compass. But we should not be, I am afraid, the better Christians for
it.

For though some things might be writ upon particular Occasions, yet it will be
difficult to prove, that the Holy Spirit did not design them for general
Directions, and as necessary to be believed to Salvation by others, as those to
whom they were writ. But besides, whatever particular Occasions there might be
for some of the Epistles yet the general Design of them is to settle and
strengthen Men in the Faith, and to be perpetual Guides and Directions to them
in the way to Happiness; and indeed if there had been no occasion for this,
they certainly would not have been written.

But it was also necessary that the Apostles should dictate, and leave behind
them some certain Measures of Belief, since their Authority, and the certain
Evidence of their Inspiration would have very great Influence on those who were
not yet Christians, that they might be more easily persuaded to embrace
Christianity; and also might be of vast Importance, for the preventing all
Differences that might arise about the Meaning of the Gospels; and lastly,
would be of perpetual use, for the teaching all sorts of Christians more easily
to comprehend the Method, Reasons and Grounds of the great Work of our
Redemption: The two last of which are more fully laid down and explained in the
Epistles, than in any other parts of Holy Writ. And if the Knowledge of them is
necessary to Salvation, then it will be as necessary to believe those places of
Scripture, where they are most fully stated, and most clearly delivered. For
since there is no part of Scripture, where we are told how we were Redeemed,
why Christ Redeemed us, and from what, so clearly and expressly as in the
Epistles, we must have Recourse to them, for our right understanding of those
Doctrines. And therefore there both was an absolute necessity for the writing
of the Epistles, and also is for our firm Belief of them as necessary to
Salvation.

Epistles, and the absolute necessity of believing several of the Doctrines
delivered in them. But it must yet be confessed, that all that has been proved
will be little to the Purpose, if it can be shown in the Fourth Place, that the
Doctrines delivered in the Epistles are contradictory to those in the Gospels.
But this I don't find in the least pretended; for it would be in vain to show
Contradictions in them, after they are allowed to be of Divine Inspiration. As
for there being several things above our Reason in the Epistles, the same
Objection may be made against the Gospels; but this cannot be sufficient to
invalidate the Authority of either of them. The Gospels and Epistles both teach
the same Christianity: And though some Points of Faith are more fully and clearly
laid down in one, than the other, and some things required to be believed in
the Epistles, which are not mentioned in the Gospels; yet they do not disagree
in any one Particular: But both tend to one, and the same End, the advancing
the Happiness of Mankind.

Fifth Argument, whereby it may appear whether or no the Epistles are necessary
to be believed, and that is the Matter they contain. For this is the only Plea
remaining why they should be rejected, because the Matters which they treat of,
are of no Concern to us, that they have no relation to the Salvation of
Mankind, and therefore cannot be thought necessary to be believed upon that
account, which is the great End of Revelation. For here the great stress of the
Controversy lies, whether the Doctrines delivered in the Epistles are of such
Importance, as will make them necessary to be believed, or to be an
indispensible part of the Rule of Faith. But I hope I have already made it
appear, that there are several Doctrines of this Nature in the Epistles, from
the Apostle's Design in writing them, and from those Texts I have before
produced from them; and therefore I shall not insist any more upon this Head.

But our Author objects, that if there are any fundamental Articles in the
Epistles, yet they are so promiscuously delivered with other Truths, that they
are not to be distinguished from them. And this he now tells us, was the reason
why he did not go through the Writings in the Epistles, Vindic. p. 14.
to collect the fundamental Articles of Faith, as he had through the Preaching
of our Savior and his Apostles, because those fundamental Articles were in
those Epistles promiscuously, and without distinction mixed with other Truths.
And therefore we shall find and discern those great and necessary Points best
in the Preaching of our Savior and the Apostles, to those who were yet
ignorant of the Faith, and unconverted.

But how are these Fundamental Points to be found in the Gospels and Acts,
better than in the Epistles? Are there in them nothing but Fundamentals? Or are
not these Fundamentals mixed with other Truths of a quite different Nature, that
have no respect to Man's Salvation? And if so, as is very apparent, what mighty
Advantage have the Gospels beyond the Epistles upon this account? Matters of
Faith, and Matters of Practice; Fundamentals, and Things indifferent are
promiscuously mixed together in both. But yet there is no great difficulty in
discerning one from another in them. For the meanest Capacity can easily
apprehend a difference between those things which are proposed to our Belief,
and those to our Practice; what are those which have a near respect to the
Covenant of Grace, and the Means of Salvation, and those which are more
foreign to that End. And this difference is as easily perceived in the
Epistles, as in the Gospels, because the Terms of Salvation are as plainly and
clearly set down in one, as the other.

But it is objected, that several Things in the Epistles are differently
interpreted, and consequently cannot be absolutely necessary to be believed to
Salvation, because Men are not agreed in their Opinions concerning them. To
this it may be answered, first, That some Men are of different Opinions in
their Interpretations of several places of the Gospels, as well as of the
Epistles. But secondly, it may be observed, that the great and fundamental
Truths in both have been always understood in one and the same Sense, by the
whole Catholic Church; and those who have dissented from the universally
received Interpretation, have been accounted Enemies to the true Christian
Faith. For in these Cases Mistakes are generally wilful; and it is not easy to
interpret any Doctrines in Scripture, differently from what the Church has
already done, if we take the most easy and natural Meaning of it. For the Sense
of Fundamentals is not so obscure, but a willing Mind may easily apprehend it.

But Lastly, We may add to all this the Consent of the Universal Church in all
Ages, for the necessity of believing the Epistles, and several Articles
delivered in them, as necessary to Salvation. For they have been hitherto
esteemed by all Orthodox Christians, as part of the Canon of Scripture, or Rule
of Saving Faith, and received and believed accordingly. And if this Argument
will be of no Force to convince us of the necessity of believing them to
Salvation, we must at the same time part with one very good Reason for our
belief of the Holy Gospels. For this is alleged for an Argument by our Church,
in the Sixth Article, for our belief of all the received parts of Scripture,
that there has never been any doubt of their Authority in the Church.

And if this universal Consent will be an Argument for the Gospels, it cannot
also be denied to be a very great Reason to persuade us to build our Faith upon
the Epistles too. For it is very absurd to imagine, that the very next Ages to
the Apostles should be so far imposed upon, and so down to the present Time, as
to receive several of the Doctrines contained in the Epistles for fundamental
Articles of Faith, if they were never designed, either by the Holy Ghost that
Inspired them, or by the Apostles themselves, to be made such. So that to
assert the contrary, is to affirm that either all Christians hitherto have
wandered in the Dark, or that they were guilty of very great Folly and
Superstition, in making those parts of Scripture necessary to be believed to
Salvation, which were never intended to be so.

Some of the Epistles have indeed been rejected, but so have some of the
Gospels too. But as this was done but by a very few, so were they Men of
Heretical Opinions. The Iraen. Advers. Here Is. l. 1. c. 26.
Ebionites allowed of no more of the Gospels than St. Matthew, and rejected all
that was writ by St. Paul, calling him an Apostate from the Law. The L. 1. C.
29.
Marcionites owned but some part of the Epistles of St. Paul to be Canonical,
but they also denied the Authority of all the Gospels, except that of St. Luke,
and then would admit no more parts of it, than would agree with their own Model
of Divinity. Sed huic quidem, says Iraeneus, speaking of Marcion, quoniam and
solus manifest ausus est circumcidere Scripturas, etc. Which shows what an
unpardonable Crime he thought it to be for any Man, without a sufficient
Warrant for it, (which can be nothing less than a Divine Commission) to pretend
to reject any parts of Holy Scripture, and to cut them off from the rest, which
the whole Church had received for Canonical. And thus whoever they were that
denied the Divine Authority, and the necessity of believing all the parts of
Scripture, such as were also the Valentinians, and Manichees, with some few
others, were always looked upon by the Church, to be no better than Heretics.

There were indeed some of the Primitive Christians, that did not receive all
the Books of the New Testament for Canonical; but the reason was because they
were not certain they were writ by the Apostles, yet after a little time they
were all admitted, and universally believed as necessary parts of Faith.

But now by asserting the necessity of believing the Epistles as part of the
Rule of Faith, I don't mean that none could ever be saved, but who had believed
them; for what then, as our Author well observes, would become of those
Christians who were fallen asleep, before any of the Epistles were written? For
no question but those who believed all that was taught them, and lived up to
that Knowledge which their most diligent Enquiries could carry them to, should
be admitted into Happiness as well as those who had afterward attained to
larger degrees of Faith and Knowledge. Since no one can be obliged to believe
that, which he could not possibly have any knowledge of. For should we suppose
the Gospel to be spread in some Heathen Parts of the World, that had never
heard of Christ, no Man certainly would be so uncharitable, as to deny them
Salvation, if they believed whatsoever they found there, and lived up exactly
to the Precepts there delivered, though they had never heard of the Acts of the
Apostles, or any of the Epistles, or no more than one of the Gospels. Or if the
Case should be thus, that they had no other parts of the New Testament, than
barely some of the Epistles, if they lived up to them in Matters of Faith and
Practice, there can no doubt be made but they would be saved. So that in Cases
of this nature, the Argument holds as much for the Epistles, as the Gospels,
and nothing from hence can be drawn to the Prejudice of either. But where we
have the Privilege of both, and are assured that both are of equal Authority,
as being equally of Divine Inspiration, we are under a necessity of drawing the
Articles of our Faith from them both, as being a most exact Body of Christian
Religion in all the Branches of it.

But then some may urge, That if this should be the Case of those who could
attain to the Knowledge of but one part of the Christian Doctrine contained in
the New Testament, that they should as well be saved, as those who have all the
parts of it, and upon that account are required to believe more, then certainly
the Condition of the other would be much more desirable.

To this it may be answered, That this Objection is of little Force, since
those are certainly in the safest Condition, who have the most Light to guide
them. For though a wary Traveller may possibly find his way through a very
narrow obscure Passage, yet those who take the broadest Road are most certain
of finding the surest way to their Journeys end. But besides, the more Evidence
we have for our Faith, and the greater the Confirmation of it may be, by the
abundant Repetition of Inspiration and Miracles for the Establishment of it;
and lastly, the more full, clear and express the Articles of our Faith are, and
the oftener God has been pleased to give us an Explanation of them, so much the
more likely are we to avoid Mistakes, to give our unfeigned Assent to them, and
to suffer them to make more lasting Impressions upon our Minds.

And thus I hope I have sufficiently Vindicated the Divine Authority of the
Epistles, and the necessity of making them part of the Rule of Faith that is
required to Salvation. And we ought to be the more concerned for the Defense of
them, because several Doctrines which have been always maintained by the
universal Church, such as the Doctrine of the Satisfaction, and the true Reason
of Christ's coming into the World, will not so easily be maintained without a
Belief of them. But if these sacred Writings are esteemed, as they are, and
were really designed to be, the infallible Guides to us in our understanding
the Mystery of the great Work of our Redemption, and for the more clearly
stating and explaining of all that is required for our Belief and Practice, we
are under an absolute necessity to preserve them inviolably, and to vindicate
the Belief of them, as much as of any other parts of Divine Revelation.

Of the Reason of CHRIST's Coming into the World.
AND now I come in the next place to examine the Reason our Author assigns for
Christ's coming into the World. And this, we must allow, can be understood no
way so well as by considering what the Scripture shows we lost by Adam. p. 1.
For it is on this that the whole Decision of the Case depends: Since which way
soever it is that the whole Bent of Scripture inclines, there we ought to fix
our Faith. And here also there is no reason why we should dissent from the
Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 2.
that Since these sacred Writings were designed by God for the Instruction of
the illiterate Bulk of Mankind in the way to Salvation, as well as others of
larger Capacities, they ought generally and in necessary Points to be
understood in the plain direct Meaning of the Words and Phrases, such as they
may be supposed to have had in the Mouths of the Speakers, who used them
according to the Language of that Time and Country wherein they lived, without
putting any artificial and forced Senses upon them.

Now what we lost by Adam may indeed be seen, as our Author urges, from the
second and third Chapters of Genesis, and that was Bliss and Immortality, and a
perfect State of Righteousness, which was without any of the Miseries of Life,
or fear of Death. But what the Punishment of his Transgression was, or more
properly speaking, would have been, had not the Messiah been then promised to
recover him from his lapsed State, and had not the Merits of his future
Satisfaction been imputed to him, and all his Posterity from his Fall, is not
so clearly discovered by any part of that History.

The Sentence denounced against him, if he sinned, was only this: In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Genesis 2.17.
Now this indeed does threaten the Punishment of Death, or Mortality to the
Body, and does not seem to imply any future Expectation of Eternal Misery, for
he was from that time subject to a state of Death and Mortality. And this is a
part of the Punishment which devolves on all his Posterity, 1 Cor. 15.22. p. 4.
In Adam all die, i. e. to use our Author's words, by reason of his
Transgression, all Men are mortal, and come to die. But though this may be
admitted as the natural Meaning of those Words, yet it cannot be inferred from
them, that the Soul also should be subject to the same Death and Mortality with
the Body, as our Author contends, or that the whole Man should cease to be, p.
15.
or that By the loss of Men's Souls in Scripture could only be meant the loss
of their Lives. For besides this Opinion seems wholly precarious, and is no way
countenanced by this other part of the Sentence: Cursed is the Ground for thy
sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy Life, in the sweat of
thy Face shall thou eat Bread, till thou return unto the Ground, for out of it
wast thou taken, for Dust thou art, and to Dust shall thou return. Which words
will by no means infer that Conclusion which our Author draws from them, p. 7.
viz. That his Life should end in the Dust out of which he was made, and to
which he should return, and then have no more Life or Sense, than the Dust had
out of which he was taken. For it is not possible that the Mortality of the
Soul should be inferred from hence: Nay, the directly contrary seems necessarily
implied, For the returning unto the Ground, for Dust thou art, and to Dust
shall thou return, can relate only to that part of Man, which was formed out of
the Dust. And therefore if the Soul was of a different Original, and of a
Divine Extract, as we are told in Genesis 2.7. And God formed Man of the Dust of
the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life, and Man became a
living Soul: It is plain that the Soul could not be included in the Sentence.
And therefore by this Sentence of Death, or that of to Dust shall thou return,
cannot be understood a total ceasing to be, or a losing of all Actions of Life
and Sense, p. 6.
which the Reasonableness of Christianity so much contends for.

But moreover; if we are to understand no more of the Nature and Extent of the
Sentence, than is to be found in the second and third Chapters of Genesis, and
may have no Recourse to the Gospel Dispensation, especially to that part of it
delivered in the Epistles, I would desire to know by what Authority our Author
includes the Posterity of Adam in the Punishment, p. 6.
and makes them subject to Death for his Disobedience, since there is not the
least mention of them in the Sentence. For that seems directly levelled against
him, and not to include any others in it. Indeed our Author proves it from Romans
5.12. p. 4.
By one man Sin entered into the world, and Death by Sin. But if he has no other
Proof for it, than from the Epistles, this would be no sufficient Reason to
make it an Article of our Faith, since according to him we are not to fetch any
Articles of Faith from the Epistles. So that this is all would be left for us
to believe as to this, that all Men are subject to Death, but that God has not
indispensibly required us to believe, that it was a Punishment due to all Men
for Adam's Transgression. From whence it appears, that the full Extent even of
Adam's Punishment cannot be gathered from the Sentence denounced against him,
which in the plainest Sense of the Words, could only threaten Death or
Mortality to the Body, and not a Death of the same kind to the Soul. Nor that
even this can be proved from the Nature of the Sentence, as we find it recorded
in the second and third Chapters of Genesis, that Death was entailed upon all
Adam's Posterity for his Offense. And therefore it must be from the New
Testament, where we have more Light, and larger Discoveries to guide us, that
we must expect a clearer Account of the Nature of the Punishment that was due
to Adam, and what sort of Death it was that his Posterity was freed from by
Christ's Coming into the World.

But by the way, since his chief Argument for his Notion of Adam's Punishment,
is, that nothing more is meant in the Sentence denounced against him, I would
desire to know, why by Death in that place may not be meant an Eternal Loss of
God's Favor, in a State of Existence, as well as by never Dying in many other
places, is to be understood an Eternal Enjoyment of Happiness, or a Freedom
from Eternal Misery. For by not Dying in such like places, is not meant an
Exemption from the common Fate of all Men, but only not Dying after that manner
which others do, who believe not in Christ. And if by this, Joh. 11.26. He that
believes on me shall never dye, or as in another place, He that hears my
word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not
come into condemnation, Joh. 5.24. can only be interpreted of an Immortal State
of Bliss and Immortality, then I see no Reason why the Sentence of Death, or
Condemnation may not imply an Eternal Loss of that Happiness in a State of
Misery, especially since I have already shown, that the Mortality of the Soul
could not be included in that Sentence of Death denounced against Adam.

And besides if there have been different degrees of Happiness or Misery in the
other World, from the very beginning, as is evident from the whole Tenor of
Scripture, and if the Souls of Men have been immortal, as may be easily evinced
from Scripture and Philosophy, unless we can prove that any of them have been
annihilated by God, then we have reason to believe that the Punishment due to
Adam, and all his sinning Posterity, was to have been Eternal Misery.

From all this it is evident, that Adam's Punishment does not appear from
Scripture to consist only in a Temporal Death; but that as he fell from a State
of perfect Obedience, as our Author has granted, p. 3. and was consequently
incapable of pleasing God; so the nature of his Punishment, and that which all
Mankind should have undergone, for all were Sinners, will be best known from
what the Scripture declares concerning the Reason of Christ's coming into the
World. And that was to make Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World, and
to restore Mankind to the Favor of God, by suffering in our stead, and being
made Sin for us. And that this was the true End of his Coming into the World,
and of his Sufferings, is evident from the Predictions concerning him, and from
the Consent of both Gospels and Epistles. The Prophesy of Isaiah is very full
and express in assigning the End of Christ's Coming. Surely he has born our
Griefs, and carried our Sorrows. He was wounded for our Transgression, Isa. 53.
and was bruised for our Iniquities. He was numbered with the Transgressors, and
he bore the sin of many, and made Intercession for the Transgressors. All which
are so very plain and intelligible, that the Force of them cannot be evaded. So
that the true End of Christ's Coming, was not only to obtain for us Bliss and
Immortality, which we lost by Adam, but also in order to effect that, to redeem
us from our Sins, and the Guilt of them, and to deliver us from the Wrath to
come, by the Propitiatory Sacrifice of himself for us.

We have also this End of Christ's Coming to save Sinners, often mentioned in
the Gospels. Thou shall call his Name Emanuel, Mat. 1.21.
for he shall save his people from their sins. And, Behold the Lamb of God, who
takes away the sins of the World. Joh. 1.29.
And our Savior himself has assured us, if we can believe his own Words, That
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, i. e. Should not Die eternally, or be for
ever Miserable, but have everlasting Life. For God sent not his Son into the
World to condemn the World, Joh. 3.16, 17.
but that the World through him might be saved. For would not the Condition of
all Mankind have been eternally miserable, without Christ's coming into the
World; but their only Punishment have been only a ceasing to be after Death, I
think it is neither an Absurdity or Heresy to say, That it would have been much
more advantageous for Mankind that Christ should never have come into the
World; since it would have been much better that all Men should have had an End
put to their Beings by Death, than that part of Mankind only should be saved,
as it now will be, and the rest be Condemned to Eternal Misery, though it be by
their own Defaults. For the Punishment of even all Mankind by such a Death,
does not seem to bear a sufficient Proportion to the Eternal Misery of but one
Soul. So that we must allow that Christ's coming into the World was to save
those that believe and repent, from Eternal Torment in another World, or else
that his Coming to save us was a general Disadvantage.

But moreover, we have several other Expressions in Scripture, Romans 5.8.
of Christ's Dying for us while we were yet Sinners; That he was a Propitiation
for our Sins; He was made Sin for us, who knew no Sin. 1 John 4.10. 2 Co^ 5.21
Has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, who his
own self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree; with innumerable others to
the same Purpose, which do undeniably evince the true End of Christ's
Satisfaction, viz. That the suffering for our Sins, and the Substitution of
himself in our stead, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
was to deliver us from the Wrath to come. Which Expression can signify no
otherwise, than that Christ by his Meritorious Oblation and Sacrifice of
himself, has delivered us from the Eternal Misery which we must otherwise have
suffered in the World to come. For there is no other Wrath which Good Men are
exempted from; for they are still as much exposed to the Troubles and Miseries
of this Life as before, and as much, and in the same manner as before subject
to Mortality. Nor can this mean a Freedom from an eternal ceasing to be after
Death; for that would make no sense of the word Wrath, or the fiery Indignation
of God, which very emphatically denotes a future Punishment after this Life.
But was it possible to wrest the Scriptures to any other sense, or to make it
appear, that they do not signify what we pretend they do; yet were not Christ's
Suffering a Satisfaction for our Sins, his manner of Dying can be no way
accounted for, wherein he seemed to show much less Courage and Resolution than
either any of his Disciples, or the lower Rank of Martyrs. They suffered
Joyfully, and with the greatest Resolutions, but he felt in himself dreadful
Agonies, and endured bloody Sweats, and seemed almost like One in Despair, when
he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. All which can have no
good Reason assigned for them, unless we allow that he suffered in our stead to
satisfy God's Justice, and bore our Sins in his own Body, and became a
Propitiation for us, which is what we mean by Satisfaction.

But we do not hereby mean that Christ suffered the same Punishment which we
should have done, but only that the Dignity of his Person made his Sufferings
equivalent to the Eternal Punishment of a whole World of Sinners. Nor will this
Notion of Christ's Satisfaction take away the Belief of God's freely forgiving
Sinners, as some late Socinian Writers have pretended; for as Christ freely
offered himself to suffer for us, so God freely without any Desert of ours,
accepted of his Satisfaction which he was no way obliged to.

But besides, the Types and Representations of our Savior's Sacrifice for us,
by the Goat that was slain for a Sin-offering, Lev. 16.
to make an Atonement for the People, and by the Sins of the People being
transferred upon the Scapegoat, clearly prove, that Christ's Satisfaction must
be also for our Sins. And thus was God's Justice satisfied by the Punishment of
Sin, not in the Persons offending, but in the Eternal Son of God, who paid the
Ransom for them with his own Blood. And therefore those who deny that Christ
died for us in that Sense, do in effect deny that he properly died for us at
all, because they do not assign the true Reasons for it, which are declared in
Scripture.

But that those Arguments from Scripture of Christ's dying for us, and in our
stead, follow from the easy and natural meaning of those Texts, I shall evince
from other Expressions in Scripture of the like Nature, and from common Customs
and Ways of speaking in the World: Whereby it will appear, that no other
Interpretation can possibly be put upon them. Thus in the Lamentations: Our
Fathers have sinned and are not, and we have born their Iniquities, i. e. Have
suffered Punishment for their Sins: So Christ's bearing the Sins of many, can
only be understood of suffering for them. So in Ezekiel: The Soul that sins
it shall die, Chapter 18. v. 20.
the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, that is, shall not suffer
for his Sin. And also by one Man's suffering for another, is meant a
transferring the Punishment upon himself, as in the Words of St. Peter to our
Blessed Savior, I will lay down my Life for thee, i. e. Joh. 13.38.
To save or redeem thine. And the Expression of Caiphas does also import the
same, It is expedient for us that one Man should die for the people, and that
the whole Nation perish not, i.e. It is necessary that One should die, to free
the rest from Destruction. And therefore he advised, that Christ should be
sacrificed, to prevent the Ruin of their Nation by the Romans. And to the same
sense are the words of John: If any of the men escape, 2 Ki^^ 10.2^.
he that lets him go, his Life shall be for the Life of him, i. e. He shall
suffer the Punishment designed for the other.

We may add to this the Expressions that occur in Profane Authors, that
signify the suffering of one for another. For by their expiare orimina, or
scelus, piaculum fieri, populum lustrare, and the like, they generally meant a
freeing others from an impending Evil, by suffering the Punishment in their
stead. And this is very plain by a great many Instances in History;
particularly in that noted one of the Decij, who sacrificed themselves for the
good of their Country, or offered themselves for an Expiation of the rest. And
this Custom of sacrificing one for all, was very common with the Heathens,
almost in all Ages. And they have used such Expressions for it, as are used in
Scripture, to denote the great Piacular Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole
World. As in the Euripid. Erecht. Tom. 2. p. 468. Ed. Cantab.
Tragedian: (...),
(...).


That it was not lawful for him to suffer the Destruction of so many things,
when he might redeem them with the Sacrifice of one Life, that of his Daughter.
And a little after he adds: (...)
(...),
(...)
(...).


That his Daughter would receive abundant Honor by offering her self for a
Sacrisice or Expiation to save both the City, her Mother, Sisters, and nearest
Relations.

There might be brought innumerable Instances of this Nature, out of the most
Ancient Greek and Latin Historians, to show that by a Man's being a Sacrifice
they meant a suffering for, and in the stead of others, to transfer the Faults
of others upon himself: Which are sufficient to vindicate our interpreting
those places of Scripture that mention the Sacrifice of Christ, to the sense of
a Satisfaction for the Sins of the World, since they cannot possibly bear any
other Meaning.

So that the natural Result of all will be this; That as the Scripture has in
very many places assured us, that Christ died for our Sins, and in our stead,
by bearing our Sins in his own Body, thereby to deliver us from the Wrath to
come, and that those are the true Interpretation and Sense of those places,
which the Words do most naturally import; so is it most evident, that the End
of Christ's Coming into the World, was for some other Design than to give us a
Title to Immortality: And that was to put us in a Condition of saving our
selves from Everlasting Misery, which we should otherwise most unavoidably have
suffered. And therefore if either Gospels or Epistles may be allowed to be
true, that cannot be the only End of Christ's Coming into the World, which is
assigned by the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity. For certainly
that is the most true, and most necessary to be believed, which is most
agreeable to Divine Revelation.

What we are to Believe concerning CHRIST.
I Come now to examine that part of the Reasonableness of Christianity, which I
proposed in the last place to consider. And this relates to our Faith in
Christ, which the Author makes to consist in the Belief of this one Article,
That he is the Son of God, the Savior of the World, or the Messiah. And for
the Proof of this he cites very many places of Scripture: As Joh. 3.36. He that
believes on the Son has Eternal Life, and he that believes not the Son,
shall not see Life. And in the next Chapter, from the Belief of the Samaritans,
p. 25, 26, etc.
who said to the Woman, We believe not any longer because of thy saying, for we
have heard our selves, and do know that this is indeed the Christ the Savior
of the World. And from the words of St. Peter, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of Eternal Life, and we believe, and are sure that thou art the
Messiah, the Son of the Living God. And from hence he gathers, that this was
the Faith which distinguished them from Apostates and Unbelievers; and was
sufficient to continue them in the Rank of the Apostles. And that it was upon
the same Profession that Jesus was the Messiah, the Son of the living God,
owned by St. Peter, that our Savior said he would build his Church, Matthew.
16.18.

The Belief of this one Article, as the only necessary one to Salvation in the
New Covenant, is the same with what is maintained by Mr. Hobbs, and proved
after the very same manner, as may be seen by any one that will take the Pains
to read the Eighteenth Chap. of his Book De Cive, which treats of Religion,
Sect. 5. etc. His words are, Credere in Christum quid est? Vel fidei in
Christum quaenam propositio est objectum? To which he answers, Credere in
Christum est nihil aliud quam credere Jesum esse Christum, nimirum illum, qui
secundum Mosis and Prophetarum Israelitorum vaticinia, venturus erat in hunc
mundum, ad Instituendum Regnum Dei. And then after he has brought very many
Proofs out of the Gospels and Acts, the very same which our Author has done, he
tells us that Alia fides ad vitam aeternam praeter illum Articulum non
requirebatur, Sect. 10. And that Vbicunque legimus servatorem nostrum cujuspiam
fidem laudasse, vel dixisse fides Tua te salvum fecit, vel sanasse quempiam
propter fidem, ibi propositio credita alia non erat quam haec, Jesus est
Christus, vel direct vel per consequens.

I need not produce more Instances from Mr. Hobbs, to show that our Author and
he agree concerning the necessity of Believing this one Article only; and have
taken the same Method for the Proof of it, by citing several Texts from the
Preaching of our Savior, and his Apostles, in the Acts, and no farther. For if
any one will be so curious as to read them both over, he will find, that they
only differ so much as a Copy does from an Original.

But it is not my Design by this to possess any one with a Belief that our
Author's Doctrine is false, because it is the very same with that of Mr. Hobbs.
For it must be granted, that can be no good Reason for rejecting it, if it be
otherwise found agreeable to the whole Tenor of Scripture: Which it shall now
be my Business to enquire.

But in order to this it may be necessary to examine whether Son of God, and
Messiah, or Christ, always signify the same in Scripture, which our Author, as
well as Mr. Hobbs so much contend for. And indeed it may not perhaps appear
that they are of different Signification from some of those Texts which have
been made use of to prove it. As where Son of God and Christ are mentioned in
the same Proposition, particularly in Act. 8.37. I believe that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God. For there Christ being part of the subject of the Proposition,
and upon that account might be made use of as a proper Name only to denote the
Person, may not necessarily imply, that in all other places it imports a
different Sense from the Son of God. Nor do the Confessions of Martha and St.
Peter, as considered in themselves, seem necessarily to infer a difference
between Christ, and the Son of God. We believe, and know that thou art the
Christ the Son of the Living God. For they may possibly express no more than
different Denominations of the same Thing, and only mean, that they believed
him to be the Christ, who was also called the Son of God, which was to be one
of the Titles and Characters of their Messiah. But if these Passages, as singly
considered, should be granted not to prove a Difference, yet neither can the
contrary be inferred from them. And we can with as much, if not more reason
conclude, that one of those Terms does imply a larger Signification than the
other, even in these Texts, as it can be evinced, on the other side, that they
do not; especially if we compare them with the Sense they most naturally bear
in other places. For it seems evident from very many Passages of Scripture,
that Son of God is an Expression that denotes our Savior's Divinity, and is
not a Title only attributed to him, either upon account of his Office as
Messiah, or by reason of his Miraculous Birth, or Conception by the Holy Ghost.
And this appears from those Texts in Heb. 1. God who spoke in times past by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his SON, whom he has
appointed Heir of all things, and by whom also he made the World. Now if by Son
in this place is not meant his being so before his coming into the World, as
Messiah, he is very improperly called Heir of all things, for it should
otherwise have been Heir of those things which were after he had an Existence.
So also, by whom he made the Worlds, necessarily show, that he was Son of God
before the beginning of the World. And again, When he brings in the first
Begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him.
Which Adoration we can hardly suppose would be required of Angels, upon the
alone account of his being the Messiah, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born
of a Virgin. But the cause of this is laid down in the 8 ver. For unto the SON
he says, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever. Which gives a plain reason why
he should be worshipped even by Angels, as Son of God, because himself was GOD
from all Eternity.

To this we may add those words delivered by our Savior, in that Form of
Baptism, which he commanded his Disciples to observe in initiating Men into
Christianity, to show that the term Son must signify a God by Nature. Go and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the SON,
and of the Holy Ghost. Where if Son must be interpreted of his being so only by
his Birth and Office, it will lead us into a very unintelligible Faith. Where
an equal Belief is required, and yet in very unequal Persons: One a God from
all Eternity, and another of no longer Existence, than since his being born of
a Virgin. So that if Son of God in that place does not mean our Savior's
Divinity, we must allow it to be very assuming in our Savior, to oblige his
Followers to the same Faith in, and Dependence on him, who was not God, as on
him who was so from all Eternity. And therefore it appears that Son of God does
imply an Equality with the Father, and consequently must be understood of
Christ's being God by Nature.

But besides, if Son of God does no where necessarily import any more than his
being so by his miraculous Conception, or from his Office; upon what Ground was
it thought by the whole Church to signify A God by Nature; or by what
Authority was it inserted in our Creeds, that he was begotten before all
Worlds, if there is no intimation of it in Scripture, or if the Title of Son of
God in Scripture does no where imply that he was so before his being born of a
Virgin. So that we must either renounce that Article in our Creed, or believe
that the signification which is there given of the Son of God has its
Foundation in Holy Writ.

Indeed Adam and others are called Sons of God in Scripture, but it is plain
that Title when attributed to our Savior, signifies very differently from it,
when spoken of them, because our Savior is called in very many places, the
only begotten Son of God, which could not have been affirmed of him, if he was
not so upon a very different account, from what Adam, or others were.

But besides, it seems evident that Messiah and Son of God are not synonimous
Terms, from what St. John tells us, that his Gospel was written, that we might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, i.e. Joh. 20.31.
That we might be persuaded to believe the one, and the other, or that there
was more to be believed by every Christian, than that Jesus was the Messiah,
for he must also be acknowledged to be the Son of God, i.e. God. And that this
must be the meaning of these Words of St. John, is plain from what is generally
allowed by the ancient Fathers, to have been the Design of his Gospel, which
was to assert the Divinity of Christ, against those that opposed it, as he has
done at large in his first Chapter. And if this cannot be questioned to have
been St. John's Design in his Gospel, the forementioned Proposition must mean
more, than that was all that was required to be believed, that Jesus was the
Christ; and consequently that Son of God is of a larger signification than
Messiah. For if they mean only the same, then St. John himself does not assign
the true Reason for his writing that Gospel: For it appears that he had
certainly another End in it, than barely to prove Jesus to be the Messiah. But
if they mean differently, and Son of God does there denote Christ's Divinity,
then we have in that forementioned Passage the whole Intention of the Apostles
assigned for his writing that Gospel, namely, To show that Jesus was the
Christ, and that he was God.

We may add to all this, that the Jews (from whom we may best understand the
meaning of that Expression) believed that God was meant by it. For a good work,
Joh. 10.33.
say they, we stone thee not, but for Blasphemy, and that because thou being
Man, make thy self God; which was only by saying, that he was the Son of God.
ver. 36.
Which shows that they understood more by the Son of God, than being only the
Messiah. And this Interpretation the High Priest put upon it, Mat. 26.63.
when he accused him of Blasphemy, for saying he was the Son of God,

But it will probably be objected to this, that our Savior has himself
explained what he meant by Son of God, in his Answer to the Jews, when they
accused him of Blasphemy: Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods, if
he called them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, how say ye of him whom the
Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I
said, I am the Son of God? Joh. 10.34, 35, 36. But does it appear from hence,
that our Savior has declared, that there is no more meant by his being called
the Son of God, than that he was sanctified, and sent by God? All that can be
concluded from this Passage is only this, That supposing he was no more than
one thus sent from Heaven, yet it would not then be Blasphemy to assume the
Title of Son of God. But that is by no means a Concession, that that Title did
not belong to him upon any other account. But besides, it may as well be
inferred from hence, that our Savior was not God; for he as much there
declares, that he was not God, as that his Title of Son of God was only to
denote his Divine Mission, and he seems to allow that Son of God, or God
signify the same, as the Jews understood it. So that this Text cannot be
brought to show, that Son of God and Messiah are the same.

But there is one Text more which may be urged to prove Son of God and Messiah
the same; and that is Luke 1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
Power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: Therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. But if the true
Occasion of his being called the Son of God is here set down, then it is plain
that the other Instance last mentioned was not to the Purpose: Because there
the reason of that Character is pretended to be by our Savior's own
Confession, only upon the account of his being sanctified, and sent by God. So
that one of them must be given up, as proving nothing in the Case. But neither
does this latter Text give us a full account of our Savior's being Son of God:
It only tells us one Reason why he should be called so, in his Humane Nature,
as being conceived by the Holy Ghost of a Virgin. But it is plain that this was
not designed to take in the full Sense of that Expression, because there are
other places in Scripture, that give that Title to our Savior, where it can
only relate to his eternal Existence, as has been already showed.

But it will farther appear from hence, that the Jews thought Son of God to
signify more than being the Christ. That though before, and at the time of our
Savior's Coming, they gave the Title of Son of God to their expected Messiah,
and the Vid. Dr. Pocock Not. ad Maimonid. p. 316.
Chaldee Paraphrast, and all the Learned Rabbis had constantly interpreted
that Passage in Psalm. 2. Thou art my Son, etc. of the Messiah; yet after our
Savior's Coming, they not only altered that Interpretation, but also denied
that they ever expected their (...). Orig. Advers. Cells. lib. 1.
Messiah should be the Son of God, least the Christians should take Advantages
of it, as one of their Doctors acknowledges. Which is sufficient to show that
the Jews, who after our Savior's Coming, denied this Title of Son of God to
their expected Messiah, did believe that it signified more than only being the
Messiah; for they disowned it, because they thought it would prove what the
Christians made use of it for, the Divinity of the Messiah. But this I may have
more occasion to consider by and by. From all that has been urged it seems
evident, that as Messiah and Son of God do not signify the same, so there is
something more necessarily required to be believed besides this Proposition,
that Jesus is Christ, or the Messiah.

But if we should suppose the believing Jesus to be the Messiah sufficient to
make a Man a Christian, will it be the believing that bare Proposition that
qualifies him for such a Character? If it will not of it self, what sense must
it be taken in? Must every one be left to his own private Explication, or must
it be received according to the general Sense of Scripture? Now if we are to
believe it as delivered in sacred Writ, I would know in what Place it is there
declared, that the believing it in such a particular sense, just so, and no
otherwise, is required as absolutely necessary to Salvation. For if the
explicit Belief of that Article only is sufficient, why are we not informed
from what particular Text of Scripture we must draw the sense of it, to be
believed in such a manner only, upon the Forfeiture of Salvation. For it is not
much to the Purpose, to say that this Proposition is alone required to make a
Man a Christian, unless there can be produced the same Authority for the
absolute necessity of believing it in such a sense.

But perhaps it will be said in Answer to this, that our Author has explained
this Proposition from the Declarations of Scripture concerning it; and that
this is the full sense of it, which he has delivered p. 31. and repeated in his
Vindication, p. 28. Believing Jesus to be the Savior promised, and taking him
now raised from the Dead, and constituted the Lord and Judge of Men, to be
their King and Ruler. But it may be demanded, whether this is the full Sense
and Interpretation of it in Scripture; and whether this is all that is required
to be believed concerning the Messiah; or where it is laid down in Scripture,
that this Sense and Meaning of Jesus being the Messiah, exclusive of all
others, is to be believed as necessary to Salvation. For this cannot be looked
upon as the only Explication, unless it can be shown, that it is declared to be
so in Scripture, and that this alone, neither more, nor less is to be believed
as necessary to Salvation, which seems to be a Matter of no small difficulty.
So that the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, though we should take in his
Interpretation of it, if it was designed for such, does not seem of it self to
be sufficient to make a Man a Christian.

But for the clearer Examination of this Assertion, we may consider, first,
That what might be sufficient to denominate a Man a Believer, or a Christian,
during the actual Ministry of Christ, would not truly Entitle any one to that
Character now, or during the Ministry of the Apostles, after our Savior's
Ascension, and that for this Reason; because we do not find from the whole
History of the Gospels, that any of those who believed on our Savior, had a
just Knowledge of him, or what was the true End of his coming into the World:
Which I have already observed of his Disciples, from that Question of their's
to our Savior, Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? To
which he does not give a direct Answer, but shows them their Ignorance, by
telling them, It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the Father
has put in his own Power, but ye shall receive Power after that the Holy Ghost
is come upon you, Acts 1.
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth. From whence it is natural
to infer, that the Apostles had not yet attained to that clear Knowledge of
Him, and the Design of his Coming, which it was necessary they should be endued
with. And if the Apostles had not arrived to that fullness of Faith, who had
been with him from the beginning, it is absurd to imagine, That any others who
had believed on Him, could have entertained any clearer, or more distinct
Notions of Him. So that we cannot form any adequate Rule of Faith from what is
delivered in the Gospels concerning the believing Jesus to be the Messiah,
since the just Meaning of that Proposition was not then understood.

Nor will it alter the Case by saying, That those who died then in that Faith,
were undoubtedly saved; for that would be no more an Argument than the proving,
that because a Jew was saved before Christ's Coming into the World, by Virtue
of Christ's Mediation, in the Observance of the Mosaic Law, he might be
equally capable of Salvation now, in the Profession of that Religion. For we
are to direct our Faith and Practice according to the most full and clear
Revelation of God's Will, and to believe that to be necessary to Salvation,
which appears from the full Extent of Revelation, to be required in order to
it. For that Rule of our Blessed Savior will always hold: That where much is
given, or much Revealed, there is also much required to be believed.

If therefore the Disciples did not then fully know, what is necessary for a
Christian now to believe, as it is very evident they did not, it will
necessarily follow, that the bare believing Jesus to be the Messiah, is not
sufficient, or all that is necessary to Salvation, or even to make a Man a
Believer, or a Christian. For the Disciples did already believe that Jesus was
the Messiah, as is granted in the Reasonableness of Christianity, but did not
understand how far his Mediation extended, or what he must do in order to
become our Mediator. And this I shall prove from our Author's own Concession,
to be an Argument of no small Force. For if all that was necessary to
Salvation, or to denominate Men truly Christians, was the bare believing Jesus
to be the Messiah, why should our Savior promise the Mission of the Holy
Ghost, to instruct them farther in what they ought to believe concerning him,
as in Joh. 16.12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear
them now, howbeit when he the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into
all Truth. For he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. And at the
25 Ver. These things have I spoken unto you in Proverbs, the time comes when I
shall no more speak unto you in Proverbs, or Parables, but shall show you
plainly of the Father. Now to what End was all this? Was it not to teach them
more clearly something that concerned their Faith and Knowledge? But this,
according to our Author, could not be, for they had already believed he was the
Messiah; and if that was all that was necessary, why should they need any other
Instruction? Since our Blessed Savior had already given God Thanks in one of
his last Prayers, that they had already believed that God did send him. Joh.
17.18.
I have given unto them the Words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and they have believed that thou did send me, p. 183.
i. e. By our Author's own Interpretation, in effect that he was the Messiah
promised and sent by God. And in the 25 ver. Ibid.
speaking of his Disciples, he says, They already know that thou did send me,
i.e. Are assured that I am the Messiah. Now if they firmly believed all this
already, according to our Author, and this was all required of them to be
believed, to what End was the Holy Spirit to be given them, to instruct them
more fully in the Belief of Him, or to inform them more particularly of his
Dignity and Office?

For the Coming of the Holy Ghost could not be only to endue them with the
Power of working Miracles, which were only to be made use of for the Converting
of others. Nor will that come up to the sense of our Savior's Words, that he
should guide them into all Truth; so that if they must be allowed to have any
Meaning in them, they must relate to those larger degrees of Understanding and
Knowledge, concerning the Mystery of Christ, which should be infused into the
Apostles, by the Holy Ghost.

But it may be urged, that the Apostles after they had received the Holy Ghost,
made no other Conditions of Faith in Christ, than that he was the Messiah, as
our Author instances in St. Peter's Sermon to Cornelius, that whosoever
believes on him should receive remission of Sins. Act. 10.43.
But will our Author assert that this implies no more than the bare believing
him to be the Messiah, without knowing what is meant by the Word? Does it not
also in the same place intimate, that he by Virtue of his Dignity and Office,
had Power to forgive Sins, which none can do but God alone? And thus in the 36
ver. that this Messiah was Lord of all, i.e. Was over all God blessed for ever.
All which, as they are implied in the Sermon of St. Peter, so they there seem
necessarily required to be believed in order to Baptism, and consequently to
Salvation. And we cannot besides imagine, that the Apostle would so far impose
upon Men, as to oblige them to believe what they knew nothing of, or to build
their Faith upon Words without Meaning: Which we must suppose them to do, if
they made the bare believing Jesus to be the Messiah, to be all that was
necessary, without explaining what they meant by Messiah, how he was our
Messiah, or what he must be, either God, Man, or both, that he might be
capacitated to be the Messiah.

And therefore we are to understand by believing Jesus to be the Messiah, in
this and almost all other places, the full Extent and Meaning of those Words,
as they are explained by this, and other Apostles in all parts of Scripture:
Which were all of them Inspired by the same Holy Ghost, and therefore must all
have the same Meaning, unless the Holy Spirit dictated different or
contradictory kinds of Doctrine, which would be too impious to assert. And
therefore the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, as it is now required for a
Fundamental of our Faith, must comprehend the full Sense that is given of it in
Scripture; unless we can prove, that there was not the same Inspiration, and
consequently not the same Reason for our Faith.

Nor does the believing Jesus to be the Messiah appear to be all that is
necessary to make a Man a Christian, from that place of the Acts where the
Eunuch is mentioned to have been Baptized, upon that Confession of his Faith to
Philip, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, Act. 8.37. For though
here is no more set down, yet no doubt there is more implied. For we have none
of the Doctrines recorded, that Philip Preached to him, but that he instructed
him in the Christian Religion, from that Chapter of Isaiah, which is a Prophesy
of the Sacrifice of Christ, and that he was to Die for our Sins; which
Doctrines, as they must be part of what Philip taught, so no doubt they were
required as absolutely necessary to be believed; and besides, since Philip
Baptized him, no question but he did it in that Form which Christ himself
enjoined, In the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and then it will follow,
that the Belief and Confession of the Three Persons was required. For where the
Form of Baptism is not mentioned, we ought to understand it to be the same
which was Instituted and Commanded by Christ himself, and which was observed by
the Primitive Church.

But Secondly, I shall show that the Gospels and Acts are directly opposite to
our Author's Scheme of Doctrine, and do require much more to be believed
concerning our Savior, than barely that he was the Messiah. As first, It is
plainly laid down in those Holy Writings that he was God; nay, his Divinity is
so plainly asserted by St. John, in the first Chapter of his Gospel, that it
seems almost impossible for Words to express it more clearly: In the beginning
was the word, and the word was God, etc. Now it is most certain, as has been
already observed, that by (...), both in Jewish and Heathen Writers was meant a
Divine Person, and was much used by the Platonists that lived in this Apostle's
Time; and that the most Learned a among the Jews, did appropriate that Title
to their expected Messiah, as well as they believed he should be God. So that
this may be a very good Reason for our Savior, and his Apostles requiring no
more to be believed in their Preachings amongst the Jews, than that Jesus was
the Messiah, since if they once firmly believed that, they must necessarily
believe him also to be God. And this is also evident from the Jews never
objecting Idolatry at the first to the Christans, upon supposition that he was
the Messiah, whom they Worshipped; which certainly they would have done, had
they not expected their Messiah should be God: Which is an Argument managed
with such Strength and Judgment, in a late Discourse, by a Learned Prelate of
our Church, that it may seem of it self sufficient to silence all Opposition,
except that of Malice, that can be made against it, or against the Divinity of
Christ.

Indeed Trypho the Jew, in his Dispute with Justin. Martvr. Dialog. cum.
Tryphon. Judaeo, p. 2668. Ed. Paris.
Justin Martyr, asserts, that the Jews did not expect their Messiah to be God,
but only (...), as he expresses it; but that he does not here speak the true
sense of the Jews, who lived before him, is evident from what Them. Evang. l. 4.
c. 1.
Eusebius declares, that the Jews had the same Opinion with the Christians,
concerning Christ's Divinity, till they changed it in direct Opposition to the
Christians: Which gives us a very good account of the Reason why Trypho, and
the rest of the Jews fell from their Notion concerning the Divinity of their
expected Messiah; the Christians having gained great Advantages over them, from
the Opinions of the ancient Rabbis about it. And therefore we may best judge
of the Opinions of the Jews concerning the Divinity of the Messiah, from those
who lived before our Savior, since the latter Jews have differed very much
from them. And this is plain from their different Interpretation of the second
Psalm: For R. David. sunt qui interpretantur Psalmum istum de Gog and Magog,
estque Messiah Rex Messiah, atque ita exposuerunt Doctores nostri. Estque
Psalmus hoc modo explicatus perspicuus, at vero proprius est dixisse ipsum
Davidem de seipso uti a vobis expositum, Not. Miscel. in Maimon. C. 8. p. 314.
One of them ingeniously confesses, That all their Doctors had expounded it it
of the Messiah, which he allows to be a clear Explication of it; but however
that it would be more to the Purpose for them now to understand it, as spoken
by David of himself. And Doctores nostri exposuerunt [hujus Psalmi]
significatum de Rege Messiah, at prout sonat, and ut respondeatur Menaeis, seu
Hereticis expedit intepretari ipsum de ipso Davide R. Salamo Jarchi, p. 315.
another of them also acknowledges, That this Psalm was constantly interpreted
by their Doctors, to signify the King Messiah, but that they might be more able
to deal with the Heretics, by which he means the Christians, it would be more
convenient to interpret it of David himself.

Which is a very fair Confession why they dissented from the Opinions and
Interpretations of their Ancestors; because they might more strongly oppose the
Christians. For if they should admit those Interpretations of their ancient
Doctors, to speak the genuine sense of Scripture, they should give too great
Advantages to the Christians, who by this Means (as Dr. Pococke Ib.
has observed) Would be supplied with Arguments, to prove Christ the Son of
God, and consequently consubstantial with God the Father. And if this one Psalm
be granted to relate to Christ alone (as indeed it is almost impossible to
wrest it to any other Sense) we cannot but acknowledge him to be GOD, begotten
of his Father before all Worlds.

There are also several other places in Scripture, which are always applied by
the Ancient Jewish Interpreters to our Vid. Not. in Grot. de Veritat. Relig.
Christ. L. 5. Sect. 21.
Savior, which sufficiently show, that they believed he should be GOD: As
Psalm. 45. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever. And Isa. 25.9. And in that day
it shall be said, Lo this is our God. With several other places of the like
nature, which being constantly interpreted of our Savior, by the Chaldee
Paraphrast, and all the Ancient Jewish Interpreters, do evidently demonstrate,
that they believed their Messiah should be GOD, notwithstanding the Opposition
made against it by the latter Jews.

But last of all, that the Jews did expect their Messiah should be GOD, is I
think very plain, from their objecting Blasphemy to our Savior, when he
acknowledged himself to be the Son of God, when the High Priest adjur'd him to
tell him, whether he was so, or not. For they could never have accused him of
Blasphemy, for saying he was the Son of God, if they understood no more by that
Expression, than being the Messiah, and if they expected their Messiah should
be no more than a mere Man.

And it was for this Reason, according to Jure Naturali and Gentium, l. 2. c.
12.
Mr. Seldom, that they accused him of Blasphemy, for saying he was the Son of
God, because they so understood the (...), or the Word of God by that
Expression, that for any one to make himself the Son of God in that Notion, was
nothing less than to profess himself truly GOD, which if he was not, he was
guilty of the highest Blasphemy. And to prove this to be the true Meaning of
that Expression, he cites the Hebrew Commentaries, and Philo Judeus, who have
commonly used the Son of God, to signify GOD himself.

From all which it appears, that the most Learned amongst the Jews, before, and
at the Coming of our Savior, did expect their Messiah to be GOD. And that if
they did object Idolatry to the Christians afterward, upon supposition that
Jesus was the Messiah, yet that they differed very widely from the ancient
Opinion of the Jews.

And this Notion of our Savior's being GOD, seems to be the first that his
Disciples had concerning him. For they had no just Apprehensions of the true
Design of his Coming into the World, or of his Death and Passion, and the
Remission of Sins he thereby obtained, till they had received the Holy Ghost.
Yet they before that time certainly believed him to be GOD, as is most evident
from the frequent Acts of Divine Worship which they then paid him, and from
that Exstatical Exclamation of the Apostle St. Thomas, My Lord, and my God. As
though this Knowledge of him was on purpose then revealed to them, to prevent all
Disputes that might hereafter possibly arise concerning his Divinity. Since it
is not to be supposed, that if he was not what they really believed him to be,
truly and essentially GOD, but that he himself would have undeceived, and
prevented their falling into such dangerous Mistakes, as must necessarily
produce endless Distractions in the Church, and bring gross Idolatry into
Religion, which has been always forbid under the severest Penalty. And we never
find, that any part of Divine Worship was ever allowed to be paid either to
Men, or Angels, as may be seen by the Example of St. Peter, and the Angel in
the Revelations.

And as the Divine Titles and Adorations which were particularly directed to
our Savior, by his Apostles and others, which he never rebuked them for, are a
Demonstration of his Divinity; so also his own Commission, which he invested
his Disciples with immediately before his Ascension: Go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, is a strong Evidence, that he not only permitted, but required
Divine Worship should be paid to him, since it is all Men's Duty to Worship
him, in whose Name they are Baptized, and that he thought it no Robbery to make
himself equal with GOD.

But if it be urged, (as a late Objections against Mr. Edwards 's Causes of
Atheism.
Socinian Author has objected against the Sense of this Text) that the Apostles
did not always observe this Command in their Baptizing Christians, but only
made use of the Name of Jesus, without mentioning either Father, or Holy Ghost,
(which however was always supposed, if not mentioned in the Form, though the
Author of the Acts does not take notice of it, because his chief Business was
to trace the Progress of Christianity in its first Propagation, and to show
that none could be Christians, or capable of Salvation, but who were Baptized
into the Name of Christ) yet this will not invalidate the Argument, but much
rather confirm it, since none could be admitted for Members of the Church,
without the Conditions of acknowledging Christ for their Lord and Savior, by a
constant Obedience to his Laws, and by continual Acts of Devotion and Adoration
to him: Which sufficiently establish the Divinity of our Savior. For if paying
Divine Worship to him may be justified, without acknowledging him to be GOD,
there can be no good Reason assigned why any Man should be Condemned for the
Invocation of Saints and Angels. For if Christ be not GOD, he is a Creature,
for there is no Medium betwixt them, and therefore to Worship such a One, is
directly contrary both to Natural and Revealed Religion; and could hardly, I
think, be justified by an absolute Command of God; for it is giving his Glory
to another. And besides, Creature-Worship is fully opposite and contradictory
to Natural Reason. For Adoration necessarily supposes Omnipresence, which is an
incommunicable Attribute of God himself. And since there may be Ten Thousand
Petitions offered up at once in so many different places, it is impossible he
should be acquainted with them, unless he be both Omnipresent and Omniscient;
the one to be present to all Petitions, and by the other to fearch into the
secret Affections of Men.

Whether the present Unitarian Writers will allow Divine Honors to be paid to
our Savior, or not, is not very material; this every one must be convinced of,
that the Adoration of Christ is as much mentioned in the History of the
Gospels, and as much enjoined in those, and other parts of Scripture, as any
other Doctrine whatever. So that it would be much more convenient for them, to
reject all Revelation in general, than to out off all those parts of it, that
are disagreeable to their Hypothesis. For to own a Revelation, and at the same
time to disbelieve what is therein clearly delivered, is such a Contradiction
as, I am afraid, their Reason can hardly reconcile. But since in some of their
Pamphlets they have denied Omnipresence and Omniscience to Almighty God, and so
have left us at a loss for a God Infinitely Perfect, they may with the same
Assurance call in question either the Truth, or Authority of his Revelation.

But seeing the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity does believe all
that is contained in the Gospels and Acts, I shall endeavor to convince him by
one Text more, for the Proof of Christ's Divinity, and consequently for the
necessity of believing more concerning him, than barely that he was the
Messiah, from the Example and Expressions of the first Martyr St. Stephen, who
suffered some Years before any of the Gospels or Epistles were written, and
therefore his Authority ought to carry very great Weight along with it, since
such an Example seems to be of as great Force and Obligation, as a Positive
Command. For as he was full of the Holy Ghost, and saw the Glory of God, and
the Heavens opened, whilst yet in the Body, so his Dying Words are upon that
account more particularly remarkable: And they stoned Stephen, calling upon
God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit; And he kneeled down and cried
with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7.59, 60. In
which Words these Two things are very considerable: First, The Divine Honors
here paid to our Savior, wherein, if Christ be not GOD, he was guilty of
Idolatry. Secondly, The Expressions contained in his Petition, which are almost
the very same, which our Blessed Savior had before made the subject of his
last Petition to God the Father, at his Passion upon the Cross: Father into thy
hands I commend my Spirit. And as before in the 34 ver. Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. Both which are, as to the Matter, the same with
those St. Stephen offered up to our Blessed Savior, and attribute the same
Honor, and in almost the very same Words, which Christ in his Humane Nature
gave to God the Father. From whence we may conclude, that either both, or that
neither was God.

I might bring innumerable Instances from Scripture, to prove the necessity of
believing Christ's Divinity, as where the Creation of all things is attributed
to him, and other things that declare his Divine Power and Authority. But these
few I have made use of, are as sufficient as Ten Thousand, where Men are
resolved to believe according to the Evidence of Things. Now the Question is
not, Whether Christ's Divinity is to be comprehended by our Reason, but whether
it is not attested by Revelation. And if this be made out beyond all
possibility of being denied, all the Arguments that can be drawn from Humane
Reason will prove much too weak to overthrow it; unless we can prove, that
there is more Truth and Certainty in Man's Reason, than in the Testimony of God.

And thus have I shown from those places of Scripture which the Author of the
Reasonableness of Christianity does admit of, that there is something more to
be believed concerning our Blessed Savior, than that he was the Messiah. And
that those places which I have mentioned, are direct Proofs of Christ's
Divinity in the most plain and natural Sense of the Words, such as they were
designed to have in the Mouths of the Speaker, is what the meanest Capacity
will easily apprehend.

But it may be said, that Christ's Divinity being asserted in Scripture, does
not make it an Article of Faith, or necessary to be believed to Salvation, or
to make a Man a Christian, unless it was there so declared, any more than
several other parts of Holy Writ; which indeed we acknowledge to be true, but
yet are of no Concern to us. In answer to this it may be questioned in the
first place, whether the Scripture's asserting him to be God, does not make it
necessary to believe him to be so, as well as we are to believe explicitly
that God Created all things, though it is not mentioned as an Article necessary
to be believed to Salvation in Scripture. But as we are obliged to know who was
the Author of our Being, so also must it be equally a Crime not to know
clearly, who and what he was, that could be the Author of our Salvation.

But Secondly, The Design of the Scripture's mentioning him so often with the
Characters and Titles of God, make it necessary for us to believe him to be so.
For to what End should St. John so much contend for his being God, in
opposition to those who denied his Divinity, if yet every Man might be at his
liberty to believe as he pleased concerning him? For there could be no reason
for the defending his Divinity, with so much Care and Concern, if it was not
absolutely necessary to be believed to make a Man a Christian, or if there was
no danger in believing him to be only Man. In like manner, the Design of the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in asserting so largely the Divinity of
Christ, by reason of the wrong Opinions that some Men had concerning him, makes
it necessary for us to entertain true Notions concerning his Divinity. And this
necessity of believing Christ to be God, even to make a Man a Christian, will
also appear from St. Paul's reasoning in his Epistle to the Colossians, where
he tells them, that all things were created by him, and that he is before all
things, Chap. 1. Ver. 16, 17. But chiefly in his second Chapter, he admonishes
them to Beware lest any man spoil them through Philosophy and vain Deceit,
after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ; for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. The design
of which Words seems plainly to be this; To caution them, lest they should fall
from their Faith concerning Christ's being GOD, through the deceitful Arguments
of some sort of Men, who might persuade them, that it was irreconcilable to
Reason. For he did assure them, with all the Sincerity of a faithful Apostle of
Christ, that the Godhead was really and substantially in him. And thereupon he
enjoins them to believe it, if they would retain the Profession of
Christianity. And if this be allowed to be the Force of the Apostle's
Reasoning, as indeed it seems to be, it must be sufficient to enforce the
necessity of believing Christ to be GOD, to make a Man a Christian.

But again, as we cannot deny that we are obliged to believe Christ to be the
Son of God, because it is required in several places of Scripture, and St. John
tells us, that his Gospel was written for this End, that we should believe
Jesus to be the Christ, and the Son of God; so we must also confess him to be
GOD, because, as I have already proved, his Divinity is understood by that
Expression, the ancient Jews both applying it to their expected Messiah, and
also meaning a Divine Person by it. All which seem as fully to require us to
believe him to be GOD, if we would be Christians, as we are in other Passages
enjoined to acknowledge him to be Christ.

And Lastly, it is most evident that the explicit Belief of Christ's being
God, is required to make a Man a Christian, from the Form of Baptism, at our
Admission into Christianity, in the Name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Where
an equal Belief in all is required, as being equally partakers of the same
Divine Nature; and we may as well say, that the Father's Divinity, as the
Son's, is not here implied. But this I have spoken to already.

And here we may add, for a great Confirmation of this Truth of Christ's being
God, that the Universal Church, as may be gathered from the most Primitive
Writings, and the first General Councils, has always asserted His Divinity, as
being most undoubtedly expressed in Scripture. How comes it therefore to pass,
that if the Belief of Christ's Divinity, was not thought clearly Revealed, and
necessary to Salvation, all those that opposed it from the first Ages of the
Church, to this present time, have been Condemned and Censured for Heretics?
Vid. Bishop Stillingfleet's Rational Ac. of the Prot. Relig.
Not as though the sense of the Catholic Church is pretended to be any
infallible Rule of interpreting Scripture in all things which concern the Rule
of Faith. But that it is a sufficient Prescription against any thing that can
be alleged out of Scripture, that if it appear contrary to the sense of the
Catholic Church, from the beginning, it ought not to be looked upon as the
true meaning of Scripture. So that if the denying Christ to be GOD, is contrary
to the received Interpretation of Scripture in the Catholic Church, and also
inconsistent with the plain meaning of the Words, we must conclude, that either
his Divinity must necessarily be believed, even to make a Man a Christian, or
that the Revelation is not to be regarded.

But Secondly, We must also believe the Incarnation of Christ: For every Spirit
that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, 1
Ep. Joh. 4.3. and therefore we must acknowledge that he was Man as well as God,
and that he was made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and a
faithful High Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people, Heb. 2.17. And that this is part of the Mystery of
Godliness, which is necessary to be believed by all Christians, that God was
manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. And that though he was in the form of God,
and thought it not Robbery to be equal with God, yet made he himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of Men, and being found in fashion as a Man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto Death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. All
which plainly denote to us both his Divine and Humane Nature, which we must
believe to be united in one Person. Agreeable to which are those Words of St.
Paul: Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood, which
could only be done by taking the Manhood into God. I need not multiply Texts to
prove that our Savior was Man; this I suppose none of the Unitarians will
dispute. But the difficulty lies in this, that he was both God and Man: But
this also is very frequently and fully asserted in Scripture.

But Thirdly, We must also believe That he died for us, and in our stead, to
free us from the Wrath to come; That his Death was a propitiatory Sacrifice for
us; and That his was the blood of the New Testament, as himself testifies of
it, which was shed for many for the remission of sins, Mat. 26.28. And that
this is part of the Christian Faith, according to St. Paul, that he died for
our Sins, as the Scriptures foretold of him. And for this End he says, He was
ordained a Preacher, to testify that Christ gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Timothy 2.6, 7. But this I have insisted upon so largely already, and shown that
this was the true Reason of his Death, from so many Instances in Scripture,
that I need say no more upon it. It is sufficient to show that this is
necessary to be believed, since our Salvation depends on the Knowledge of the
New Covenant, and the Conditions of it, and how far we are concerned both in
Faith and Practice. In short, as the Scripture has assured us that Christ was
the Mediator of the better Covenant, and that we must believe in him; so must
our Belief of him be measured by what is revealed concerning him. For Christ
himself has told us, That is Life Eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, i.e. The Knowledge of Christ is as much a Condition
of Salvation, as that of God the Father. And the most certain Knowledge of both
is to be drawn from Revelation.

And therefore as we are obliged to believe concerning the Nature of God
whatsoever the Scripture has revealed, so also we must believe of Christ, as
the Scripture has made him known to us. So that the adequate Measure of our
Faith in both must be taken from Scripture. For if upon a Supposition of no
Revelation, we must believe all that of God, which Right Reason could dictate
to us, then certainly since we have a Revelation from God, and that Revelation
has also obliged us to believe in Christ, in order to Salvation, we must
believe upon the hazard of our Salvation every thing concerning him, which is
asserted by that Revelation. And as in the general Confession of Faith, when we
say, We believe in God the Father, etc. we are to understand all the other
Attributes of God, which are made known to us either by Reason, or Revelation,
as that he is Just, Good, Merciful, that he governs all things by his
Providence; or whatever else can be conceived in a Being infinitely Perfect; so
when we say, We believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, we must also
mean by it whatsoever else we can find in Scripture, in reference to our
clearer understanding that Article; as that he is God and Man, our King,
Prophet and Priest; and what more the Scripture has comprehended under each of
those distinct Offices. For believing in Christ, if it mean any thing, must be
interpreted of every thing that Scripture has required to be believed
concerning him. So that this we may be certain is a Fundamental, that as Christ
is the Author of our Salvation, so that Revelation is the just measure of our
Belief in him; and that we must not believe either more, or less of him, than
we are warranted by Scripture.

But it will probably be objected to all this, that though it be granted, that
there are several Articles to be believed by those who are thoroughly
Christians, yet there was no more required by our Savior himself, or his
Apostles, to make a Man a Christian, or in order to his Admission into
Christianity, than the believing Jesus to be the Messiah, and that this is all
which the Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity contends for.

In answer to this it may be observed, first, that the forementioned Articles,
as well as others that might be named, are of the same Nature with that one
Article, of Believing Jesus to be the Messiah, and are a Repetition of it in
all its Branches; for without the Knowledge of them, the Nature of the New
Covenant, and the Meaning of Jesus being the Messiah, would be altogether
Unintelligible. For which Reason they seem as necessary to be Believed, to make
a Man a Christian, as that one Article: Since we cannot suppose, that Persons
should be admitted into the Christian Faith, without understanding the Meaning
and Extent at least of that one Article.

But, secondly, there was more required even to make a Man a Christian, than
the Belief of Jesus being the Messiah. For besides the Obligations that all
those were under, who would be Christians, to acknowledge him to be the Son of
God, which we have already proved to signify more than his being the Messiah;
there was also required, by our Savior himself, the Believing in Father and
Holy Ghost, or in the whole Trinity; if it be granted, which cannot be denied,
that all Christians were obliged to Believe in those in whose Names they were
Baptized. For this was the Commandment which our Savior gave his Disciples,
That they should teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, i. e. They should first instruct them in
whom they were to Believe, and then Baptize them into that Faith. And it was
upon the Believing the ever Blessed Trinity, that Men were admitted Members of
the Christian Church, and upon the Denial of any part of that Faith, Church
Communion was refused and has been so down from the Apostles time. If therefore
Men could not be truly Christians, without being Baptized into that Faith, and
were not looked upon as Christians if they Denied it, then certainly it must be
confessed, that there was more required even to make a Man a Christian, in
whatsoever Sense it be understood, either for the first Embracing that
Profession, or for the Continuance in it, than that Jesus was the Messiah, or
even the Son of God; the Faith in the other Two Persons of the Blessed Trinity
being also indispensably required in the very Initiation into the Christian
Profession.

But here the Objection will recur, that the forementioned Form was never made
use of in the Baptizing of Christians; and therefore that the Faith in Christ
was only required, his Name alone being mentioned in the Form, as may be proved
from several Instances in the Acts. To this it may be answered, that it is
certain, that the Form prescribed by our Savior was used in Baptism, though
the Name of Christ be only taken notice of by the Author of the Acts. And this
is plain from St. Paul's Question to those who said unto him, We have not so
much as heard whether there be any Holy Ghost, Act. 19.2, 3.
Unto what then were ye Baptized? Which evidently shows, that they could not be
Baptized into the Christian Faith, without Believing in the Holy Ghost. But yet
after this when they were Baptized, there is no more set down, than that it was
in the Name of the Lord Jesus; ver. 5.
though it is very evident from St. Paul's Question to them, that they could
not be truly Baptized, or made Members of the Christian Church, but by
Acknowledging and Believing in the Holy Ghost. So that we ought always to
suppose, that when Men are only said in Scripture to be Baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, that it was in the Form enjoined by Him, In the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And this we must either grant, or suppose, that the
Apostles did not faithfully discharge the Trust committed to them. And this is
sufficient to show, that there was more required, and still ought to be, to
make a Man a Christian, than our Author's One Article.

And thus have I vindicated the necessity of believing more of our Ever-blessed
Savior, than that he is the Messiah: I shall now in the last place examine the
Reasonableness of this Author's Article of Faith, set down in the largest Terms
in p. 301. in the Treatise it self, and repeated in his Vindication, p. 28.
which he sums up in these Words, Believing Jesus to be the Savior promised,
and taking him now raised from the Dead, and constituted the Lord and Judge of
Men, to be our King and Ruler. And that by the All-merciful God's requiring no
more as absolutely necessary to be believed, he seems to have consulted the
Poor of this World, and the Bulk of Mankind; these are Articles that the
laboring and illiterate Man may comprehend.

So that this he thinks to be the great Advantage of his One Article, above all
other Schemes of Religion, That it is suited to vulgar Capacities, and the
Comprehension of illiterate Men. But for the clearer Examination of this, we
may consider, first, that supposing God either had, or should reveal any thing
to Mankind, and make the Belief of it a Condition of Salvation, which the
Reason of Man could not comprehend, and we had all the Evidence the thing was
capable of, that the Revelation proceeded from God, would this
Incomprehensibleness of it be a sufficient Plea for our rejecting it? If it
would, it must be because it would be unjust in God to require any thing so
revealed, as absolutely necessary to be believed by us. But this can be no
Injustice, since it is as easy for us to believe any thing upon the Testimony
of God, as upon the Evidence of our own Senses; if we are fully persuaded that
God has all those Perfections, which are attributed to him, and that he can
neither deceive, nor be deceived. Indeed if there are direct Contradictions in
that Revelation, we ought to disbelieve them, i. e. We ought to reject the
Revelation; but if we allow the Revelation, and are assured that it proceeds
from God, it is in vain to say there are Contradictions in it, for that is as
impossible, as that God should not be true.

But Secondly, Why all this Concern for the illiterate and Men of weak
Capacities, as though it would be so very Prejudicial to them, to be obliged to
believe what they cannot comprehend? For they do not seem to receive any
Disadvantage by it more than others. For if they are able to search the
Scriptures, they may know what they are obliged to believe, and may as easily
believe as Men of greater Reaches, and stronger Reasons. For the Mysteries of
Religion which are incomprehensible, are equally so to all. Indeed had God made
a difference in the necessary Parts of Faith, between the Learned and
Illiterate, and required such particular Articles to be believed to Salvation
by all sorts of Men, which only the Wisest could understand, then the Poor of
the World would have just Reason to complain. But since he has placed all Men
on the same Level, and has required no harder Terms of the one than the other,
we have all the Reason in the World to admire his infinite Wisdom, in that he
has revealed himself as much to the Unlearned Bulk of Mankind, as to the Wise
and Prudent. For he that reads may understand, may know what God has made
necessary to Salvation, though he can understand what he believes but in part.

Were we to draw our Belief from a long Train of Deductions, and infer every
Article of Faith from some one Principle, though there might be a Mathematical
Certainty for the Truth of such a Religion, yet the Men of great strength of
Judgment, and Intenseness of Thought, could only reach the perfect Knowledge of
it, and the poor, laboring and illiterate Man must then most unhappily perish
through his Ignorance. But as now it is, all parts of our Belief are equally
intelligible by all; and what we cannot comprehend as to the Manner of it, we
can believe to be true upon the Veracity of him that revealed it. So that how
mysterious soever some things may be which are proposed to our Faith, they are
not more difficult to the weak, than those of stronger Capacities.

But there is yet in the Third Place more to be said in Defense of our common
Faith, if we consider the Extent and Limits of it. For though we are obliged to
believe what in its own Nature is a Mystery, yet our Faith does not require us
to go into the mysterious Parts of it, that is, We have no Obligations upon us
to believe it as a Mystery. As for Instance: We are obliged to believe that the
Three Divine Persons in the Trinity are one GOD, but how they are One, or how
Three, what is the adequate Meaning of their Personal Distinction, or how
consistent with their Unity, Revelation has not made necessary to be believed.
And so as to the Creation of the World, and the Hypostatick Union of God-Man,
we are to believe as Scripture has revealed, but as to the manner of them, by
what distinct Act of Omnipotence God made the one, or how he united the other,
our Faith is not to determine. And in this Sense it may be granted, that we are
not obliged to believe farther than our Reason can carry us; that must
determine us how far, and what we are to Believe; that is, It must decide what
is required by Revelation to be Believed, and what is to be the Extent of that
Belief. For we are only enjoined to believe Articles of Faith as they are
delivered in Scripture, without any particular Explanations of the Modes how
they may be conceived. For though the Articles themselves are necessary to be
Believed to Salvation, yet any particular Explication of them is not; because
as we can have no just Idea of them our selves, so we have no certainty that
any Body else can have. And therefore it is a mere Scandal cast upon us, that
we Believe we know not what; for we have a perfect Understanding of what is
required to be Believed, and the Grounds of our Belief are as cogent as any
Evidence of Sense. For it is as easy to Believe what God has certainly
Revealed, as what we can apprehend by our Senses. We may without any great
difficulty understand what we are to Believe; but as to the Manner, or
particular Modes of Existence of those things, which are required to be
Believed, as they are above our Comprehensions, so are they not made any Parts
of our Faith.

But, lastly, Since our Author is of Opinion, that it would be so very
Advantageous to Mankind in general, to have only such a Religion as is very
easy to be understood by all sorts of Men, we ought to consider how very
Intelligble his Rule of Faith is, if compared with that of our Church, and how
Agreeable his One Article is to the Comprehension of vulgar Capacities. For he
that advances a new Scheme of Faith should take great care, that it may not
labor under any of those Imperfections, for which the other is Condemned.

Now let us suppose with our Author, that the believing Jesus to be the
Messiah, the Savior that was to come into the World, to be alone necessary to
Salvation; and let this be proposed to an inquisitive laboring Man, that would
desire to know a Reason for his Faith. Now indeed he might acknowledge that
this Proposition, Jesus is the Messiah, is easy to be remembered, but not so
easily understood. It is then very probable he would enquire what is meant by
his being the Messiah. If we should tell him, that he was the Savior promised;
the Question would again recurr, What is meant by his being our Savior, or
how, or from what did he save us? If we should say, that he was our Savior by
those excellent Precepts which he taught, to reform Mankind; this would not
satisfy, because we had most of those Precepts before, though not so fully
explained; and because this is not consistent with the general Sense of
Scripture, which tells us that he was our Savior by suffering for us, and in
our stead. If we should reply, that he was indeed put to Death because of our
Sins, and that we should by the Death of so innocent a Person, learn to reform
our Lives, and follow his Doctrine. This would be yet more unintelligible; for
why should God suffer an innocent Person to be put to Death, because the rest
of Mankind were Sinners: This indeed would be the only Means to encourage Men
in their Impieties, since there was no safety in a Religious Life. And this
Reason would also prevent the success of his Doctrine; for if all his Design
was to prevail with Mankind to receive his Doctrine, it would have been much
more for his Advantage, to have saved himself by a miraculous coming down from
the Cross; for then there is no question but all Men would have believed what
he taught was from God. Since this would have been a greater Evidence for the
Truth of his Doctrine, than his Death could possibly be.

But if we should say that he Died to gain us an Immortality which we lost by
Adam; yet this would not put a stop to his Enquiry; for if this was all he Died
for, what should be the Meaning of those places in Scripture where he is said
to be made Sin for us, to free us from the Wrath to come? For the frequent
Repetition of his suffering for our Sins, necessarily supposes that there was
some severe Punishment due to them, which we should otherwise have suffered.
But if upon his farther Enquiry, why this one Article should only be required
necessarily to be believed, we should inform him, that this is all that is
required in the Gospels and Acts of the Apostles, and that we are not obliged
to an explicit Belief of any Doctrines delivered in other parts of the New
Testament; yet this would never satisfy, because as he would easily perceive
the Falsity of the former, so it would be difficult to convince him of the
other, if he was persuaded, that the Epistles had as great an Authority stamped
upon them, by being Divinely Inspired, as any other parts of Scripture, and
that the Apostles had the same Commission from God, in the writing their
Epistles, as in any other parts of their Ministry.

And, Lastly, If this Illiterate Man should demand, Whether this Messiah is
Man, or God; and whether we are not obliged to believe him to be God, because
Scripture has in diverse places asserted his Divinity; and because in the Form
of Baptism by which we are made Christians, He is represented as equal to God
the Father; if he should be answered, That if those places meant any thing, it
must be some other Sense than we generally understand by them, or at least that
they do not require an actual Belief of that Doctrine to Salvation; or that it
is not material what we believe our Savior to be, so long as we acknowledge
him to be the Messiah; yet this would run him still into greater Perplexities,
and make him throw aside all in general, rather than take up with such a
Partial Religion. For whatsoever is irreconcilable with all the parts of
Revelation, will never persuade any Considering Man to Embrace it, that
believes there is an Equal Authority from God for the whole. Such a Scheme of
Faith which our Author has drawn up, I am afraid, will give no better
Satisfaction to those who are for searching the Scriptures, to see whether
these things are so.

The Holy Bible, especially the New Testament is not so very large, but that
the Knowledge of it, particularly where our Salvation is concerned, may be
easily attained by the meanest Capacities. Nor are there such Intricacies in
the Matters of Faith, but that a willing Mind may see sufficient Reason for
assenting to them; not because he can comprehend the Depths of them, but
because he perceives it is his Duty to Believe them; since God, that cannot
Lie, has assuredly Revealed them, and made them necessary to be Believed in
order to Salvation. And why may not Almighty God, that has contrived such a
Salvation for us, as our greatest Wisdom could never have discovered, oblige us
to the Belief of some things, which our deepest Reasons cannot now comprehend?

Indeed we might with very great Reason complain, if God had laid a necessity
upon us of clearly Understanding whatsoever he has required of us to Believe, I
mean as to the Manner of it, because he has not been pleased to explain the
Manner: But since all that he has enjoined us, is only a firm Belief of
whatsoever he has Revealed, we ought in all Humility to submit our selves to
his Wisdom, and wait for a fuller Intuition into those Mysteries in the other
World, which we must be Ignorant of in this. And there is no Question to be
made, but that a great many Things are hid from our present Views, and which
yet are required of us to be Believed, on purpose to heighten our Desires after
those higher Degrees of Knowledge, which are particularly reserved for the next
Life.

It seems indeed very plain, that we are under an Obligation to make nothing
more necessary to be Believed, than what is clearly laid down in Scripture, or
necessarily to be drawn from it. But this also is as certain, that we ought not
to deny any thing to be an Article of Faith, which the Scripture has made such,
especially if it be clearly delivered. For it is God's Word alone that must
guide us in those Cases, and it is as dangerous to detract from it, as to add
to it.

And thus I have Examined those Parts of the Reasonableness of Christianity,
which seemed to me to be Erroneous; as for those that treat of the Necessity of
Revelation, the Conditions of Repentance, Good Works, etc. they seem to carry
an Air of Piety along with them, and to be writ with such strength of Judgment,
as may be supposed that the Author had thought more upon them, than upon any
other Parts of that Treatise.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
WHen these Papers were just coming Abroad, there appeared a Second Vindication
of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. by the Author of it. I was under
Apprehension, that some Arguments might be there propounded, which ought to be
considered: But since I find they are chiefly directed against Mr. Edwards
Reflections, which though I have not Read, I presume are different from these
Observations, by the Passages cited from them, I did not think my self
concerned to examine them; especially since they required more Time than the
Press would allow.

If I have urged any Arguments that have been managed already by Others, it is
more than I knew. What I have mentioned of Mr. Hobbs was with no Design to
possess the Reader with Prejudices against the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity; but only to show, that the same Doctrine had been maintained
before our Author appeared for it: Though I don't believe he Borrowed it from
thence, since he has declared the contrary. If in that, or any thing else, I
have fallen upon the same Notion with the Ingenious Author of the Occasional
Paper, Numb. I. it is more than I did, or could design; since these Remarks
were Drawn up long before that came Abroad.

ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 7. read in the Gospels. p. 14. l. 28. r. reject them. ibid. l.
33. r. Inspiration. p. 20. l. 5. del. it. p. 35. l. 10. del. the p. 44. in Not.
r. commata. p. 62. l. 1. r. Crimina. p. 63. l. 12. for those are r. that is. p.
69. l. 24. r. Apostle.


