Mysterium Pietatis OR THE Mystery of Godliness WHEREIN THE MYSTERIES
CONTAINED IN THE Incarnation Circumcision Wisemen Passion Resurrection
Ascension.


OF The SON of GOD, and comeing of the HOLY GHOST, are unfolded and applied.

AT EDINBVRGH. By Will. Ar^and. M. A. o^e of the Ministers of that City, la^e
of University Coll. OXON.

I. Tim. III.XVI. And without contr^versie great is the Mystery of Godliness.

London, Printed for Robert Boult^r, at the Turks-head, in Cornhill near to
the Royal Exchange, ANNO DO. 1671.

To the right Reverend Father in God, George, by the Mercy of God, Lord Bishop
of Edinburgh.
My LORD,
THE Almighty in His Law, ordered none to appear before him, empty handed, yet
he himself being to Flesh invisible, the present was an offering to His Priest;
God who is also called, Good accounting it churlish to address in
thankfulness to Him, without something that figured bounty to His Servant;
neither would he have his People always taking, but sometimes also giveing:
unto which Law, as a Conformist, I in this your Clinical condition, comeing to
receive your Blessing, presume to present this my Mysterium, in regard of your
Acquaintance with Godliness, not according to the new style, which intimats
separation; but to Scr^pture-Dialect, Respecti^^ Holiness and peace. You have
had experience of the CROSS, and that at home, we by your Lordships order in
our Pulpits, pray for your PASCH; your self waits for ASCENSION in your bed,
the power of the RESURRECTION having said, be not afraid.

My LORD, when the Rivers of Babylon begu^ to swell, I mean, when those tyds of
confusion, that destroyed all order in these pleasant Lands, of late years, did
first rage, you were one of the Hundredth and Twenty, that resolved TO SIT by
and weep retiring from your own, to other Countries, to any Kingdom rather then
IN those waters, to become instrumental of your Countries Sorrow, Death, or
Discredit: How did my dear and worthy Father, your Brother and Companion in
that Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, exult at
his Death, that he had in a bloody Time, been free of the blood of all men,
whether executed on the scaffold, or slain in battle? and that in a time when
one cried up Character of a perfect Evangelist was to be an Incendiary to
which, how vehemently was he solicited in both Kingdoms.

IN those days of unleavened bread, the Angel who Redeemed you from the same
evil made you find Favor in the sight (...) Strangers; Providence among them
alott alottin^ you a Charge, peculiarly respecting Church-Festivities, and that
Theme pursued, until Iniquity, and Invasion, gave Check to Royalty and Order:
but these again, being Captived by Truth and Decency, a door was opened, and
that Holy subject a fresh prosecuted; Until God and the King, whom you always
joined, called you to wear an Honorable Mytre in that City, wherein you had so
signaly, Innocently, and patiently, endured the Cross.

UPON which score, unto whom fitter could this manuel be delivered, for
Patronage then to you my dear Lord? The Author co^fiding to be participant of
the effects of those virtues whereof Experience has evidenced to him, you are
copiously endowed conveyed into your breast, as it were by Christanity and
Blood* finding one William Archbishop of St. Andrews, Anno Dom. 1279.
Chronicled for a lover of peace, and your Names-sake, and our Martyr Mr. George
Wisheart, to be fam'de for Humility and Charity: Upon which rocks I build my
presentment, Conceiving that your Aged, Young, and yet Accomplished Abilities,
shall not disdain my Improportionat Dedication, but that you shall depart in
peace, even with me, pardoning my failings, praying for directtion to my good
Intentions, and for Additament to my weak endowments: In gratitude whereof,
that your Nunc Dimittis, with Simeon, may be in Peace, and that Peace to come
in Job's opportunity* as a shock of Corn comes in his Season, shall be the
Prayer of,

My LORD, Your Lordships most Obedient Son, and Servant. WILL. ANNAND.
From my Study May 15. 1671.
To the Courteous Reader.
Ingenuous Friend.
IT is not unknown, that Solomon of old said, of making many Books there is no
end; yet by the expression, it is probable he only understood his own continued
pains therein, having acc^mplished Abilities therefore: But grant him to check
the plurality of other Writters, I dare engage and promise never to write more,
that since his time, if there had not been multitudes of Authors, we should not
have had one book for a hundredth, which yet we profitably turn over; Freedom
therefore of Writting not being called in, I have for my Mysteria the Apology
of a late publisher in the year 1659. (a time, wherein the Press, like a
skittish Jad, had broke all bridles, Curbs, and Girhts of Licenses, and
Restraints) who entitled his Book, Let me speak too: and believe it, in some
things he was worth hearing; for in all to be perfect, is the sole privilege
of Almighty GOD.

LET me declare, that I knew of no false Copies abroad of these Sermons, that I
never feared to be injured thereby, though there had; that Importunities from
others never induced me to a composure, or that Arguments were offered urging a
necessity of Publication, being convinced that the perpetual burying of these
sheets, should never have caused any sensible alteration in the affairs under
agitation, about the present expedition, or Dunkirk Randevouz of the most
Christian King: But profitable I humbly conceived they might be, to such as
will read, then practice; and having an education that said Stand off to
tattle, with a Natural Genius abominating To meddle, I have some spare hours
forming conveniences, for profitting my Generation, the immediate Parent, of
this, and other Subjects, which Time and Opportunity, may bring to light.

IT is plain white-seam work, without the Point, or Lace, of Marginal
citations, because Toylsome and Expensive; yet one thing troubled me, which was
the throng of Authors upon this Subject, being forced ( as sometimes Travelers
are) to forsake the path, ( but never I hope the rode,) until the Crowd
passed, by which, as may be perceived by the Scrutinous, I had, or took, time,
to look about the Country, and what others did less heed, i^ here respected
with greater care and Vice Versa.

IF thou have ever Printed thy self, want of Charity is not to be surmised: if
otherwise perhaps thy Relations, thy Kinsman, thy Father has, and I presume
some Paragraph or other, has Redundancy, Deficiency; Some Section contains
somewhat too laxe, too dark, and upon this score, cross I pray thee my
Failings: Beseeching also, that when in the Title thou reads the Mystery of
the INCARNATION or ASCENSION, unfolded and applied, thou would understand the
phrase with this Restrictive note IN PART.

Farewell.

An advertisment by way of Caution unto all Readers.
AMONG other blemishes wherewith the face of this Age is disfigured and whereof
she ought to be accused as being degenerat from that Pristine Beauty, Justice
and Equity, of which our more upright Ancestors bequeathed ample legacies, one
is, that whatever savors of that Ancient Doctrine established in the Church,
(who for her age, and Religious hoarinesse ought to be accounted venerable)
Invidiously is by some, foolishly is by many, houted upon, as Superstitious,
Idolatrous and Anomolous to verity and Truth; atteesting, yet without ground,
that whatever in Divinis cannot be found in express text, as Fornication,
should not be named among Saints: Obtruding this upon some Disciples, it cannot
be supposed, but this small treatise, because an offspring of Antiquity, shall be
deemed scandalous, and as a misshappen birth, in the Midwifery of their
forestalled fancy, be smothered as soon as parted from the womb of the Press,
and not buried, but cast forth through the dunggate of Obloquie or into the
Kidrone of disdain.

NOT considering that if the question should be put concerning, some approved
practices, and strongly pleaded for Resolves, the legitimating of many Acts
should be found to emerge from Scripture, Logically, that is, Rationally
understood, conform to that rule a Minore ad Majus. The Jews appointing feasts
as that of Dedication, one great Jew, instituting a feast as that of Purim, the
Zealous separating days from civil use, to commemorat mercy, the devout
Magistrate designing such and such hours, o^ days, for public preaching;
Colleges, Halls, Hospitalls, Schools, solemnizing days in memory of their
pious Founders and Religious Benefactors, exempteth the Church from Censure, in
enacting festivitys for her Lords birth, passion, or Resurrection.

SINCE the world could not contain the books, had all things been written which
were done, or said* concerning it by Christ, the world I infer, is to rest
satisfied when any thing is done, not contrary to the things in that one Book
taught and delivered by him or at least not to condemn it, which so much the
less ^s to be done, that the Judges of these exercises seldom, if ever (were
they exactly scanned) are found seriously to reflect upon any one day in the
year, the matter wherefore these days were set apart, which they condemn
because fixed principaly upon one day.

ANABAPTISTS infringe that liberty our Lord has procured for us in denying
infant baptism, as if they were without the Covenant, in which more and higher
priveledges are tacitly granted to the Jew then Christian, he wanting, the
other enjoying* the comforts of admitting his Son into that promise made of old
unto the people, the Almighty styling himself Lord God of your Fathers: whereas
the Baptized by them, stands in a particular, or personal Relation, to the
Same Lord from which there does not flow so eminent Consolation in case of
Death in Infancy.

AND such who will not allow the Church in separating times of worship, for
dazeling, that is, singular acts of Grace, ought to reflect how the vesture of
the Christian, under Gospel Dispensation, is our-tail'd, being made more short,
more bare, more thinn, that is, the Churches freedom, more impared by the Death
of he^ Savior, then amplified and enlarged; we b^^fore seeing the Phylactery
of the Jew, so extensively broad, large and honorably graceful, under
Typical oblations, Synagogue and Temple-service, the removeall of which,
discharging to the now Believer, that piece of true devotion, wherein the
Faithful of old appeared before God, with joy, having Room, that is, liberty
to make, to keep Holy Day.

ITS granted, that neither Jew nor Gentile, men or Angel, ^an, dare, or make
offer, to make a day holy now but to observe a day Holily, or to separate a
Civil day, that is one of the six for a Holy use, a Saint-like encompassing the
throne of God for Celebrating praise or pouring forth prayer, as by many it is
held good, and performed in the week; so ought it not to be judged
supperstitious, if done by others in the Return of the year.

IVDICIOUS Calvin expounds those places of St Paul Orthodoxly genuine, Let no
man judge you in meat or drink, or in respect of a holy day, 2 Call. 16. Ye
observe day^s, and months, and times, and years, Gal. 4.10. One man esteems
one day above another. Romans 14.5. For, quis nisi Furioso? who ( says he) but
Madmen will here understand any observation condemned, save what ritualy
shadowed Christ to come, and neque Ecclesias damnavero, neither shall I censure
( mark the words) those Churches who have instituted other solemn days for
the Congregations Conveening together, they Keeping from superstition, of which
they shall be free when appointed purely for good order, and Discipline, not as
shadows of the Law, etc. Institut. lib. 2. c. 8. S. 33. Whence its deducible
that feasts so observed are not to be accounted either Jewish, or Popish, they
being purely to Commemorat Christ already come, and appointed for that end,
before either Pope, or Romish Antichrist* that is to say, before the usurpation
of the Bishop of Rome, above all called gods.

FOR when the Records of the Church shall be exactly viewed, and when again
more diligently inspected, and a search made after that, then for greater
security, if once more there be a tumbling over the monuments of Ancient times,
the Time, the Place, the Persons, by whom the days here marked, were
distinguished, and first instituted, shall never be found, never be heard of,
so that it was a puzling and thorny question, and for ought we find, an
Unanswered one, proposed by our Late Sovereign, April ^. 1647. of blessed
memory in these words, I desire to be resolved, why the new Reformers discharge
the keeping of Easter, the Celebration whereof being of the same Authority,
which changed the Jewish Sabbath into the Lord's Day, Saturday being no where
discharged, wherefor it must be the Churches Authority, that changed the one,
and instituted the other: therefore my opinion is, that those who will not keep
this Feast, may as well return to the observation of Saturday, and refuse the
weekly Sunday, when any body can show me, that herein I am in an error, I shall
not be a shamed to confess and amend it, till when, you (Meaning the
Comissioners, and Ministers treating in the Isle of Wight) Know my mind. C. R.

THERE is no footsteps of Antiquity indeed declaring the rise either of the
one or other and those Arguments from proportion, touching the vndenyed one,
wants not their influence in approving the other controverted; the old Church
by her own power abolishing the Jewish Sabbath* though express law, and Divine
sanction for its observance, is scattered throughout, Moses and the Prophets,
the present Church abrogating by not using Apostolical constitutions though
enjoined by the holy Ghost in proper terms, as not abstaining from blood, not
anointing the sick, not tarrying one for another, before the Sacrament of the
Supper in St. Paul's sense, not having Deaconesses to attend the poor Clinick
sick and bedridden: Against which such as are not distracted, foameth not, nor at
the Churches desuetude thereof, being convinced at the Reasonablnesse of her
omission, and her Authority so to do, which in the case under debate, is also
to be acquiesed in, and conceeded unto.

THE Controversy so early started betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches
about the Celebretion of Easter, Anno. Dom. 240. as whether on the 14 day of
the Moon with the Jew, or on the Lord's Day as with us, gives Testimony for the
Seniority of this Festival, and by anology, of all the other, chiefly
considering, that the observance of either is recorded, to arise from a custom
long before delivered; Assiatick Congregations, Synods and Councels keeping it
precisely with the Passover, those of Europ refusing in that punctilio of time
to Celebrate their spiritual Pasch, Christ being come, observed the annual
dominicall, as we now, both of them, more wise then to put darts in the hands
of unbelievers, by affoording Israel Armor to fight against our weekly Sunday,
or any Heretic to strugle against the decrees of the Church, because no
express warrant for their publication, having this in general that what
conduces to our Lords glory and man's salvation, may by our Princes, Churches
and Elders be appointed, provided the Church be not burdened thereby, nor
salvation held as subsisting thereupon, or pressed, as matters of Faith, the
present fault of the Church of Rome, by the Reformed Church abroad eyed, in
separating from her Corrupted Doctrine, yet retaining the celebration of Days,
which she as a Sister had derived unto her, with the Gospel from the times of
the Apostles, and custom of all other Churches of God: At which word, let ^one
stumble, for though a naked custom, or ^n only custom, as such, signifies
little; yet when it comes clothed with Truth, Reverence, Sanctity and
Antiquity; Its hoary-head ^s to have all due veneration, which St. Paul
^voucheth in recurring to it, in that case of woman's being covered in the
Church, there^rom surceasing to dispute, 1 Cor. 11.26.

BUT how is it to be observed, when be^^ds Tradition, it comes with Imperial
Edicts? ^he division above mentioned being reconciled ^y the first, and famous
Council of Nice, determining the Celebration of Easter for ever to (...) upon
the Lord's Day Eusebius. in vit. Con^ant. lib. 3. ratified by imperial
proclamations ^mitted from that Holy and Royal Emperor, Constantine, sugaring
such Laws, with Kingly solicitation in Epistles, persuading some E^minent
Churches to obedience, and conformity that the Resurrection and Passion might
be ali^^ Celebrated in the Churches, being one sca^^tered abroad. Socrat.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. u^^ing that the Jewish observance might (...) a
repetition of that famous Feast by a two-(...) celebrating in one year, which
as a thing abo^^nable here solved never to endure* whereby them^^ it is to be
adverted, that the year 1664 made (...) clamours, Easter being lost one whole
week* that of 1655 caused a whole months Error, (...) as fell almost this
present year. 1671 as to (...) time of celebration, which is the Sunday (...)
the first full Moon, next after the Vernall (...), by which account through the
processi^^ of the Equinoctium Vernum, it will often (...) and worse, until at
length it be quit lost, (...) unknown ( as is told us by skillful
Mathema^^^cians) it were generous if the new Style (...) made old Style, and
the Julian changed, to (...) Carolin account by Emendation of our Tab^^ But to
go on*

THE Emperors Letters were seco^^ by others from the Council to the Church^^
Alexandria, Lybia, Pentapolis, including joyful news of the Union of the
Christ Churches in the West, South, North, and some parts of the East,
concurring to this Act, and adhering to this statute about Easter, those of
Italy, Afric, Egypt* Spain, France, Asia, Pontus, Cilicia and Britain;
which last did punctually observe the Pasch according to the Asian Churches:
from which it is more then probable, our Ancestors received not the Gospel from
Rome, nor any of Romes Emissaries, and we find Joseph of Arimathea first to
plant the Gospel here, sent out of France by Philip, the Evangelist, whom
Policrates, Bishop of Ephesus attested to have taught those Esterns that way of
Institution, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. But afterward Britain yielded to the
Law, submitting to the determination of the Emperors and Councels, Niceph.
Hist. lib. 8. c. 25.

YET before this Nicen Council, the solemnity of this, as also of all other
days, is notour: for under the reign of Valerian. A. D. 257. Alexandria being
almost desolate by Tumults, Pestilence and Plague; the unbelieving Inhabitants
bevailing their disaster, did the Christians with great joyfulnesse solemnize
the Feast of Easter in fields* Prisons, and where not with gladness of heart,
Niceph. lib. 6.20. Yea the more Tyrants designed the Gospels overthrow, the
more zealous were its Followers for its Lord and Masters splendor,
particularly in their exact heeding Church Festivalls, among which that of the
Nativity was respected, Celebrated in December as now, in the Church being so
taught, and received it from times of old, Aug. in Psalm. 132. The Archiues of
Rome that is, the Registers of the City, being Authentic witnesses of his
birth, that happning in the days of the Universal Taxation by Augustus Caesar,
Tert. ad Mar. lib. 4. c. 7. The Church generally of old, knowing no other day
observed no other, Chrysostom. de Not. St. Ioh. Serm^ The more solemnity being given
always to it, (...) regard that without it, the feast of the Epiphany* Pasch
etc. had never been, these as rivers flowing from the Fountain, of the verity
of the birth, whereupon it was called the Metropolis, that is, the head, the
Foundation of all Festivities, Ib. de Beat. Philog. orat. And what is sai^ of
one Feast, maybe said of this, and all other, tha^ by the Church were they
instituted, and annualy observed, Aug. Epist. ad Jan. 119. ^. 14. Even before
statutes were made, or before there were any Christian Emperor, to honor them
with a Law.

LAMENTABLE was that slaughter made upon a Christian Assembly in the days o^
Dioclesian at Nicomedia, where on the Nativity day the Church-doors being shut,
by the Tyrants, and life offered to all who would burn Incense to Jupiter,
from within the people testifying, they were Christians, believing in one God,
and in Christ, for whom with the Father and Spirit they were ready to suffer, a
fire was Kindled, which in few minutes redacted to ashes twenty thousand
persons, Niceph. Hist. lib. 7. c. 6. To which degree of Cruelty, they are not
many leagues distant, who will Censure the service of these Martyrs as
will worship, because Convocat on that day, practicing what long before had
been taught, by holy Ignatius the second Bishop of Antioch after Peter and
said, to be that little Child JESUS, set in the midst to teach his Disciples
Humility, Matthew. 18. He floriushed, Ann. Dom. 71. And being sentenced to be
devoured by Lions adviceth against disrespecting Festivities saluteth
Polycarpus who is Known to have been Disciple to St. John the beloved Apostle
Epist. ad Philip. the Reason of these precepts, being for advancement of
believers toward God, or, (which is a more apt expression) for returning to
him, this one said haranging upon the Natalitials of our Savior Greg. Naz.
Orat. 38. Whence the Golden-mouthed Father, prefaceth a Sermon in upbraiding
such, whose zeal and fervor, excited only to Communicate upon such days,
(which yet might be often) and not upon others, pathetically showing how each
day might be made a Festival Chrysostom. in Fide Ane. Hom. 5. Which them by Origin.
who was Famous Anno Dom. 226. was closely followed in his writting in defense
of the Gospel against the cavils of subtle Philosophers, affirming, that to
Keep a feast, was but to attend dutifully, offering up Prayer and praise, as
unbloody sacrifices unto God, and he who believed the death of Christ, and
lived by his word, did Celebrate the Pasch, such who went to an upper Chamber
to pray with one accord, Kept the Pentecost etc. Contra Cells. lib. 8.

WHAT more? for Paper would fail, if exact rehearsal of the practice of the
most famed, most Ancient, most edifying, most Religiou^ Sermons, Orations,
Persons, Churches, and Nations touching these things were in Individuo
Specified* without boasting what hat^ been said as light, may Conjure those
Spectrum Phantasmes, Phasmes, and Apparitions of pretended supperstition,
though walking in (...) heavenly garb, by a holy vogue, to disappeare* as
Impostors and airey vanitys, possessing nothing of the substance of solid
piety, not having the true body of Refined Reason, Laws, Edicts, and Authority
regulating Christianity in this exercise, by uniting Churches for observing in
the Circumstance of time, that, for the doing whereof they had Authority from
Apostles, or Apostolic men; I say, Circumstance of time, there being a while
disagreement among the Churches when, but never about, whether, these days
should be observed, the difference in our own Churches about Easter after
Austine the monks enstalment, being removed by Theodorus Bishop of Canterbury a
Citizen of no mean City, born in Tarsus in Cilicia St Paul's Country* who
appointed the feast of Easter to Commence according to our present Computation,
Anno Dom. 662. Full. Eccles. Hist. Cent 7.

WHEREBY Unity was beheld in the Churches of Palestine, that Conforming with
the Churches of Antioch, of the greater and lesser Asia, of Egypt,
Thessalonica, Athens and Corinth, the Churches of the Isle St. Thoms, of
Iberia, the Mengrellians bordering on the black Sea, those of Phrigia,
Galathia, Bythinia, Lydia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Magnesia, Lycia, Alepo,
Damascus, Tripoly, Cyprus, Candia, Zant. those of Media, Persia, India, those
of the Abyssins, Babylon, Syria, and those of the once great Kingdom of China:
For a learned Author showing how all these Churches, though under the Dominion
of the Turk, Rome, or Pagans agree with us, in the great matters agitat,
against our Romish adversaries, as in the Supremacy Purgatory, half Communion
Transubstantation, etc. Discovers also their disagreement from us in several
points to Instance only in the case in hand, some begin their Lent ten days
before ours, some fast nine days before the Ascension, in regard of Christ's
absence from the Apostles, which to them they reckon a time of sorrow, Paget
Christian ograph 146. and 150. Which exception from our observance, evidenceth
their agreement with us in the matter under proof, according to that Known rule
exceptio firmat in non exceptis.

SHOULD we say in all this they inclined to Popery, waspishly they would sting,
and frettingly would they be angry, having against that so great an aversness,
that the Patriarch or Archbishope of Constantinople when Elected by his Clergy,
and confirmed by the Barut or Patent of the Grand-Segnior in the Government of
the Churches of Greece, Macedon, Epirus, Thrace, Mosina, Maldavia, Corsu, in
the Egean Se^, etc. having under him seventy four Archbishops, I say this great
Patriarch yearly upon the Sunday called Dominica Invocavit, solemnly
excommunicats the Pope and all his Clergy, for Schismatics, its true of late
his seat has been often at Musco, where to this day if a Roman priest by chance
should officiat upon any of their tables, or Altars, as polluted, or accursed,
they break it into pieces, Paget ut sup. and c 29.

A Learned Critic and Antiquary, viewing the several Churches of the world,
finds that part of the Greek Church in Armenia, Celebrating the Nativity, not
as we, but upon the sixth of January Bree^woods inquir. 124. as if that had
been his birth day, which indeed is an old opinion, being received by some, but
neither so universaly* nor so rationaly believed, Chrysostom. Hom. de Not. led
thereunto through a mistake of the word Epiphania signifying manifestation,
they concluded the time of his birth, and baptism to be one, for which cause
it may be yet the Ethiopicks sprinkle themselves in the Epiphany in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet not as essential unto Faith, but as
Historical, a remembrance of our Saviors baptism* Barrets travells p. 146.

YET the received opinion by the Current Testimony of all Antiquity from the
first, and primitive times, was the feast of Christmas, that is, with the old
Saxon Christ's feast, computed, and appointed to be observed, as it is now,
being Inclyta solemnitas, a Famous Festivity over all the world Cyp. de Not.
Ser. giving it as genuine Characters of true profession to observe the
Lord's Day and Festivals. Tert. de. Idol. c. 15.

TO make yet a doubting Thomas believe the existence of no Popry in this
codicle, let him thrust his hand into the side and look upon the Prints of
these things, in the body of the Church Reformed, he shall, or may be
ascertained of its Innocence, in this matter, or be forced to exalt himself,
above all in our Israel, accounting none to be so wise, so pure, so knowing, so
holy, as he in all our Congregations, when put together.

BEHOLD, Eminent Emissaries of those Churches, chosen as messengers from
Holland, Gilderland, Zealand, Vtrech, Frizland, Transylvania, Groaning, from the
Palatinate, Landgrave of Hesse, Helvetia, Genevah, from the Republic of Brem,
and that of Embden, and from the Kingdom of great Britain met together at
Dort. to Censure, Remove, and Rebuke, opposers of their peace, and Corrupters
of the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, for preventing of Error, Heresy and
Division; And see them all seated debating for this end, yet unanimously
agreeing in full Synod to Intermitt for a while, until the feast of the
Nativity of our Lord and Savior which then approached, was performed and over,
The foraigne Divines, being desired not to remove from Town for more
convienency of meeting, the solemnity being done: This motion freely obeyed and
by none disputed, may put some stop to the grumbling Zelot* not to say the
Censorious Hypocrite, whose Religion perhaps should altogether not only be
questioned, but his prophannesse attested, had he not the salvo of twitting
others in the teeth, as Formalists to, buoy up his Credit with the headless
Vulgar: And when the Magistrates of Bommel writ requesting that Henricus Leo
their Minister, might be allowed to repare to his congregation, to preach
Administer etc. with his own people, upon the feast of the Nativity, The Synod
smelling a Rat refused the motion, Leo having been cited before them for
Censure, yet Censured not, the request, nor hissed at the purpose, adjacent
Ministers being easily obtained. Synod Dordre. sess. 36. and 45. How would some
of our Precisians have ranted? dissented? and to let the world know them to be
no small fools, it is probable they had protested against such Actings,

VEIW these Churches in their several precincts, it shall be found Days of
this fort are not condemned as unholy or superstitious, but honorably
mentioned, those of Suitzerland Decently observing the Incarnation, the
Circumcision etc. The like is done by the Churches of Germany, Hungaria,
Transylvania, those of the great Dukedom of Lituania, the greater and lesser
Polonia, the Fratres Bohemi, those of Moravia, Holland, France: in Genevah, its
true they are not observed, yet it is as true, that she condemns not these that
do, approving and commending, thereof, as her subscription to the Helvetick
Confession, apparently evinceth, Durells veiw. p. 25.26.

THE practices of the Reformed Kingdoms of Denmark Norway, and Sweden is
Known, which appended to what has been declared may strick an aw, Creat a
terror in the bosom of that Malapert, whose rigid conceptions are wraping to a
tendency of disrelishment, disrespect or Censure.

THE Fairest Daughters of the Church Reformed, being our own three Kingdoms,
are not to want their due respect, the particular judgment of each one being
equivalent to many extraneous, or beyond Sea provinces, as the Judicious among
those will declare, we begin with Ireland as farthest off, whose Clergy in a
numerous Convocation in Dublin Anno Dom. 1615. agrees in their Confession,
that every particular Church has Authority to institute, Change, put away
Ceremonies, and other Ecclesiastical rites, etc. Constituting others making
more to seemlinesse, or edification. Art. of Irel. 77. Upon which firm basis
stands fixed her obedience in pleading for, and standing to the observance of
these days. England in her Confession drawn up Anno Dom. 1562. speaks the
samething ( both agreeing to the Reformed Churches abroad) saying, Every
particular or national Church has Authority to ordain, change and abolish
Ceremonys and rites of the Church, so that all things be done to edifying,
adding, that whosoever through his private judgment, wilfully and purposely
does openly break the Traditions, and Ceremonies of the Church, not repugnant
to the word, ordained by Authority, ought to be rebuked as he that offends
against the Common ordor of the Church, thus fare the Article. Now though
neither of these be so express as are the Confessions of the Helvetian
Churches allowing the Celebration of the Lords Nativity, Circumcision etc. nor
as that of Ausburgh (the standart of the Reformed Churches abroad) retaining
the traditions of about holy days, the Lords day, the Nativity, the Passover,
etc. Yet upon these pillars stood that Arch of her Law and Church constitution
Anno Dom. 1630. (viz.) All manner of persons shall from henceforth Celebrate,
and Keep the Lords day, and other holy days, according to Gods holy will and
pleasure, that is, in hearing the word, etc. And where is that Church, ( Rome
excepted) in the whole world, Regularly constitute, did ever presume to Censure
England in this particular? nay, where is that Church, (except as above
excepted) but blesses her as a Daughter and prays for her as a Mother?

SCOTLAND is behind none of the Reformed Churches in defense of the matter
questioned: for she in her Reformation (which truly in this was according to
the best Reformed Churches) by the Lords of the Congregation after mature
deliberation, for raising bulwarks against Popery, concluded, that in all
parishes the lessons of the Old and new Testament should be read on Sundays,
and other FESTIVAL DAYS. Spots. Hist. lib. 3. Ann. Dom. 1558. the sense of the
word FESTIVAL, determines the Authors exemption from obloquy, upon the account
of this works were any of these noble Patriots alive, to peruse his
discourcess; but least any suspend belief of the thing, out of prejudice to
that most Reverend Historian, I hope Mr. Knox will have some influence upon the
weak in faith, who records the same thing to be done by the same persons, whom
he calls Lords and Barons professing Christ Jesus, Reformed preachers
rejoyceing, and much encouraged thereby, the Popish Clergy being on the other
hand much Incensed. Knox Hist. lib. 1. Was not our old League with England in
(our new days) and Uniformity thereto in the mouths of many? which was begun
by subscription, and consenting to the rites and service of that Church, by
which the French was here overthrown, the Pope, the most Christian and
Catholic King, being angry thereat, Buchan. Scot. Hist. lib. 19. All which put
together, with the legal procedure of Future times, demonstrateth those
bug-bare ordinances, Votes, and Resolves contrary to those proceedings, which
has troubled our Lands, were not National decrees, but Falacious opinions.
And beheld by the Churches abroad ( as could be proved by numerous instances)
not so much the Doctrine of our Reformed Churches, as the Dodder of our
Churches Reformed ( i. e.) weeds growing about them excrescences of the Earth
occasioned by showers and Tempests of popular commotion, and in seren sky cast
over the wall and Empalement of our Congregations.

BUT yet if any man be contentious, and still hold this youngling as Popishly
affected, its Father, the Author, from these undeniable records, smiles at the
expression, pittys their mistake, justifying himself, against such selandarous
taunts in St. Paul's words we have no such custom, (that is, so to speak)
neither the Churches of God: But for peace sake do wish the dissenter to
cognosce before he condemn, For as the Erecting of the Altar of Ed. Ios. 22.10.
Occasioned a surmise of Rubens Apostasy, and Idolatry, was upon search, found
otherwise: so a right stateing of the Question, and a seasonable distinction (
as with them) may make us bless, pray for, and part from each other, to the
laying aside contention and debate, which the sense of the Reformed Church,
about these things, when hearkened unto shall happily procure.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERY OF THE INCARNATION OF THE SON of GOD
Unfolded, and applied. Christmas- Sunday, Tolbooth Church, 1670. YVLE- Sunday,
Tolbooth Church, 1670.

JEREMIAH. XXXI.XXII. How long will thou go about, O thou backsliding
Daughter? For the Lord has created a new thing in the Earth: A woman shall
compass a man.


VICE and Folly are so congenit with the Essence and soul of man since his
fall, that Aristippus counted a good or temperate man, to be the most admirable
thing in the World; and the Orator, beholding the proclivity of most, unto that
which by the torch-light of Nature was to be condemned, chused rather then be
led by them, to become a Victime or Sacrifice unto Reason, and perish with good
men: wherefore GOD superadding to those un-audiable censures, motives and
documents suggested vigorously by the Spirit into the hearts of people, as
perswasives unto virtue; has in the Church from all generations sent his
Servants the Prophets (who though dead yet speak) to purchase prosely^s unto
piety, by powerfully convinceing the world of sin, and terrifying men from
unrighteous courses by the Terror of the Lord, even by those judgments he is
purposed to execute upon all that are ungodly, by which the strongest holds sin
has erected, has become like Iericho's walls flat, so powerful has been the
breath of their mouths, from which Energy came that confidence of Lactantius,
who with open mouth transacts wit^ his Readers that if they give him a Covetou^
man, an Ambitious man, a Libidinous man, by a few Scripture Texts (actuated by
the Sp^^rit) he shall instantly present them with a li^beral an Humble and a
Chaste man. And if any Rampire of Belials erection, had braved it (...)
opposition to those precepts of pious deportment, making avarice and lust, with
impudence, and power, Rapine, Effusion of blood, Oppression, and Injustice, so
far to enlarge the Philacteries of their Jurisdiction, that like Augustus Caesar
they tax all the World, compelling even mankind to pay Contribution; Goodness
joins with Omnipotence, and by wonders, and Miracles, GOD gives check to
unbelief, making it as Pharaoh's Chariots, first move softly, and next
overthrows it in the Sea of Admiration, making Faith first transcendently to
triumph, next resolve upon obedience, and godly holiness argued into them, by
convinceing prodigies, the intellectual faculties of the Soul not being so
depraved, but will prompt the organs of the Speech to say: This is the finger
of GOD. Which holy violence if yet more obstructed through the frequency of
visions, the customableness thereof not inforceing but nauseating the Heart as
cloyed, with signs and wonders, the Almighty compassionating the phrensy,
displays once more the Ensigns of his power and for creating in men new hearts,
and disuniting them from their beloved lusts, causes Truth to be embraced by
representing for its verity unwonted Spectacles as here he did the Jews (a
generation fatted and surfeited with miracles putting Divinity it self to
devise a new device for reclaiming them from stale and Frantic combateings
against Heaven, and for confirming them, against their old wonted Apostasy and
back-slideing, Creats a new thing in the Earth, making a woman to compass a
man.

PROVIDENCE is but a continued Creation, a series of the things at first
created; which Creation, is not only the production of things out of pure
nothing, by an irresistible fiat, but also out of matter by it self (through
any virtue inherent) not disposed to be the origin, or parent, of such or such
a Substance: as Adams rib was not in nature in its utmost activity capable to
produce of its self; or give the constituent parts of such a Harmonious body as
Eva had, receiving the power for that, by its enlargement, extension, and apt
composition in symetry of parts, alone from the great JEHOVAH, who stil^
continues the beings at first created by the same alsufficiency they were
formed, an^ wherein they are commanded to subsist, which being observed, and
indeed expected, in the turns and returns of the year, ( forsooth) by natural
reason and experience, creates (...) wicked men a neglect of, and prejudice
against their maker, which puts God by way of re^venge upon some, and in
manner of advice to others, and for Caveats unto all, to form st^ange effects
from not imaginable causes, that the Dreadfulness or Loveliness thereof may
thunder, or allure men into a reformation, which to perfect, our Prophet orders
his Hearers to consider this new thing, viz. A woman's compassing a Man.

THAT a woman should be created out of man, is an old thing; that man should be
produced out of a Woman, is an ordinary thing; that a Woman should embrace a
man, is no strange thing, but search records and a woman's encompassing a man
is a new thing in the Earth, and so new, that it is the prerogative of the Lord
of Glory alone, and an act whereof he boasts; yea, invits to wonder at its
creating, by which is hinted, that as it was never done, so neither is it after
to be expected, purposeing still to have it a new thing and under that notion
to be revered.

THE words by some are understood as predicting a change in the Jewish Church,
now groaning under onerous oppression, being enfeebled by broyls and tyranny,
laboring to be delivered, and here promised strength against, and power to
overcome the Masculin sword of the conquering Babylonians, but this being no
such new thing since Egypt was before destroyed, they may be interpreted to be
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ according to Jeremiah, Speaking of her,
whose womb without the Knowledge of a man, encircled a MAN, That MAN, That
singular MAN with an Emphasis, as the word Gaber originally imports, hold out
mighty strength, a MAN in his strength, a man not old, not a boy, but in
perfect ability and full strength, and was, and is, and which is yet to come,
yet still a MAN, so that the woman is Mary, a Daughter of the house of David,
and the Man is Jesus, Son of the most high GOD, whose Conception and Nativity
in the flesh, was indeed a strange thing and prophesied of, as a sign, and as a
wonder futurely to be accomplished, this sign the Lord giving, that a Virgin
should bear a Son Isa. 7. joining Heaven and Earth for his animation, God and
man for his Constitution; A new thing yet an old thing, because foretold, it is
an old thing, yet a new thing because but now Created, that Israel who had been
married in Truth, Righteousness and Judgment, might leave her dissolute
Harlot-like Conversation, and return to the first Husband of her Youth, who
upon her penitence purposeing graciously to accept her as a chaste Virgin, that
Truth might spring out of the Earth, confirms his word by this astonishing
miracle, of a Woman's encompassing a Man, which ratifies Gods tenderness to all
posterity unto all man's issue who will Spiritually dive into the depth of this
Abyss, and secure the Treasure therein unto himself by application, Kissing the
man with the Kisses of his mouth, that is, doing Homage to the Son least he be
Angry.

THIS being the feast of our Lords Incarnation, called Theophania, because the
Lord appeared, and sometimes the Nativity, because the Lord was BORN, it shall
be as apples of Gold upon pictures of silver to descant upon the thing it self,
viz. A woman's compassing a man, next upon the strangeness of that thing, or as
it is a new thing in the Earth.

A Woman, that is, in sex, and yet a Virgin, that is, in condition receiving,
the first compellation from her wombs fruit-fulnesse in which she conceives
and nourishes man, as if she were not properly a Woman, whose womb had not
bred a man, neither shall man be happy but by this Woman, this womb Man's
bearing, this Virgin's encompassing, she saveing all by this Child's bearing
though a Virgin an expression from the bodies vigorous and beautiful motion,
with vivacity, more particularly called Mary which is by Interpretation
exalted, and to the highest acclivities of acquired Honor, was she manuducted,
when separate by eternal Decree to be Mother to the Son of God, and raised
above the level of ordinary capacities, in believing the Angels Revelation, for
which all Generations shall call her blessed both for Faith and Example, her
Faith and Chastity, at first view inclining her Beholders, her Admirers and
Followers to that high way of the upright (i. e.) virtue, Modesty with self
denial, which is above, not dareing to tread in those so did and impure paths
of Wantonness, Conceitednesse, or uncleanness, leading to Hell beneath, She was
indeed found with Child but it was by the Holy Ghost, this woman removing the
Curse due to man for Insobriety, became by Samplar, another Eva not for being
beguiled, but for believing, the Mother of all living or of all, that would
live by beautifying their lives, with Angelick continence becoming Mothers to
the Son of God, conceiving by the Holy Ghost, who again helps them to keep
their vessels in Sanctification and Honor, The thoughts as the shade of the
Juniper tree frighting and debarring the Serpents of Corrupt resolves from
entrance, and avoiding the deplorable issue of enflamed lost, in the remotest
imaginations tending thereunto, subjugating every thought to the Captivity of
Reason, which by and by brings it under subjection unto Christ, and perpetually
deterreth unclean Spirits, from nestling in the Soul or heart, by remembering
the woe due to them, who neglect so great Salvation, about this time as it were,
BORN by this Woman, this Virgin, unto whom the Angel was sent as unto a Virgin
in body, and mind, being every whit holy, not for one day but daily which all
ought to be, and shall at last be acquired, maugre all seeming difficulties, by
girding the Sword of Honor upon our thigh, denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, by which we not only conquer and Triumph, but with our Virgin woman,
Magnify the Lord for doing great things not only for us, but in us.

ADAM is said not to be deceived, but the woman, she being beguiled by the
Serpent, brought forth Death, Adam consenting to her, Mary alone believes,
Joseph consenting, and aiding her in things requisite, life is brought forth by
them to destroy that Death conceived by the other two; Eva, Adam's wife became
the mother of Death, Adam yielding, Mary, Joseph's espoused, for which she is
called woman brought forth life, Joseph attending* therefore she (...) called a
Mother, she conceived that life by Faith therefore a Virgin, yet brought forth
in sense wherefore she is also called woman. How men are born all men know, but
not that way, but on this wise was the birth of Jesus, Mat. 2. that it might be
strangely differenced from other products of the womb; For when his Mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph she was found with Child, having already conceived, that
Joseph should not mistake him, for his Son, yet she was espoused, so Joseph's
wife, that the world should not charge her with whordome or her Son with
Bastardy, so zealous is God that the ugly stain of incontinency, be avoided,
pretiously esteemed among the very Heathen; for a Laconian Lady, being demanded
of the Dowry she brought her Husband? Answered I brought chastity to his bed;
Mary was found a Virgin, Mary was made a Woman, for her Honors defense for her
life's security (Adulterers being stoned) and that more honorably she might
travel as in Iewrie or sojourn as in Egypt with a man, and some will have her
made a woman, that is espoused, that from the devil might be concealed Christ's
birth and conception, for though from the prophesies before running, by the
translation of the kingdom to the romans, by the weeks in Daniel by the Angels
Message he might have a conjectural knowledge of the Messiah near to be
revealed, but a certainty thereof might not be obtained for the foresaid
reasons.

WAS not Evah when first took out of man a pure Virgin yet is she not called
woman? Christ is BORN on this wise, that like the High Priest he mi^ht not be
defiled by his Father, or his Mother: for by his Father in Heaven, in him is no
darkness, and from his Mother on Earth, he receives no guiltiness being in
her Virgin estate, as the former, though a Woman, when a Virgin, was tempted to
distrust, this Virgin in a woman's estate, not contradicting Truth, but overcome
by Faith and Admiration, becomes, (pardon the allusion) the Mother of Eternal
Salvation to all that obey, The Serpent encompas'd the woman, the Angel
encompas'd the Virgin; and the Virgin woman without man, encompas'd man, Man
thereby reaping the benefit of that he never sowed* nay of that he never
believed was in the Earth. For notwithstanding of that which is Fabled of
Periclio, the Mother of Plato, that she brought forth, not devirginated, yet
the wise admiring at that peace in the days of Augustus Caesar enquiring at
their gods, its duration, had no other Response then that peace should endure,
until a Virgin brought forth a Child, which so gladned the Spirit of the
people, that a Temple was builded, called Peace, and engraved on its front, The
eternal Temple, but this their conceit miscarried, for the same night Christ
was BORN in Bethlehem that temple was ruined by an earthquake in Rome, upon
whose ruins in after ages was erected a Church called, S. Marys, I know there
are who ^ighting against this Temple of peace, triumphs as did Titus over
Jerusalem, and at length leav^ it as the temple of that City, without one stone
upon another, in raseing the very being of it from Records, alleadgeing with
those circumstances it was never bu^ded save in Authors brains; But this being
a day of joy, and gladness, of peace and Union, we shall not enter the lists
for combat, accounting it easier to believe, or misbelieve, the story, then
travel to infringe the objectors Authority, by digging up the foundations of
that (if so) twice ruined structure.

THE first we read to have been named Mary was Miriam (Sister of Moses a
Prophetess) the same with it, but she keep'd among the Virgins, and because of
an Ethiopian woman murmured, against the Goodman her Brother, But our Mary,
because found with Child, is numbered among women, rejoiceing that Shiloh, unto
whom the gathering of all people, was to be born of her betrothed, providence
clothing Reputation by alloting her a supposed Husband, discovering thereby
her Genealogy, for greater Fame, both toward her self and Son, he being
reputed the Son of Joseph which was the Son, that is (to omit dark and endless
reckonings) the son in Law to Heli; Marys Kindred being* Numbered, Luke 3. the
custom of the Jews not allowing Families to be computed by women, yet this is
clear from both* that being of the house of David and reckoned by S. Matthew
from Abraham, Salvation by Jesus came to his Sons; but S. Luke reckoning from
Adam, intimats Redemption by him also to be intended by the incarnation to the
Gentiles, found in the Royal line, and appears in the person of the the King of
the Jews, Jesus the Savior of the whole Earth. Whose Mothers Kindred is
reckoned under Joseph's name, as being one with Mary, she being his wife. Luke
3. and Heli's Daughter, which I^seph a Carpenter, became a Foster Father, a
reputed or supposed Father to the worlds Master Builder, and great Architecture
of heaven and Earth, his espoused having conceived in her womb about the age as
is said of fifteen, being fitted early for her Saviors intertainment by
Sanctity and pudicity, contrary to that Famous Helene upon whose eyes its
recorded none could look securely, there being thence emitted rays, destructive
to purity, enflameing the breast unto concopiscence, but from this woman say
they there was such emanations of beaming Continence, as not only denied such
reflections, but extinguished their being as the sunbeams do an ordinary fire:
I shall swear to none of these, yet know that though Nebuchadnezars furnace be
seven times more heated then usually, it no way impedeth Jesus the Son of God
from making it his gallery; but the least spark of natural lust indisposeth the
soul for being a receptacle for that holy Child Jesus* he being both separate
from sinners and sin, can have no Communion with Belial nor his imps, yea, if a
David by entertaining of a lust, lose the warmth or forfeit the sense of
heavenly joy, or Mary at a feast (who has ears to hear let him hear) lose her
Son and Savior, they must both regain their Consolation, with sorrow and Care,
and acknowledge with Naomi, that their Names are Mara that is Mary, by
interpretation also bitterness.

All our Saviors actions have in their womb instructions to the world,
concerning Converse, and particularly his being BORN of a woman Virgin,
doctrina^s to Virgin-like simplicity, as some therefore abstaines from
wickedness for fear of pain, others of shame, or such like Carnal grounds, let
Believers make no provision for the flesh that Jesus may be formed in them more
and more, that his left hand may be under their head and his Right hand embrace
them, the former healing and justifying, the other embraceing and felicitating,
the first applying his merits, the last assurei^g his reward, the one offering
food, the other medicine, yet behold the Phisician, and his first cure for the
Souls support is innocence, attested in his Manl^sse conception, that we
showing freedom from the deformity of brutal desires. Manlike may be capa^le to
convers with heavenly intellig^nces, crying out in our acts, with those in
Theodoret, who being ignorantly, through Cunning* made to offer incense unto
Idols, we are Christians, we are Christians, keeping fresh the Image of
Holiness, becomeing Familiar as it were with Angels. Outstripping that modest
heathen Archytas, who refuseing to utter an immodest word, yet desireing to
sense his discourse pou^traid upon the wall with a coal somewhat significative
to his purpose, which is but to trapan sanctity, and shutting our Organ, that
is our ear, against rib^uldry, to offer it an inlet by the eye, an or^an apt
enough to smutt the soul, and sufficiently polit^ck to captivat the heart, wi^h
its own consent, and betray it to destructive conceptions.

DRAW near you that are Virgins and behold this Virgin, you that are Mothers,
and behold this Mother, you that give suck, and behold this Nurse, you that a^e
with Child, and behold this womb, you that are widows, and behold this woman*
no Maid, no Wife, you that are begotten of Men, and born of woman, and behold
this MAN encompassed by a woman, born for all kinds of condition, wherein woman
can be found begotten of Man, that all living ( as she in breeding) in
Ch^stity, may be encompassed by this MAN secured against shame and misery, by
imitating this woman^ Gen^us, this Marys warrinesse, this woman^ temperance,
this Virgins holiness, this Maids retiredness, for, its probable, the Virgin
was alone when the Angel accosted her, and it may be conjectured at some good
exercise, as appears by his salutation, The Lord is with thee, the Religion
of the Hebrews teaching them to bless in the Name of the Lord, whom they found
diligent and well employed as Boaz did his Reapers, and the Reapers again their
master.

IMITAT also this Marys cleanness for the Virgin was pure in heart, that is,
in eye, in ear, in feet, in tongue, walk and apparel, her compositum being
clothed, crowned with the virtues, as with so many robes and diad^ms of
stares, defending her (by nature) unfortified ear, from the assaults of
immodest utterance, by bashfulnesse, gravity, and censure; disdaining to soil,
or smutt her purer soul with the reports of obscenity, acted, either on the
Theater* or seen in the wardrop: the habit but warping toward kindling of
Concupisence in any, being condemned in the solidity of her Judgment;
accounting it equally destructive, to be casually an incentive of, as
studiously to become a pander to lust in any; the Angels salutation, her Royal
stem and pedigree, clears all this and more; As if her word had been like
that of Heraclius the Emperor, Insania l^ta voluptas, estimating the usual,
trivial, finical delights of the Daughters of men, to be dangerous, and their
Gamboles to be very madness; because either being, or forming, or bordering
upon pollution; yet, (according to the Accute Maxim in the Holy State of
Virginity) counted it Virginity to be unspotted, not unmarried, encompassing
her self with Resolves, of piety, industry, and purity, in all conditions,
therefore she Saw GOD, and that with her eye, the invisible being in her, and
of her, and to her, made visible the Father through the Spirit er^cting a
mansion place in her womb for the Son, she having had a repository for the
Almighty his Law revealed to his Servants in her heart, from which issued an
aptitude and disposition inclining he^ body rather to Kneel, then Dance.

Ought not this to persuade future Ages, for applauding and consenting to
consciou^ and sanctimonious behavior? Christ being th^^ born for this cause,
or then his coming had been casting pearls before swine. and the product of
Christian profession little different from the frantic actings of the fable^
Jewish Armillus, (with them the same the Antichrist is with u^) who before the
comeing of the Messiah (with them) is to be bo^^ by, o^ breathed from, a Marble
image of Virgin, unto whom the wicked of the world shall be gathered for
incestuous copulation* And under him their Leader bandy against heaven.

HOW advantageously has the Ho^^ Ghost baptized our Savior ( so to speak with
variety of names, titles and comparisons? and how comfortably does he expatiat
upon that subject? that in all doubts, fears or discouragements his Name is as
ointment poured forth, Cant. 1.3. the word Messiah, the expression Christ, the
phrase ointment being all one, holding up the tapestry showing the devout the
inside of his worth, that the savor of his works, merits, and offices may bind
up and restrain the deluding pleasures offered by sin, Satan or the world, to
our deceiving senses.

WHAT deductions faith can make from those Names, of the Rock, the Lamb, the
Vine, the Sun, the Rose, the Shepherd, the way, the door, the Priest,
pertains not to our province, but the appellation MAN in our theme, is so
sovereign, so gravidat with blessing, flowing from Fraternity and Brotherhood,
that the improver may observe a Magazine in point of war for all accommodation,
a storehouse in matter of peace for all convenience, at first representing God
in MAN and therefore in spiritual attaques, hellish conflicts, wrestlings of
Conscience, struggling with the world, interceeding with God, he is a MAN an
accomplished Captain endowed with all requisits, required anciently by the Law
of Arms for accomplishing a Leader, viz. Age, Virtue, Trust Knowledge,
Authority, Success, Blood and Gentry ^he battle ended and the Halcion days ^f
peace being come, the soul in sweet Communion, holy Fellowship with God,
uninterrupted joys of the Spirit, he is a MAN to advise with in the Management
of all things.

INDEED the Angel appointed this MAN'S name to be Jesus, that is, a Savior
adapting his name to his office, whence sa^vation in its bulk, as also in its
parts is ascertained to him, who makes this MAN his Jesus; an appellation which
none of the Prophets knowing, or not revealing* makes evident, that Almi^hty
wisdom concluded it fittest for an Angel first to utter, and next him the
Christian, that both the one and the other might eternally adore, the impresse
and signature thereof being capable to m^lt the soul by its heat, but its worth
proclaims a jubilee to the most de^pon^ding sinner, in enclining his ear to
these (...), that Jesus is born in Bethlehem, who^^ a Savior, Christ the Lord,
which so tra^^quillats the Conscience that it may disda^^ the surmisings, the
wh^sperings of Fear, (...) inviting the eye, and attracting the ear, th^^
except Jesus be seen and heard, wise dis^courseing is but babbling; A holy Man
disrelis^ed the (otherwise) sweet fluency of Tullys eminent ( not to say)
admited Rhetoric and immitable (because not bumbastick) Oratory, in regard
that Jesus was not among all his tropes to be found, that being the salt
seasoning the highest expression of endearing Friendship or most allureing
Eloquence.

THAT Signior, like name the Prophet gives him, Isa. 9.6. exceeds all
delectation, that speaking him wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, the first ^epresenting all the rest
miraculous, being Wonderful, yet amiable because a Counselor, yet that
hinting subjection, he is formidable in action* understand to his foes, he is
Mighty, and least that should be construed not to extend to omnipotence, he is
said to be the Mighty God, yet to conciliate kindness he is a Father, and to
cause veneration, he is the everlasting Father, and that he might be known to
be above all desirable, he is the Prince of Peace, made peace go before him,
brought peace with him, there being either peace or Truce at his birth, all the
world over, what can be reflected upon here, wanting for the accomplishment of
a MAN? and what is not here evincing the rationality of his name wonderful?

IN the beginning was this word, John 1.1. there is eternity; this word was with
God, there is equality; the word was God, there is a Deity; and the word was made
flesh, there is Humanity, and that word in flesh is called Jesus, there is
Salvability, the Grace of God by him appearing, and bringing salvation unto all
men, and how happy should we be if we would so far act as MEN, as make our
symbol like that, the Emperou^ Jovianus, scopus vitae Christus, the end and
perfection of my life, is Jesus.

FOR this cause the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. has, as a Father observes, the Name
Jesus, and again the Name Jesus in the first ten verses, eleven times over, as
if he could not, or would not, complete his triumphant wishes, for the
Corinthians establishment by other means; then by tuneing their ears to this
Appellative Jesus; making it manifest to the most inadvertant, that the word
Master, or MAN, or any other nown, had not in his judgment virtue competent to
heal their sores, remove their follies, or si^ their quick silver, so much as
Jesus: Or as if he himself by a holy inebriation of the juice or wine pressed
from the signification thereof, had forgot the earthinesse of names, and
sounds, but in heavenly Dialect could only pronounce the Elements of man's
salvation; view the stable therefore, the manger, the swadling-cloaths, and
behold they all cry See Jesus, Behold the MAN, who being eternally enjoying
peace, and splendidly ruling in heaven, was (as about this time) born MAN, a
word also insinuating Misery, vexation and woe, encompassed from the womb with
Legions of Devils, Princes, Pharisees and people; yea by his own Kindred and
Disciples was he perplexed, being denied, forsaken and rejected saying, we have
no pleasure in him, because they saw him a MAN that is, a compend of Sorrow,
yet because he is a MAN, that is a compound of Excellency, behold his worth
with cheerfulness, and Zeal as Simeon, Anna, the Angel, and the heavenly
host, who as they sang at the Creation, Job. 38.7. would also rejoice at the
Redemption of the world, worshipping him who was the first begotten.

HOW much more, ought man, for whom the Lord more peculiarly was made Christ,
as the shepherds will show you, who went to see and returned from Christ the
Lord with great joy, two words expressing first his Human^ then his Divine
nature. The great Turk vanteth of his being Guardian of our Saviors Sepulcher,
let us exult in his Authority, glory in his Holy Name, Religiously improving
the design of his comeing, that we may be redeemed from this present evil
World. Gal. 1.4. that is, from the practices thereof, and designs therein, the
mischief whereof can easily be discerned, and from which no Angel could secure
us therefore their maker, Gods Son became MAN by consequence our Brother,
voluntarily divesting himself of his glorious Robes, clothed himself with the
poor raiment of flesh and blood and buckled on the Coat Armor o^ bones and
sinnews, to fight against the god of this world, who had projected ma^^
thraldom to Eternity by the worlds gai^^ty; whereas contrary our Jesus, is
before us in a stable, Reprobating the worlds glory in his practice, that
others may abstract their souls from it in their Converse.

IT is said, that the herb, Christ^^woort, or Christmas flower, in plain
English black Helebore, (so called for its springing about this time) helps
madness, distraction, pu^geth melancholy and dullness: sure we are, that
though Christ at this time did not speak, yet the members of his body, the
face of his nativitie, the indigence of his parent, the surlinesse of his
host, says to the demented, witless, because profane prodigal, Love not the
world, cease from evil, and do good, subdue pride, watch envy, provoke not to
wrath, Love mercy, do violence to no man, (he troubled none in the Inn by
making intrusion into any Chamber thereof) least he fall upon thee, and smite
thee with more madness, and astonishment of heart, Deu. 28, 28.

THIS last expression minds me to caveat the Reader, not to be angry at
Helibore because it is called Christmas-flowre; for it, poor thing hurts no body
that lets it alone, and Herbalists are to be she^t, not it spoiled for that
Name, as was the harmless Hawthorn tree, near Glassenbury in Sommerset-shire
in England, which being always observed to bloom so near to this time, that
it was reported first to budde this day, other Haw-thorns about it remaining
dead, and naked, King James jestingly concluded theref^om, our old style to be
more R^gular then Romes new, but others of latter years more seriously
concluding, the thorn guilty of old superstition, grubbed it up by the roots,
and burned it to ashes; which comeing to the ears of honest Christmas, fearing
her own fate, from that of her Harbingers (receiving notice by a public order)
quietly retired, and keep'd her self alive by the fireside of more Charitable
Christians, accounting it more honorable to ly by a flame, then die in one: But
this Bush has almost put me from my path, and hoping (...) things, we proceed
to press the Christian in all temptations to lift up his heart soul, and all
within him, R^membring the of descent the Son of GOD, I should have said of MAN
approaching toward us in the Chariot of the Virgins womb, moving upon the
wheels of Humility, Charity, Mercy, and holy Wisdom, GOD uniting to MAN, that
man might be reconciled to God through inscrutable actings, by new things,
Heaven being opened as in the Revelation. Angels ascending and descending as in
Jacobs dream, joining earth and Heaven as in the Ladder, the Father saying,
fear not as in Isreal's going dow^ to Egypt, here is the Door, this is the gat^
of Heaven, as in the Patriarch's dread, Th^^ Lord shall be my God, as in the
pilgrims vow Genesis 20.21.

BUT forget not as we ought to reverence and adore him as God, in God, so ought
we to respect and benefit all me^ since God in MAN became like one of us, Our
Lords Natalitials and birth, being a mirror representing divine Charity and
bowels of compassion unto us, and loves swavity or sweetness one with another,
his very swaddling clothes speaking patience and benevolence.

FROM the time of celebrating our Lords Advent in order of nature our, days
lengthen, our nights shorten, and was of old called Midwinter-day, or Midwinter
mass, or feast. The Solstice formerly being nearer to it then now, however
until became, Darkness was upon the face of the earth, and that so gross
that for eight hundredth years, none had the gift of miracles, for in working of
them, none proceeded our Savior save Elisha only, the Prophets taught the
living, neither cured the sick, nor raised the dead, that the world by his
miracles, might learn him to be the true Messiah, the very sun of
righteousness, by whose beams the world being irradiated, errors might
vanish, and Truth brake forth more and more, for the conversion of men; And
that as the Cloud did Israel, we by his manhood might move and be directed in
our motions through the wilderness, in pureness of behavior and brightness
of Doctrine, that by his fiery light, we might have light, and constantly walk
as Children thereof, old things passing away by the Spirits over shadowing, and
heart beleiving, we might also become new in Christ Jesus, who was once BORN,
and no more that the woe denounced against unbeliever^ in all ages, might deter
the remiss and enforce a running into Bethlehem, the house of brea^ to see
admiringly this great thing, and neither complain, nor deride; nor sco^n, or
turn again to the Egypt of carnal p^ss^ssion, bu^ vivaci^usly embrace this Man
in their arms living by faith, confess that he is come i^ the flesh, which
whosoever denis is an An^tichrist, he as God giving so clear eviden^ces of his
assuming flesh, showing even be^fore his greatest miracles infallible proofs o^
his Manhood, cu^ing the deaf after sighing* raising Lazarus after his weeping,
and shakeing of the Earth, as he gave up the Ghost.

THE wedding then betwixt GOD and man, in him being come, let not the rooms be
empty, but the faster invite Jesus to the Marriage, staying for your
satisfaction in a stable until your prepared hearts say as a Laba^, Come in
thou blessed of the Lord why tarriest thou without that darkness of Soul and
will being expelled thou may dwell, yea encreass in light, evangelical for
ever, as the earth receives increase of light for a time, And as it puts one
hence forward a new dress the fields clothed with a fresh green, the ^^ees in
the gardens s^ed or lopped, the Vines ^n the Vineyard pruned, for the grapes
grea^er sweetness, so he the Vine being planted ^n the earth, may through our
sincere pray^rs, be engrafted and inoculated in us, that ^s the Vine we may
have wherewith to glad the heart of God and of this MAN, causeing this days
exercise to have a voice prepare ^^e the way of the Lord lopping off all
superfluity of naughtiness, and exc^^scencies of Vanity, leaving the Drunkard,
to be drunk in the Night studying to be sober and vigilant, as Children of Day,
avoiding somnolency or sleepiness, ebriety or drunkenness, the morning of
temperance beginning with the Sun of right^ousnesse, inforceing a being wise
unto sobriety, remembering the very supposed Father of this MAN was Joseph, who
was known to be truly a good, and a just man.

BUT the word Encompass imports the enliving, prodigious ineffable mystery, the
most in comprehensible conception and miraculous nativity of our Lord, of which
sufficiency of knowledge terminating the understanding, is that which mortality
can no ways be obliedged to expect, yet to attract eyes for yielding respect to
this astonishing birth, whereon the building of our happiness depends more
then upon his rising from the dead; for, from the grave some have risen, bu^
from a Virgins womb no man yet came, an^ affoords new, yea strong consolation,
more over all his other actings are bottomed upon this of his birth; therefore
is it to be weigh^ed.

THE word expresses encircling, en^closing, by which pure word insinuating hi^
confinement in the Virgins womb, an^ abideing there as in his proper Cell,
unti^ the time of life, at which this MAN ap^peared in the world, but the
manner of hi^ being compassed is concealed from us, the Angels expression. The
Holy Ghost shall overshaddow thee; Remorats curiosity, Go^ thereby intending to
conceal the manner, pro^^seth wholly a belief of the matter, a shadow being but
the absence of light by the interposition of a body, the darkness of the womb
confineth our eyesight, and the power of the Highest discharges prying.

TO show that he was born, not to be admired, or gazed at, were easy; and to
prove that he was born for us, is that which we all believe, to demonstrate he
was not born for himself, but given to us, that has been heard from the
Prophets; For, say they, to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, Child yet
before his Mother was, he was a Son, a wise Phisician, and tender Savior, the
omnipotent God, to us is given a Child a Son, respecting his two natures; the
first, viz. Child, expressing him real MAN, as he was and cleared to be from
his Geno^ogy, from his soul, body, eating, weariness fasting, sleeping,
weaping, from his being called, Man, and the son of Man, besides such
representatives as GOD made of him under the Law, as the seed of the woman, of
Abraham, a Prophet from among your Brethren, and David's righteous branch: The
other word SON, expressing him real God which he was, being called always the
Son of God, after his Resurrection, after which time, that phrase the Son of
man is never used. He is the everlasting Son of the Father Creator of all
things giver of eternal life, from the beginning confessed by the Angels,
demonstrated by his fasting, by his miracles and that in the Temple, where
never miracles were wrought by man, that being the place, wherein God
significantly would have his Son to be noticed, and he proved from his working
therein, to be the Lord who was suddenly to come thereto, Malach. 3. It being
the house of his Father.

IN short by his suffering, dying, riseing from the dead, he declared himself
to be the Son of God with power, for never MAN, neither Moses, Samuel, nor any
that called upon his Name, neither Priest nor Prophet wrought miracles at their
Death but he, the exploit of Sampson, was rather wonderful^ then miraculous and
came far short of thos^ ^^upendious actings, at our Saviors giving up of the
Ghost, but at his rising from the grave so far he declared himself to be God
that these words, the Son of MAN, are no^ mentioned, he said it behoved the Son
of man to suffer, but being raised, it was, ought no^ Christ to have suffered?

HOW elegantly has S. Paul, Philip* 2. difference^ I should have said, united
these two, in these words, who being in the for^ of God, thought it no robbery
to be equal with God, herein is the truth of his Sonship, and first part of
his nature, but made himself of (...) reputation* and took upon him the form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men* here is the truth of his
Childhood, the other part of his being* the Apostle expounding the Prophet
would have said, He was given to us, who was in the form of God, and born for
u^ who made himself of no Reputation, this is the beginning, middle and end of
his nativity even to adore, reverence, that Love of God we who after he had
made all things, yet made himself MAN, so man's good, before this Child was born
as a Son, he governed all things, but for nothing was he born save to serve,
that men might enjoy all things, and if the bi^th of this Child, this Son, be
accounted fabulous, either by Jew or Greek, because incredulous.

I pass the Vengeance shown on a lewd painter, intending to draw our blessed
Savior in the form of Jupiter, An. C. 436. whose hand by the Divinity of
Christ's power withering, was again refreshed by Prayer, Repentance, and ^aith,
in the two natures though reason could not unfold the Union. But let me know
why the diseased lion seeks out an ape by whose ugly tricks, he, as it were
laughs himself into health? how or what can cause an ovel ball of Virgin wax,
cast into the salt Sea, fill it self with fresh water? why should the Jew doubt
of Marys Virginity since he believes, the bush burned and was not consumed?
that Gideons fleece was wet and all the ground dry? that Daniels stone was cut
out of the Mountains without hands, All these were antecedent to this, the
Spirit trolling us forward to believe the Mystery of the Incarnation from a
Virgin overshadowed, she being like the porch in Ezekiel, 4.4. through which
none was to pass, because the Lord has entered in by it; he was the occult
se^d, which had we wanted, we had been like to Sodom, 1. Isa. he is the fruit
of David's body: to sit upon David^ throne, other sons are the fruit of the
Loins, Psalm. 132. but Christ was purely a fruit o^ the belly, for from Joseph's
piety, for Jesus Dignity, for the Honor of the Holy Ghost, as we know Mary to
have been a Virgin, before her Conception, so she is believed to have remained
a Virgin ever after.

HIS Conception in the womb being the fund and bottom of all that followed, in
hi^ Mediatory office, in it rests the inscrutabl^ Mystery of the two natures,
the possibility whereof in the Union of our capacious Souls with our finit
infirm bodies is somewha^ cleared: but admit this should not be reflected upon,
Heaven it seemed resolves that the A. B. C. of our profession should be whol^ly
superstructed upon faith, that the (...) and Ground-sale might be conform to
the roof, and both to stand upon his ipse (...) the word of the Lord, the Femal
being (...) only placed for the parent, not a man to co^^passe a woman, whereby
a man may be b^^gotten, but a woman a MAN by which Jesus was organized.

AND if heathens beli^ved the possibility of Minervahs concep^ion in the brain
of Jupiter, without a woman, may it not from truer g^ounds be trusted, that
Jesus was framed in the womb without a man? it is certainly fabulous; that
Budda should have gendred in his side a Virgin, bu^ for this truth what direful
things have not been suffered? and what consolation has it not bred* And the
newness of the thing in the uniting God and man, is said to have been
registrat'd in the book of Heaven it self for all to see, the Learned observing
by their tables, that upon the observed day of our Lords nativity (viz.)
December 25. their fell the greatest conjunction of the eight and ninth spears
in head of Aries that ever was, and nature is not able to effect the like ( say
they) unless the world continue thirty or forty thousand years, a strange
conjunction upon earth, represented by another in heaven* imports the Almigh^y
would have it wondered at.

HER name Mary imports a star, and that of the Sea too, designed in this
particular to be eyed by such Mariners, or rather questionists who in sailing
through the Ocean, of Divine Revelation and Mysteries will needs be exerciseing
the plummet, and by the line of reason ^ath^me in the depth of the wisdom of
God, or coast it by the shore of their own interest, opinion, faction, or
concernment, Mary in this being a better pilot, by her own motion, above her
own reason, in how can these things be? steared toward* the bay of Faith, and
of dependence in; Be i^ according to thy word, and to her Honor cast anchor
within the port of God's verity and omnipotency, with God all things being
possible, and their striking sail saved her own Soul, bringing him forth who is
made to us of God, Wisdom to cure our folly, righteousness to remove our
irregularity, Sanctification to wash away uncleanness, and Redemption to
obliterat our guiltiness.

AND verily she had her reward and shall have; for may we not see with
Elizabeth, blessed is she that believes? and in temptations to pride, to
avarice, in the surges o^ a tempestuous world, among other Saints Mary as a
star may be veiwed; and as a cop^py followed in this her act of relying, upon
Gods Testimony, which is thought no soo^^er to be done, then Christ was
conceived That Holy thing said the Angel, pointing, a^ it were, then at him,
now in her womb, the person of the Son of God bodily formed of he^ flesh and
blood, not by transmiting the deity into the substance of flesh, or flesh, into
that of the deity, but by uniting both in one, subsistin^ person, so that
neither the Godhead was manned, nor the Manhood Goded, but both though
d^stinct, really united, qualifying the Impassible to suffer, the Immortal to
die, and the Eternal God who had ever been, to be, by a Mystery not to be
apprehended, and is the Mystery of Godliness. God humbling himself for men,
that is, for their good, to men, because born a MAN, above men, for though like
them he was born of a woman, yet was he unlike them, in so far as in her, he
was formed by the Holy Ghost, and born of her a religious virgin, in him also
the Godhead bodily abideing.

CAN we do here less then cry out blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps that gave the suck? the womb bearing him who is the Author of all
blessedness to us, the virgin becoming Spouse to the Father, Mother to the
Son, and habitation to the Spirit, hail Mary, thou art highly favored being
made the restorer of thy sex, sorrow in bringing forth, imposed for sin by thee
not felt, when from thee we received Jesus, God from the Father, Christ man
from the Mother, therefore blessed art thou among women, the blessed fruit of
thy Virginity expressing a blessing to all the Daughters of Eva, abideing in,
following after, or cleaving unto, thy pattern set them, of Simplicity and
Faith even in thine, in their Child bearing, thou as a star emitting beams of
light upon the earth, from thy breasts giving food to him, who gives meat to
all flesh, bears the price of man's Redemption, the mean of the Angels
confirmation, in thy arms, thou art highly favored, God work^ng in thy belly
three wonders for our astonishment and cureing of our heart, first in
preserving thy Virgin purity in integrity though in flesh, (...) the Ark was
covered with pure gold, in fruc^tifying thy Virginity, and making it conceive,
as the bush burned, and was not consumed. Lastly, by an meffable joining of
earthly thin^s and heavenly together, thou (...) Jacobs ladder touching both;
thou art high^ly favored For in thee God becomes MAN a Virgin turns a Mother
and the heart of m^^ believes all, being pe^swaded thou a^t the Mother of our
Lord yet thy Lords hand^maid, that is, our Lords Servant, for tho^^ was made by
him, and if God be terrible o^^ of his holy places, how much more wonderful,
when he appears out of thy bowels having been compassed by thy womb? Tho^ art
highly favored therefore Hail Mary, (...) heavenly salutation, while thou was
upon Earth; yet on Earth thy worshipping of him ought to expound unto us, its
robbing him of his just devoir to pray unto thee, since he was born by thee to
become the Author of eternal Salvation to all that believe and to thy ignorant
adorer I imagine, that is, I conceive thou says, Man what have I to do with
thee? seeing he is the Lord thy God, worship thou him; for its written, him only
shall thou serve. etc.

THE english word compass is known, and the root Sabab is of the same sense,
importing round about, or on every side, whence some apply the word to the
Church, who should after much wandering and wantonness, cleave to embrace the
Lord her Husband, as the barren womb does a man; but this being no new thing,
we make progress in our first interpretation, affirming the words sound a
retreat to the Church in her unprosperous war against God, persuading to a
Reformation of life upon this new Creation, beseeching them as els-where the
Apostle, by the Mercies of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, who to cultivat
our barren souls, had first appointed the blood of beasts in sacrifice, next
our own in Circumcision, and when both failed, the desi^ned effect, by this new
thing his last and great work, that from his mouth the mouth of a Bab, the
blood of a Lamb, of this Lamb of God, we might be persuaded to bring forth
fruit, upon the sight of such pure innocence, who not being heard when he
thundered, might be heard when he weeped, yea, loved and obeyed; descending
unto Earth, that he might be kissed of such who while he sat in heaven was not
feared, God purposeing to ereat nothing to save the impenitent, this being done
to enforce abhorrency of every evil way, and the newness of it causeing
wonder, might the more to enflam godliness; the worthies, Kings and Prophets of
the former ages not knowing, not seeing this; that is, knew it not, saw it not
fu^filled; for though it be said The Lord has created a new thing in the
Earth, yet the time of utterance shows it only to be prophesied of, because
of which the People of the prophets generation, might be ascertained that it
should be, as if it been past and gone, God speaking of things that are not as
though they were, and to come as though already done, so in after ages, A woman
did compass a man.

ENDVED he was in probability with a rational Soul from the first instant of
his glorious conception, the Holy Ghost framing by his power his pure body
without those previous preparations of natural formation, infusing likewise his
Soul before the ordinary number of thirty six or forty six days, which
casts the birth upon the seventh or the ninth month, for though he was like
unto us in all things, yet the exception of sin, includes such effect as
emerge from it, of which pain in conceiving or in bringing forth, is to be
exempted from his Mother or imperfection of parts, or lack of a Soul from
himself, we speak not of the extension or delineation of his members, which
must be by time perfected, but of his bodies organization which how small so
ever, might be animated, that be from the beginning might be both God and man,
which of an Embrio could not properly be allowed; and the body being immediately
the work of the Spirit of Power, makes diffi^ult to grant, the body of Christ
to be shaped or figured according to the wonted manner of men, the Scripture as
leaving it doubtful, expressing the Embrio, which can neither be called Male
nor Female fruit, whereas Jesus must be reputed to have always been God and
MAN, and MAN here enforces the same conclusion, the word Child in other places
not enervating the inferences, that being used more effectually to demonstrate
the verity of his INCARNATION.

THIS one word MAN, proved a confounding Topic to the Jews in their pungent
hopes of a Messiah, foretold by a reaming Prophetissa of their own, who being
with child predicted of a deliverer in her womb, her belly indeed grew, yet
their hopes grew bigger until the Chast-Damosell was delivered of a lusty
Girl, which brought her Countrymen to bed of a brown, (that is, a shameful
and melancholy) study, But our Redeemer, like the true Lamb of God* Exodus 12.
was taken from the flock of mankind, a Male, a MAN without blemish without sin;
In the evening born in the last age of the world and to be eaten whole,
believed wholly in, as God Christ, and Man Christ, without which what can be
thought of these Scriptures but forgeries, as that he grew in wisdom and
stature, Math. 2. that is, as MAN, or that he knew not the Judgment day, that
is, as MAN, or that he made the worlds, Heb. 1, or that he was in the
beginning, which is to be understood only as he was God so that our Jesus is
canonically, I should say Levitically fitted to be a sin offering, by whose
Masculine Virtue through grace the sins of the world, are to receive expiation:
let none therefore in malice or in mirth, henceforward maintain the Etymon of
Woman, to be woe to man, but derive it rather from wonder of men, all fixing and
centering their eyes on this woman and this MAN, as objects, for samplars of
joy and admiration.

SATAN at first by the Serpents craft abused the woman into credulity,
perswadi^g her too attentive ear, to betray the heart into lust, by which death
triumphed over all her Sons; But here is a Daughter of Eva harkening unto the
words* of an Angel of light, ba^^ling Satan, believing God rather* yea b^fo^e
her self, and becomes a great instrument of salvation, wounding Satan's head
(for her Son bruised it) in which his craft and tongue are both destroyed, and
like David with the head of Goliath, erects trophies and signs of eternal
conquest, over the legions of Death and Hell, Conceiving by ^aith, bearing by
faith, pondering in, and storeing up in her heart ^hatever could corroborat her
faith, un^ill her Son, had made both his and our enemies* become his
footstool. By his horn. FOR he is the horn of Salvation, Luke 1, (i. e.) his
power and beauty as by the horn of a Unicorn, pushing yea breaking the Devils
stem, not only antidoting but annihilating any poison, he can or does lay in
our way to hurt us; it is true that too great confidence made Eva talk with the
Serpent, she being without fear, whence even in a Phisical sense for her
punishment, there yet is a pannick dread generally in her sex at the sight even
of a dead snake, but though Mary was terrified or put out of countenance at the
Angels Salutation or first appearance, conceiving him as is conjectured a man,
and she solitary, whence good in the accost might be suspected, let in any case
spiritual horror, in Serpentine discourses, or Satanick blandishments, or
sinful appearances (staining a good report) contrary to Christian modesty, to
the fleshes satisfaction in any debauch, be always rooted in us, for avoiding
the wages of either of these which is Death; And if any put the evil day far
off, yet as the seed of the woman (like things long looked for) came at last,
so the Veracity and truth of God shall at length display it self to the terror
of all adversaries, and shall prosperously publish it self in accomplishing
what ever it predicted, for the believers consolation, as after some thousand
years, by and in a woman, was the promise of the seed in the person of our
Savior perfected.

A woman shall compass a man, is not this strength out of weakness? and
visibly evident at his birth, she first bringing him forth, we read of no
Midwife, next she wrapped him in swaddling clothes we find no assistance, and
she laid him in a manger.

BEHOLD a new thing, chiefly in civilized Nations, in honest births. Tulliola
the Daughter of Cicero dyed in labor, Iulia the Daughter of Caesar, dyed in
Childbed, and weakness generally is found in Travel, and help called for in
bringing forth, but this Hebrew woman was strong, and in History neither had,
nor demanded aid, Joseph her spouse not dareing to touch what he begat not, or
it may be was exercised about some other employment, while she swadled the
Child and laid him in a manger.

THE ancients generally record it to be of a rock, and histories registrat the
truth of that to have been seen of many, and what more pertinent for the rock
upon whom the Church was to be builded, then a rock for him (the Mystical
foundation) to be laid in? (But of this cum Deo we shall speak elsewhere) and
Joseph standing by when the shepherds entered to shun the surmise of scandal,
and remove the beginnings of an ill bruit, apt enough to kindle in the breasts
of them whose hard heartedness drove his great bellyed mother to a stable, for
though there was at the birth of John great joy; yet at Christ's, save in
heaven, and in shepherds, we read of little, but that world knew no better, we
have more full intelligence, and understand, though our hearts be rocky, and
our bosoms, as the stable, common filthy and unclean, yet he is born a Savior
to deliver us from both, as a Moses to break the one, as a ( Hercules, pardon
the comparison) to cleanse the other for which let the Holy b^ glad, because
here is a rule, let the honorable rejoice, for here is a fountain; the humble,
for here is a pattern; the dying, for here is life; the sinner, for here is a
Redeemer born, who purposes to pay their Ransom, and for that end more
enriched then was that Silesian Child born, A* D. 1585 December. 22. In whose
mouth afterward was found a great jawtooth of gold, approaching to the Carat
of Hungary, for he has precious blood (without which there is no remission)
which as a pri^ from his holy body, he shall deposit to procure us from slavish
servitude and spirit of bondage, and therefore in these days it is unlawful to
be surly out of spite, and unholy to be sad, except for sin; touch, taste and
see* that God is good, and rejoice, for to you is born a Savior, Christ the
Lord.

AUGUSTUS about this time, this good time, by proclamation ordered none to call
him Lord, prompted, sure, unto it by a spirit, not of flesh and blood, so let
no lust rule over you, but bow the knee to him of whom it is said; And let all
the Angels of God worship him, pay tribute unto him; who is over all the world,
evidencing, that where ever you are (as Joseph in Galile) that there is peace
with you, toward him* having either yielded, or being subdued by the most
august, serene Lord Jesus, who was by the Spirit given to this woman, and by
whom is published Heaven to be at peace with men, and women, uniting these two
together and both unto it self, that peace might be on Earth, and goodwil
toward each other, and both give glory by submission unto God, ceasing from
contention, Salvation comeing by Jesus and Honor with Christ to men, who are
but dust and ashes.

WHEN the Almighty does wonderously, men should be surably affected, here is a
Prophet created, a King anointed, a Priest consecrated, a Phisician born: what
more? a Savior encompassed, let this be your tidings, Christ is born in
Bethlehem, and leave your flocks, ascending to him, (who came down) in your
heart and love, for in your Salvation there is utility, in his Unction swavity,
in his INCARNATION Majesty, for he has bowed the heavens and is to be found in
the swaddling clo^ths, of Precepts, Sacraments, and Promises, of all which the
Angels of the Church have told you, because of which heavenly testimonies
expect not a star in the air, I mean a new miracle or a new good way of your
own chuseing; but draw near, and behold, this new thing, proclaiming it to each
other, as the two cousings* Mary and E^izabeth, that Jew and Gentile may both
rejoice together in the birth of their common Savior, and that with have, our
Saviors birth as his doctrine, being prolifick, discharges oscitancy and
sloth, having a proper work, which must industriously be gone about, (viz.)
Sancti^y, the dig^ity of the Spirits working in thi^ supernatural manner,
having morally a coercive power to suspend ter^en matters, and carry the soul
to the hilly Country by affection in the sweetest Cell of the Souls
complacency, and thence again to issue orders unto all faculties* to abstain
from filthiness to Love the Lord to speak good of his Name.

CHRIST being as at this time born, as at this time the Angels sang, the
Heavenly host praised, the Shepherds glorified, which in our leading pious,
holy and Religious lives, shall also, satisfactory to God, and Jesus our Lord,
be perform^d for which this new thing was created, the World being grown old,
exceeding old, that is, thin, crazy and bare, Adams disobedience, the Angels
fall, Cain's slaughter, Lamech's Murder, Nimrod's oppression, the Giants
Impurity, Babels Confusion, etc. had so marred the visage of this Earth, that
the heavens groaned to be delivered from its aspect, from its scent, as if
Mezuntus Tyranny had been anticipated, who tied living men to stinking
carcasses for their death and his own sport; But at last God sent his Son, in
flesh, with water, that the Earth as the Garden of the Lord being well watered,
and as Pharao'hs Kine made fresh, fair and well favored, or as David of a
goodly countenance, in imitation of this woman by humility; for though she was
Mother of our Lord, she visited, First, in charity, for she came to help the
aged, Elizabeth to assist the conceived, and comfort her cousing now impregnat;
in her dolors, burdens, longings, faintings, and domestic affairs; in her
Modesty, she was a teeming woman, and at the time of her delivery Mary the
Virgin returned home; in her Oratory she spoke so well that the Bab of grace
leaped in the others womb; And lastly, in her Civility for she saluted
Elizabeth, no question, but with civil honor and Religious reverence, for the
Mother salutes the cousing, the cousing Mary, and the Baptist both, all with
earnestness, and serious holiness, mixed with joy; or if you please in
imitation of the MAN, in Love, for as the Son of our Mother he is come down,
that we may kiss him, with the kisses of our mouth, in comforting, the
shepherds when clothed with darkness, and it may be with sadness, were
comforted with joyful tidings, in suffering he endured the worst, a stable, a
manger, for all his innate worth, and former glory he fretted not at, (...) he
cried, it was for man's sorrow, in doing he went about doing good, and so let us
compas^ each other with Religious delight, celebrat^ing this feast, very near
as old as the Gospel not now only, but always with the Church; ^ Virgin, yet
the Lambs wife, by Faith hope and Charity, that they being found with us, (...)
Joseph, Mary and the Bab, were by the shep^herds, may live as they, soberly,
righteously and godlily, which perfected, we shall not be cast out of the heaven
of the Church with Lucifer, nor out of the paradise of power^full ordinances
with Adam, but enter into the new Jerusalem which is above, by virtue of this
new thing created in Jerusalem be^neath.

THE method of obtaining which (...) included in the marrow and significancy
(...) such names, whose bearers were more peculiarly grandiz'd in the history
of Incarnation, Joseph by interpretation is addition, Mary bitterness,
Zacharias minding the Lord, Elizabeth peace of my God, Gabriel strength or man
of God, and John gracious; now a good Name is in Herauldry accounted an
accomplishment gentilizing the virtuous. And we find in godly saints accrewment
of honor to be attended with change of names, for the case in hand; let this
days solemnity add one cubit to the stature of your knowledge, touching the
pravity and bitterness of natural self, by reflecting upon what the Lord has
now done for our indwelling with him, and becomeing men of God, inspirited with
peace, when the Spirit shall write on the table of the heart Grace, Grace,
teaching us all our life long to celebrat on Christmas, that is, Christs-feast,
in the old Saxon, the holy Eve of that Eternal yule or Iubile in the holy
Hebrew where old Emanuel, now Jesus, shall be worshipped with everlasting
Jubilation.

FROM this MAN'S encompassing, the Holy Ghost pleads for Isreal's returning, and
(...) this backsliding age, would suffer a word of Exhortation, I should
motive for Modesty; now Pharaoch's physicians would sense a child's ^onfinement
in the womb, a woman's nourishing of her fruit, or how the Egyptian midwives
would retail the particulars couched in the expression, I presume not to know;
but there is a MAN, and a WOMAN in the text, and the copula joining them
together, is chaste, and comely; there is mention made, of the attire of an
Harlot, Prove. 7. and we read of the solicitations of a whore; Genesis 39. but, the
knowledge of Christ ought to instill sobriety in all our converse, Men, Woman,
Women, Men, at meeting or a part contriving the contexture of their discourse,
the Methods of their thoughts, the sentiments of their soul, to be spirited
with that virtue.

A Father observes, that Joseph gave no assistance to Mary, she swaddling, she
laying him in a manger, he not dareing to touch, so holy, a Bab, whom he Knew
to be none o^ his, It Is also, and there from, incumbent (...) the mystical
beholding of our Lord, to retur^ from our irreverent behavior, and give hi^
his just devoir: how unseemingly will so^^ touch Christ in the Supper as if the
(...) were their own bread and wine when it is his body? How rudely will other
skip, tread, walk, and frisk, upon (...) ground, as if it were their own furro^
their own tale, their own house, their (...) Romance? Certainly the Gospel is
scandalized, by the sordidnesse of some men's unclean fingering, mouthing,
writing, yea, Printing of the person of Jesus, so contumeliously, that it would
be Death in Turkey, to word it so of Mahomet; I know intimacy, and acquaintance
is pretended, yet that ought not to offer rudeness to the serenity of his
countenance, the sanctity of his Laws, the dignity of his person, the
excellency of his being, which are infringed to that degree of mockage, that
were he once again upon Earth, he might say to such, what a great, yet affable,
Emperor said unto a Churl, who confidently made invitation, yet nigardly
served up his meat, which was, I did not think there had been such Familiarity
betwixt us.

BELIEVE it, what in the state by policy, in the Church by Simony, in trade by
defrauding, in Religion by opinionating, in faction by abetting, in the road by
stealing, in the Sea by pyratting, in common talk by filthy discourseing, in
print by unholy applying, in the house by slandering, in designs by oppressing;
in the counting house by tricking* and in our hearing of the word with itching,
our holy and ever-glorious Lord, is made and accounted, as a common thing: wash
your hands therefore you sinners, purify your hearts you Hypocrites; for how
unprosperously all this is done, is known long ago to the Jew, and may in due
time be evidenced to us Gentiles, if so besotted, as not already to have full
instruction, since this new thing has been created on the Earth.

A woman shall compass a MAN. This Generation (old, because so long, lying in
wickedness) seems incapacitat for amendment; But as when S. Paul was weak,
that is, in himself, then was he strong, that is, i^ Grace; and as when the
impotent Man* complained of his want of a man to assist him toward a cure,
John 3. The MAN in the text, said, Rise take up thy bed and walk, it is hoped
there is an holy seed in the womb of our Mother Church, springing toward and
hastening forward, the desire of the godly and truly Religions of the Nations,
some holy Simeon, that is, obedient hearer, expecting the Lords salvation and
some devout Anna's, that is, gracious and merciful, waiting, that is, praying
for the Redemption of our Israel from the division-ating hub-ubs, wherewith she
is entangled, in practicing and persuading for peace and Holiness, which as
from the womb of a Mary, or Mara, of all, or any, that is, in bitterness for
our gross backslidings, shall hasten the production of comfort and
tranquillity, in the knowledge of a Jesus born to save us from our sins.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERY OF THE CIRCUMCISION OF Our Lord and SAVIOR
Unfolded, and applied. Circumcision- Day, Tolbooth Church, 1671. New Years-
Day, Tolbooth Church, 1671.

LUKE II.XXI. And when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcising of the
Child, his name was called Jesus which was so named of the Angel, before he was
conceived in the womb.


AS we find no nation, the old Savages of Mount Atlas excepted; but found a
necessity, and from natural, as well as politic causes, gave proper and
distinct names, to things and persons; so in civilized nations, ingenuity and
law, prompted them, to pitch upon a time, proper for designing their issue by
them; When Cain, Abraham, or Lot, were so denominated is not, so far as I know
upon record; but Christianity has generally observed, and followed near about
the time of the Jews, who were strictly tied to the observance of the eight
day, from Isaac, who was but eight days old when he felt the knife, and
afterward in all ages, each Male was to have the sign of the Covenant in his
foreskin, under the penalty of being cut off a phrase among the Jews,
intimating a liablenesse, to the wrath and vengeance of the Lord in the highest
measure, and was concluded to be the greatest and most cursed of all
threatenings in Scripture, as a punishment not inflicted by man, but an
impending vengeance of God, on earth, imprinting (say some) the certainty of
dying Childlesse, and toward heaven, (say others) importing the Gospel's
Anathema Maranatha; the offendour peculiarly being separate for a curse when
the Lord comes as hateing his holy institution, for which also his indignation
may be felt in being cut off in the midst of their days, as is evident, in
Moses tarrying in the Inn, fearing to go down to Egypt, wherefore that
irregularity in no rite might be charged upon the Son of God, now born of the
seed of Abraham, when eight days were accomplished, they came to the
Circumcision of the Child and called his Name Jesus. Circumcision imports
blood, and since without that there is no remission; withal, being to speak of
a Savior, I know no better object to present before you, then a ruddy; then a
bloody JESUS, for because of the Circumcision he may say to the Church his
wife, a bloody spouse art thou to me, and her name since Abel may be Aceldama,
a field of blood, as being bought with a price of blood, and still sprinkled
with that blood which bought it, as that field was with his blood, who took
that price, as the text imports, Acts 1. or she may be called Damascus, a bag
of blood, where and because our Brother the Lord, as Abel was slain by his
brethren Jewish Cainits out of envy, and whose blood at this time beginning to
be shed, cries loud to heaven, speaking better things.

CIRCVMCISION is a short word, yet of a large sense; and as applied here,
makes three miracles to be discovered. First, the eternal God who was before
all worlds, and made time, dividing it between day and night, is found to be
eight days old, next the impassible Lord of Glory, unto whom there be no
augmentation, or increase, nor diminution or lessening of parts, is made less
by the foreskin; Lastly, the ineffable Jehovah, who is above all Names in
heaven or earth, is called JESUS.

IT was, and is ordinary with God to ratify his precious promises to the
Church, by appending signs as seals, reason it self being dim, except the eye
perceive something illustrious, or taking in things purely natural, how much
more in spiritual the bow in the cloud, the dew in Gideons fleece, the change
of Abraham's name, the whole pedagogy of Law, and among others this sign of
Circum^cision, held in so great veneration as to be reckoned above, that is,
greater then the Law, for it was before the Tables, preferred to the Sabbath,
for even on that day it was not to be omitted, hence S. Paul wisely caveating
the Philippians, Philip. 3. against its use, reflects not upon the word, yer
presses its neglect, and charge warrinesse under the notion of Concision.

Being then purely a pareing or cutting of the flesh, not a sign of the
Covenant, which as such, not only with Jews, but with Arabs, Mahumetans,
Phenicians, is in high regard unto this day; though some more Barbarous derids
even its institution, suggesting it un^^table, to the benignity of a merciful
God, to delight in beholding blood issuing from the ^oins of a tender Baby, and
to enjoin it, under so severe a penalty as Cutting off: But this is to be wise
above what is written, for to pass the Lawgiver who is not obliedged to
demonstrat by reason the equity of his Mandats, to any, much less to such, who
have forfeited their being to his justice, the speciality of its rise was to
discriminat Gods own people from Ethnicks and Pagans, for which if man will be
at no cost, he is very churlish, or at no pain, he is very selfish, and in
these days gratulation is most becomeing, since God in place of Circumcision in
our own blood, (which as a Judge in matters criminal he required of our
forefathers) allows, yea commands us, that of water, expecting in the
Mystery but cleanliness of us, as a distinguishing character.

AGAINST sin; of old the adult whether men, or women, had a Sacrifice, but that
being in the young also whether Male, or Female, God accepted a few drops of
blood from the Male, ( when all was due) as an expiatory offering for both
sexes, in their nonage, so that in this Circumcision, said of Mercy and
Judgment will I sing, Psalm. 101.1.

WE have seen God contracted into a Man, let us see that Man contracted in his
parts, and behold why he was circumcised, and why so named at his Circumcision.

VIEW the causes of his birth, and it is sai'd to be for us, Luke 2. and as for
himself, he was not born, so nor circumcised; for neither he nor his Parents
sinned, in God his Father there was no sin, in Mary his Mother no offense, (i.
e.) in her conceiving, neither was there any guile in his own heart, so that he
needed not, be circumcised, his being born without original guilt, infallibly
removeing the merits of the smart, that principally eyeing the pollution
transmitted by, and contracted upon ordinary generation; upon which score the
Baptist pleaded, his no need of baptism, but contrary he of his: Math. 4.13.
unto which, our Savior yielded as a Truth: but requested of him a sufferance
for that time that he (viz.) Christ might fulfill all righteousness, (i. e.)
both of Law and Gospel, that sinners of all sorts might equally adore, and
accept of him as Savior, sanctifying in his own person, the signs exhibited to
each* assureing reconciliation begun; clearing that not offense, but his
condition, as a man required John's connivence, his own condescendence being in
these words, It becomes us; that is, both me, and thee; for as he took upon
him the form of a servant, so was he to submit to such; as were superiors,
which is righteous, yea the hight of righteousness, all righteousness; for
being found as a man, a sinful man, was it not expedient in point of honor, to
submit to this law, for rendering himself more capable of converts, and more
amiable of conversse? for what could now be judged would be the issue of an
unbaptized Evangelist but scorn and contempt, for building up of that, in
Doctrine, which in his own practice he disdained to stoup unto?

BESIDES he had took upon him the seed of Abraham, and purposed ( as the
Messiah ought) to be so accounted, for fitness therefore (though not for
necessity to) his grandour, he received the impresse of the Circumcision upon
his flesh, whereof GOD himself was the institutor, elucidly discovering thereby
to the Prophets of the Christian faith, the end of his mission; to be the
fulfilling and ending of the Law, unto which Circumcision so eminently had made
them debtors, being now exempted from its bondage, Christ himself having
undergone it and institued baptism a more easy, sweet, comfortable Sacrament in
it is place, being Circumcised through infinite wisdom, for the same cause that
Paul baptized Timothy, even to abolish Circumcision, Acts 16.3. which was to
endure no longer then the use, for which it was appointed, did endure, and that
was to difference Jew and Gentile, which distinction Christ removeing legal
Circumcision, as well as priesthood, was to be changed and laid aside. Gal. 3.

The Cabalists finding the history of Miriams death, to succeed the laws
referring to the red heifer, or Cow, Numb. 19. infer, the laws binding up, at
the approach of the Messiah, that the heifer did typifie the ruddiness,
sanguinolency, or bloodiness of a Savior is a truth to be attested, but that
the Prophetess death was a prototyp of the Laws departure, is not so easily to
be granted; yet this is clear, that as Abraham, ordered his servant in swearing
to put his hand under the thigh, whence the Son was to come, in whom all was to
be blessed, and that Son to be GOD also is evidenced in the addition of the
letter be to the name of Abraham, taken from Gods own name Jehovah, so our Lord
the Son of God the Son of Abraham that ordains that by, faith which Abraham
had, when uncircumsised which was in himself, we should know, whence we are
hewn, even from himself, whose name is upon his thigh, Revel. 19. by spiritual
generation, consequentialy receiving the benefit of Sonship from both, not in
that legal, but in this mystical begetting, by virtue whereof as he, we are the
Sons of Abraham not of his flesh, but of his faith, and such are still
d^fferenced, and separat^ from Infidels, and Cananits of the world, not by the
Pale of Circumcision, but the waters of Baptism, Gala. 3.27 in which, as in
Noah's ark, we are secure from that deluge, shall fall upon the ungodly, and
liberat from that bondage which the Jews, as servants, as Scholars, were under,
as sons of the flesh of Gods servant Abraham, and as Children of Jesus the
beloved Son, has the knife turned into water, and what the edge of the former
could hardly cut off, is now by water and grace easily washed away.

THEREFORE our Lord was both circumcised, and baptized; as being prince both of
Law and Gospel, and a cornerstone, for uniting Jew and Gentile in one unto
himself; receiving Baptism last, saying by that, of it, unto the Church, as of
the other Sacrament, take ye all of this; do this in remembrance of me; and of
Circumcision, first, because made of a woman under the Law; hence is he called
the Minister of the Circumcision, being under it, and preaching actually,
personally, to the partakers of it, the promises being made to such; whereas to
the Gentiles, there was no such obligation of his truth; yet by Grace, did
persuade to an entrance into the Covenant, by his Messengers and Prophets, Romans
15.8. Mystically seen in his ver^ Baptism receiving it from John, by
Bethabe^ra, in the river of Jordan, John 1. somewh^^ above the place where the
priests of the Lord stood with the ark, while Joshua and the camp of Israel
more southward passed over into the promised land, where he circumc^^sed the
people, Christ being the substance o^ that very ark of the Covenant, he being
t^^ mean, for reconcileing unto God both nati^ons, beginning with circumcision,
which h^ received in Isaac, until he suffered in him, ful^^filling the figure;
wherefore we are said to be circumcised with the Circumcision mad^ without
hands, obtaining the benefit promi^sed unto it another way then by blood.

PROVIDENCE, like the goodman of the house, knowing not only when, but how, the
thiefes would enter, frustrats by Circumcisi^on their design, who should a
vouch our Savior not to have had a real, corporal, but an aerial, or
fantastic body; for as Alexander proved himself unto his flatterers to be no
God, because when wounded he bled, so the Gospel cleares him to be no phantasme
because of the prepuce, and by it casts a mist in the Devils way to abate his
fury, that though he might know the Angels revelation; yet as truly again, he
might infer him guilty of sins tincture, which Circumcision did mainly respect:
wherefore we read of no great rage, that either Satan, or Man, had against him,
until his Baptism, being then more clear because of the voice from heaven: yet
still was there some dimnesse of his perfect Deity, as appears in the first
temptation, Mat. 4. Our Savior as a warlike Prince in his enemies country,
clothing himself in the robes of that country, to pass the more securely
undiscerned, and ( pardon so strong application) to destroy his adversaries the
more surely, and make them inexcusable.

WHAT more? the ends and uses intended by God, and the profits or benefits
received by the Church, in the Circumcision were of old comprised in this
distich, and, applied to Christ, are proper; Cauterium signum meritum Medicina
Figura,
Exemplum fuit olim Circumcisio dura.


AND as an issue or cauter it emitteth putrid matter from the body, was a
Character or badge of discriminating the people of God from the worshippers of
Idols, and to them also represented their merits for sin committed, which in
justice might have made the whole man to be cut off, by which it proved
Medecin or physic, some say against the Carbuncle; sure it is, it figure^
lust in the Soul, and showed what puri^^ ought to be in the heart, the
corruption thereof, being moraly evacuated, and causing each one become a good
example to another of continence and virtue.

BUT the design in the Circumcision (...) the Son of God, was for the
fulfilling of t^^ Law, which he came to do, Mat. 5. (...) again to abolish the
law, which as a shadow went before him the body, until he wa^ incarnat, which
being done, as a shadow must go behind, and at his ascending, vani^^ away, he
himself being the substance of the shadow, perfecting thoroughly what it in
(...) only endeavored, therefore must (...) children of Israel, (according to
the (...) Ios. 5.) be circumcised the second time, (...) this Ioshuah, to whose
law, according t^ Moses doctrine, they have been circumcis^^ once, but these
leading them by Faith (...) Christ in the Gospel, they must undergo
ci^^cumcision the second time; by which their reproach shall only be rolled
away, and their gathering together to be glorious.

YET subordinat to this, it is worth considering, that he opened himself unto
this first fruits of his suffering, for the same cause he paid tribute, (viz.)
that he might give no occasion of offense, that all might splendidly adapt
themselves, for obedient walking, and not justle with Superiors upon account of
privileges; wherefore we should hammer our pernicious designs, and curb our
extravagant affections, not as untamed heifers in a conceit of our own worth,
plead immunity from law, or from premises of Dignity, Excellency, Piety,
Liberty, or Birthright, maintain a disorderly carriage, Christ presenting
himself in this as a Samplar, for us to work by, as a rule to act by, as a law,
oblidging us to conform, yielding to those in authothority, and laws in force
though in all things we be gratified; nor in all parts there be no necessity
for them, hence he is said not to be born but made under the law, Gala. 4.
whereas we are not made but born, and ought the rather to be Subject.

THIS Sun of righteousness rising in a red cloud, caveats against murmurings,
complainings; having something in it, to be seen, to be loved, and also to be
imitated induceing to a Circumcision of the foreskin of our heart, the badge of
Gospel mortification, and teck-merion of self denial, his blood and name
hinting at salvation even from our selves.

STEPHEN charge his impenitent countrymen with Uncircumcised hearts and
ears, by which he understands the whole man; Ears implying their hearing such
doctrine as tended to depravement, Hearts; insinuating their peculiar kindness
and approbation of it, to that height, that the eyes beheld it as delectable,
the palate as delicious, the hands as prosperous, the feet as an easy journey so
that heresy, impurity, vanity, iniquity, sensuality, with practice without
consideration, become^ the love of him who is carnal, and prevails to seduce
the undiscerning, to the subsequent way of ungodly folly, the whole Man
becomeing prize to the Tempter, for all irregularities, the universal
intendment of the Soul being Guadrat to the appetits of the corrup^ heart,
which therefore is to be keep'd, that is circumcised above all things, Prove 4.23
by which the eyes shall let in no vanity, and the ears be stopped, that is
circumcised, against rotten communication, the Spiritual Palla^ shall taste and
see that God and his ways are only good, the lips shall be preserved from
lying, and the tongue from speaking guile least at any time we grieve the Holy
Ghost, Ephesians. 4.30.

WE find upon record an universal Circumcision of the whole Tribs at one time,
by knives or sharp flint stones, Ios. 5. that service being omitted in their
travel through the wilderness, not, because the northwind blew not, for
scattering the cloud, which had been inconvenient, as the Jews foolishly
suppose, holding that wind most seasonable for Circumcision, but through their
unfitness to admit the same, in regard of tedious, and uncomfortable travels,
which being ended and the holy land entered, God thought it expedient no longer
to be delayed, and therefore ordered Joshua no more to procrastinat or put off,
shadowing that such who would possess Jerusalem the holy City, and spoil the
potent adversaries of our rest in succesful battles, must by faith in Christ
the rock, make holocausts, that is, burned offerings of beloved lusts, though
as near, or dear, as the skin it self, by declining from evil, and doing good,
keeping the soul from rapin, blood, covetousness, and wrath, solicitously by
the sharp and two edged sword of the word of God, which Christ brought into the
world, restraining every thought, and bring it captive to the Laws of piety and
sound reason, that being a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart,
a divider betwixt the soul and sin.

CIRCVMCISION being nothing but a purgation of the soul from vice, which who so
scruples to deposit, must not be reckoned among the faithful, but as
uncircumcised, be denied entrance into the holy temple, the holy City, holy
JESUS being only King of the Jews, that is, of the Circumcision, not of the
letter, but of the Spirit, not of the Body, but of the Inward-man, and the
precept being given to Joshua, intimats, that as death and lust entered upon
all by one MAN, we are not free from either* until by his Antityp Jesus, we be
redeemed from our actual, or original transgression, by applying faithfully his
life, and blood, as expiatory for sin, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
which is a deliverance from our vain conversation; and in one sense, a being
crucified to the world, and in another, Ci^cumcised in our foreskin, they
being; (with some, as it) superfluous and no way necessary for felicitating
soul or body.

THE Hebrews say, Sem was born circumcised and he was happy, but that the
foreskin is not necessary, is figured in the eight day, seven being allowed in
proportion, and revolution of time to all in common; but the right, is that
eternal day, expected by the Elect, and forestalled already in those occult
joys, which emerge from liveing Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, in this
present world, and their names being written in heaven, contemplats upon the
felicity, their Spirit shall possess the week of this wearisome world, being
brought to its final period.

IT is said of Severus, that no day passed wherein he did not something that
was good, and beneficial to others, and without much arguing its evident, how
soon our Lord amply discovers earnestness, passionatly to offer himself a Lamb
indeed for the sins of the world in his yielding so easily, so suddenly to
breath a vein, (as a wise Physician) for the cure of his mystical body; (now in
a Spiritual) raveing and sinful feverish distemper; Man go thou and do thou
likewise, do good, and yet more good, and by whom thou art accounted base, of
them at last, thou shall be had in honor; God incarnat having here begun, to
lay down his life for thee, be not ashamed to lay it down for another, at least
estimat what can be done for thy Brother, and reckon that to be a debt, due
from thy Saviors stupendous humility.

WE mistake, if we conclude our selves heavenly born, until as heaven, we
influence the Earth with benign aspects, and Eight times, or days, or duties
must pass over us, before we ought to repute our selves of the seed of the
faithful or circumcised: for in the opinion of Holy Bernard, we must first be
just in our dealings with men, he who would raise high, and must build low, and
Jacobs ladder had its foot on the Earth: another is, the avoiding of Fellowship
with evil men, Christ was separate from sinners, and his followers must hate
the Congregation of wicked doers: A third is, watchfulness, and observance of
Enemies, Our Savior not being ignorant of Satan's devices, disappointed his
stratagems, he left him unresolved of his being the Son of God in the
wilderness, and of his wanting original sin by Circumcision in the Cradle, and
in both prevailed. Another is, Sobriety as becomes men, the Believers life is
a warfare, and if lust, pleasure, or cares of this world overcharge that day
may come unawares upon us, Luke 21.34. Another is, patience in all things we
suffer among men, for a few evil days, we must neither with Cato, put out our
lives, nor with Thrasillus run out of our wits, but keeping a good heart, we
shall never want a place, not to say, a whole wherein to hide our head. Another
is, Humility, Our Lord humbled himself to the Death, and that the soul with
Mary be exalted, Remember he visited her in her low estate, Luke 1.48. The
seventh is, Piety and Devotion, in which by contemplation the Chil^ of Grace,
celebrating a Sabbath* by resting from works of sin, and walking with God,
ought not to be reckoned a Son of Belial, but as on the eight day, declared by
the Angel of a good Conscience, or rather is by the Priest of the new
Testament, called the Son of God, and gets a new name which none knows but he
that has it, Revel. 2.17.

THERE are who will have the eight day to imply the eight ages of the world,
reckoning the first from Adam to Noa, the next from him to Abraham, the third
from him to Moses the fourth from him to David, the fifth from David to Christ,
the six^h from Christ to the end of the world, the seventh to the Dead, the
eight represents the Resurrection, at which time all the true so^s of the
Faithful, shall receive their true name and true inheritance, in being saved
from their sins, and approved for their Sanctity; But the more sound, and far
more probable ground for fixing upon the eight-day, was, because of the infants
strength, being then more able to bear the sharpness and smart of the knife,
then when newly born, and yet not after the eight day, for they growing
stronger, and imagination more forcible, the pain had been greater, that time
was therefore chosen, when the skin as more tender, could renew and repair it
self; but it is nice, that to this day, the Jews circumcise none; but on the
eight day; that is to say, never at night, however it be, it is said, that the
pain is greatest on the third day; nature tending then to a healing, for which
cause Simeon and Levi slew the Shechemits, according to which its given out,
that the three offended in each sin, viz. our selves our neighbor and our God;
the third and last is the forest, and its remembrance most dejecting, as
appears from David's confession, in matter of Vriah, and Joseph's admiration in
the temptation of his Mistress.

THOUGH I conjecture not that the e^ght day, was allowed for the body of the
infant to be inflenc'd by the seven planets yet according to the Doctor of that
Philosophy, concluding the sun to operat upon the head and heart, we may
alludingly teach, that the beams of the sun of Righteousness, must shine and
opera^ upon the head and heart of Adams Sons, before they can have a living
Soul, or be brought forth in the second birth; yet, let none pin their abideing
in pollution upon God, for the Sun beams shine in the Ministry of the Gospel;
but many as the swine in a hot day, tumbles the more in the pudle, and what is
vitiously observed of circumcised nations, as Egyptians, Saracens, that no
people is more lascivious, may shamefully be applied to Christians; none being
more filthy, more unclean then they, who have been washed, being the more
defied thereby, that they commend it, yet mockingly rise not from forbidden
pleasures, from condemned delights; Mahomet in a great measure^ encourageing
those passions, allays the guilt of his Disciples; but being discharged by
Christ, by Christians are to be the more abhorred.

THE Jews circumcised but in one part, and that part by which the whole body is
most defiled, where lust, and luxury tyrannized and played rex; but the
Christian must be circumcised all over, to extinguish, not only the heat, as by
pores; but the very sum of uncleanness, in his eyes for restraining Vanity, in
his ears for debarring obscenity, in his tongue withdrawing from ribbaldry, in
his hands by shutting out iniquity, in his whole person and converss, laying
aside all superfluity of naughtiness (for that as the circumcised part, may be
well spared) least emasculating themselves, they walk as the Daughters of men,
that is, not worthy of God, that is, not as his Son our Lord Jesus, who being
to introduce a new doctrine into the Church, of Faith, and Love, got in a new
day, and as is supposed the first day of the of the new year, a new name, and
was called Jesus not by chance, or choice, but according to the order of the
Angel before he was conceived in the womb, which fights against and impugns our
old courses, pregnantly inviting to a new and holy life, for matriculating, or
ingrafting our selves, in a real, not nominal, Spiritual, not political, and
innocent, not blasphemous, way to the Society of Jesus,

TO work a cure against the distempers of the whole body of the Church, was the
head thereof, as about this time, let blood, and by whose vein breathing, the
body becomes more agile, and every member more apt, to exercise it is peculiar
office, for the good of the whole: therefore, ought all, as spiritual Eagles,
(a bird who by casting her feathers, and breaking her old bill, occasions a
fresh growth, and repairs her strength) to arise from old, and dead works,
Mount toward the heaven in new desires, and new affections, testifying both,
by new lives, unto which this Child, this name Jesus, strennously attract's,
there being in it, when opened, a treasury of all riches, a ga^ner of all
provisions, and a warehouse of all excellencies, sounding first from an Angels
mouth into a Virgins ear, nothing but what was heavenly and of a heavenly
virtue, being fit to express it, or capable to apprehend it.

IT^S true, we find some of this Name besides him, yet of such eminency, as
demonstrated them forerunners (i. e.) typs of this Jesus, it is of the same
root, and sense with that of Joshua who was Captain of the Lords host, and
possessed Israel of the holy land, another was a holy and high priest separat
for expiating the sins of the penitent delinquent Zach. 3.1. And to pass the
Apocriphal Jesus, who yet was a wise and prudent teacher, we have mention of
another Jesus, Colos. 4. a companion of S. Paul, and fellow laborer with him
in the Kingdom of God; it was in short a common, and an honorable name among
the Jews, but out of venera^ion to our Lord Jesus not now used in the Church.

NAMES of old have been adopted by Friends, or parents, according to the hope
conceived of the person named, or by some accident about him, or done by him;
but none of these here, for our Savior was seen by by none when he was named,
nor thought upon by any when he was called Jesus, a Savior, not from hope,
which still includ^ fear; but from assurance that he should save his people
from their sins, which until revealed, might be unknown, even to the Angel who
brought the message, so that nothing of the creature was instrumental in this
nomination, but purely drawn from the benefits should accrue unto the world
through him, which obiter and by the way, enforces parents to elect such names
as may import to their posterity some duty, befitting them, that their names
may teach sanctity and true piety for as if something had been in that name
Ioshuang, or Jesus, we read not of their sins, not of their scandals, as we do
of other's; we have Judah's incest, Solomon's apostasy, David's adultery, and
Judas the traitor, as if Salvation in the others name had transfused it self
working detestation of profane courses; Adam named his wife Evah because she
was mother of all living, and the name Gabriel enforce^h the bearer to be a man
of God, the name Nicholaus to overcome the people in good, John to walk
graciously, William courageously, Thomas to behold each man as a brother, the
word importing a twin, such are good, and suits Christianity, whereas Hercules,
a sturdy heathen, Lout, Diana, a famed huntresse, savours (pardon my boldness)
not of the font, not of the Laver of Regeneration, not of baptismal water, and
therefore to be retired, least Mars, Jupiter, Vulcan, and other names of Baal,
defile the Baptistry, the name Patience: I cannot conclude ill, but that Femal
one, of Faith, in my judgment is to be avoided, as all other that in any
direct way, tends either, to sin or revieve the memories of the profane.

WHICH evil, the name Jesus, in it is very initiatory letters does abrogat, and
cancel, improving the Saints, in all degrees, to the highest bless of
Saintship, speaking Iucundity, or gladness to the sorrowful Eternity to the
mortal, Sanity, or health to the languishing, Vtility, or profit to the poor,
Satiety, or plenty to the hungry; in Greek it is anagram'd, (...) thou art the
sheep, or lamb, viz. which is given for the sins of the world; it is often writ
in 3 letters thus, I. H. S. Jesus Hominum Salvator, showing the Salvation he
brought to mankind, and thus drawn in the body of the Sun, is it the arms,
and public seal, of the segniory of Genevah, showing her light, to beam from
the rays of this Sun of righteousness, her inscription about that, being,
Jesus, Sol, and Scutum meum, Jesus is to me, both a Sun and shield; but others
express thereby, his Innocence, Humility, Sublimity, he not being conceived in
sin; yet under-went death for sin, and because, he, is man, is made Lord of all
things.

GIVEING of names, is a sign of authority and dominion, and given by Jewish
Fathers at Circumcision, as we do now at Baptism, it is the first act of
jurisdiction Fathers exercise over their Children, the Scripture showing
plainly in Abraham, and Zacharias, that the Mother has no right to impose
them, and if they do, the Father may alter them; as in the History of Benjamine
is conspicuous, he being never called Beno^^, and though the Mothers name
should stand, in holy writ it is to be understood by the Fathers indulgence, as
is famously clear in the Register of Leas fruitfulness, her husband gratifying
her in that particular, and not without reason, but this name Jesus was not
imposed by Joseph, who was no father, no^ by Mary though a Mother; but by God,
who has power over Christ as man, and exercised the same as a Father; before
his birth, that he who is the King of Kings, and Son of God, might not be made
subject to his parents; but so far as his own knowledge, discretion, or
goodness, in riper years, should concede unto, as is evident from several
places, his subjection being commended, and, ^oman, what I to do with thee,
being expressed.

YET to condemn the obstinat and refractory, this name is not publicly
proclaimed from heaven; but given to Mary, and after that to Joseph, who gave
it to his supposed Son, at's Circumcision, and by that name which his parents
gave him, was he known in all the tract of his life, God in this occult way,
preserving the order and honor of paternity, disallowing such, who assume the
boldness to rebaptize themselves; and write new names which their parents knew
not.

HE is by the Holy Ghost, yea by men, sometimes called Jesus, sometimes Jesus
Christ often our Lord, sometimes this, and again that other name, every one of
which, have some peculiar eye, to some relation he bears toward the Church,
and in all those glorious precepts for divine celebrating the Supper, that is,
the holy communion of the Church, by S. Paul, he speaks of it in that style,
that would hardly make that phrase the cup of Jesus, the death of Jesus, to be
proper, speaking constantly of the Lord as the Lords Death, the body and blood
of the Lord, a word importing the founder of that communion, and fellowship we
have with the Father, from which this may safely be drawn, that men should
discreetly express the tittles g^ven to their Savior? It is a truth, that
some have spoken of him under Epithets purely, that is, scripturally applicable
to the Father, to the Spirit, to an Angel.

THE most celebrated tittles are Jesus, Christ, and the Son of God, this last,
when Jews deny him, mock, rail, reprobat, laugh at him, etc. is proper to use,
Christ intimating his anointing, hinting at the means, whereby he saved us, as
preaching, fighting, conquering is pertinent for us; the Son of God he is
called, being very God, of very God, the second as he is Man. God by assuming
humanity; but his name Jesus represents him God joined to humanity, united to
the humane nature, and here wisely given, yea before having three times been
so named ( viz.) at his conception to Mary, next to Joseph (...) a dream, and
lastly at Circumcision, for then they called his name Jesus a name majestic, a
name consolatory, holding forth his Deity for besides this Lord, there is no
Savior* and his Humanity also, for by it, he makes propitiation for our sin,
nay we find it i^ other writtings, not removing, but preventing sin; even that
of robbery: for a paddist, or High-way-man, attempting to spoil a preacher,
ordering him to stand, and asking what he was, was answered I am a the servant
of the Lord Jesus, the Paddist trembling at the answer, said again, what are
you? and had the same answer, and so a third, the Robber as amazed, forgot both
bloud-guiltinesse, and covetousness, and called to his unjustly detained
Captain, for the sake of Jesus depart in peace; and ruminating to himself whose
servant he had been, in this debauched trade of life, being cogitabund, cried
out, Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, blessed be the name of Jesus, who has kept me from
sin, and forsakeing that course of life walked after in the path of virtue.

LET none inquire touching the utmost extent of this name, since it is secret
and wonderful, Iud. 13.18.19. above all man's conception, and expression,
having not under it the name or shadow, but the essence, and verity of all
Salvation; yet know he is not called Jesus, because he saves from war, or
sword, for these may be good but from sin, which can never be but ill,
therefore it comfort the heart when opened, delights the Ear when
hearkened, pleases the mouth when expressed intimating, from sin freedom, and
predicts glory, in place of misery; But yet, not by the aerie sound or letters
thereon whether uttered, or impressed, for the Devil spoke it to Christ
himself, and had a finger in the py, when it was writ upon the cross but when
applied by faith, and conforming to the Doctrine of him who bears it, as he who
learning and studying* Jesus well, proposed to himself for a Copy, a meek man,
^ humble man, a sober man, a chaste man, merciful man, and finally, a man endued
with all honesty, and full of all sanctity, which is a sweet way to make him to
every man Jesus (i. e.) a Savior, that he as being Almight^ God, created them,
so as Jesus that is Go^ and man, may redeem them from this present evil world,
by his omnipotent unspeakeable goodness, compassing and strengthening by his
mediatory office what ever is his own within the ^oul and abolishing by his
Royal power and Christ-like virtue what ever besides that, the heart has
contracted, and to prevent relapsing let the man Jesus be our example, and
Jesus God your chief support, leaning upon him as your beloved, and the name
Jesus shall assure salvation, secure heaven, not otherwise.

THE name Jesus is admirable, for by it all wonders have been wrought, and
because of it all Devils trembled, it is, also amiable, sinners having by it
been justified, righteous gladned, the dejected raised, and all that ever
called as the blind-men, Jesus, thou son of David have mercy upon us, have been
relieved: it is lastly laudable, for it is glorious, it is holy. it is new, it is
exalted above every name, and the name that is given to us, for us, whereby
only we can be saved, therefore glory ye in his holy Name.

REMEMBER you are his by purchase, be having redeemed you, not with corruptible
things, as with silver and gold, but by his precious blood, of which sum, he
this day gave part in hand, as earnest, and paid the whole afterward, in
gross upon the Cross, and might there be not more, then a common providence,
that upon the first of January there should be fewer Martyrs in the primitive
persecution, then on any other in the year, each day produceing when laid
together, five thousand save that; since the faithful witness himself, by
whose blood their's was accepted, did, as upon that day, enstate us into the
passage leading to the spiritual Paradise, by applying his merits in
Circumcision, as the first fruits of the land ^or earnest of our forgiveness;
making hell to tremble as being spoiled of its Dominion, Earth to rejoice as
being redeemed to God, and Angels, to triumph as being confirmed in
righteousness: all which passionatly excits to a confession, that Jesus is the
Christ, to the Glory of God the Father, making his Regimen in our souls the
more arbitrary, when by way of reserve we reflect upon that purpose of the
Father, that every knee shall (mark the word shall) bow, that is, yield and
submit to the name Jesus, that is, the power, authority, and Judgment of Jesus.

FROM the name Christ, are we called Christians, that implying both his, and
our Unction, with the graces of the spirit, whence also came that name of the
Messiah (i. e.) one that is anointed ( viz) above his fellows, as Christ is
said to be, Isa. 61. with gifts, not with material oil which had been improper
to him as a King, for his Kingdom is not of this world, or as Priest for he was
not of the order of Aaron, nor as a Prophet for their unction showed their
lawful successor, whereas he succeeded none, for all before him were thieves
and robbers, John 10. insinuating that all the Prophets were either after him,
or came along with him, art thou the Christ said the Messengers to John? is not
this the Christ? said the woman of Samaria, that is, he who was to be the
Messiah, the anointed one, and this name of Christian from Unction is most
proper for men to use, they, if believing receiving some measure of that holy
oil, the Spirit of God, which was given to him without measure, But some
contrary to this name, delight in the word Catholic, and some of these
Catholics again, glory in the appellation Jesuits and both of these
scandalously use, some countries in particularly in Italy and in Rome it self,
to make the glorious and honorable name of Christian, to signify an Idiot, a
Dolt, a very fool, which shows their impious arrogance in boasting of what is
proper to Rome, nor Romes Doctrine as now taught, the word Catholic being of
no worth unless Holy be added, and their spiritualized pride, in stamping the
name Jesus, upon a few, making him the head of a faction assuming a name so
glorious, so ineffable, as if salvation were only to be found in their
colleges, and Christ himself to be only of their order.

GIVE us the name of Christian, signifying out hops in his Authority, and the
sense of it also as heirs of his purchase, together with the obligation of it,
as being bound to his doctrine, chiefly and first in reprobating the worlds
vanity: for, Io. 6.15. perceiving that they would come and take him by force to
make him a King he departed, next strennously to exercise repentance, for he
was the lamb slain, then fervidly to exercise Charity, for he prayed for his
enemies; and lastly studying purity, in the whole man for he taxed the
Pharisees, for cleaning the outside of the Cup.

SO being Christians in truth* let us leave others to boast of being Catholics,
and brag of their Iesuitism, we shall exult in our Lord Jesus Christ, honoring,
revering, but not dareing to assume the name Jesus, there being no other name
under heaven by which we can be saved; Christian including only our duty
obedience; and respect unto Christ; whereas Jesus imploys his office, and
benifits toward us, and therefore no project, how devoutly so-ever carried on,
ought to appear under that notion in the world; and truly the interpretation of
the same, being known, the inap^nesse thereof, as to Ignatius Disciples would
as clearly appear, as the incongruous name Cosmographers give to the
Magelanican sea* calling it Mare Pacificum, that is, peaceable, whereas the
Pilot finds it still rageing and stormy which they are, to that degree, that
they are a burden, a curse, and cursed by the generality of that Church,
wherein they so monstrously breed; and if obedience, Laws, designs, scops, give
names, they are neither to be called Ignatians nor Jesuits, but Popelings.

JESUS is his name, and Salvation is his office, and our profession proclaims
our acceptance of him for a Savior; yet, who will ^enter a cut, or a bruise,
because he has a salve or ointment? or break his arm upon confidence of a
skillful Surgeon? So no less warrinesse against offending, issues from the
knowledge of a born Redeemer, whom we are to use, not as Mountebanks for sale
of their balsoms ( viz) try his efficacy, or skill, by putting our selves upon
spiritual hazards, and run risks in eternal concerns; but as wise men, avoid
both danger, and infection, and either happening, consult him, as we do a
learned, wise Phisician, agai^^t the impurity of our birth, unrulinesse of our
l^^es, and horror of our death, against all which he is a Savior and ready to
help, for he was called Jesus.

IT has been an old complaint, that the celebration of our Lords Nativity in
these days, has been polluted by Pagan-like behavior, as if by it, we had
been liberate from God, Sabbaths and Temptations, and tied to nothing but
idleness, gluttonness and wantonness, not as God, but as if the Devil had been
incarnat; and this is not of yesterday: for we find the Ancients exprobating
the case with Christians, for their beholding, observing, some wanton rites of
Ianus at this time celebrated; yet their zeal was attended with greater
knowledge, then to raze these days out, or expunge them from the Calendar; but
rather their people from sin, the observation of which time being accounted by
them (as it is yet, with the Churches of the Saints, at home or abroad
reformed) a godly, a goodly practice; the protestants in Holland, France,
Switzerland, Germany, etc. joins in this practice with the Church of old, and
we as Brethren, ought in charity not to condemn them, though we withdraw our
Amen. In not consenting to that observance.

LET us (abhorring the lasciviousness of the Gentile, the scandalous practice
of the irreligious, equally avoiding the maliciousness of the Jew) serve the
Lord with fear and rejoice with trembling, Circumcising our selves, in our
flesh, externally, by seemlinesse in our apparel, to be in our actings
irreprehensible, and in our speech, that it be not contemptible, and in the
Spirit also internally, which consists likewise in three, as in our thoughts
that they be holy, in our affections, that they be pure, and in our purposes,
that they be honest, all which is most necessary, though they may be thought
severe, as was cutting off the prepuce of the foreskin under the Law by ^
knife, importing how fast sin stuck, and how dear lust is,

BUT off it must, or we shall be cut off, r^ther then which, let it go, and as
about this time there was for our good a new birth, a new mother, a new Son, a
new Song, a new Marriage, a new Spouse, a new Brid, a new Testament, a new
Inheritance a new Sacrifice, a new Sign, a new Child, a new Y^ar, we ought to
have new lives, laying aside the old leaven of malice, wrath, envy, and all
uncharitableness, going beyond, that is, exceeding the superstitiousness, not
to say the righteousness, of those Pharisees, the Jews, who will not eat what
is either sour, or bitter, on their new-years-day, but sweet almonds figs,
rasins, as also fish, a type of that candor inoffensivenesse, that they are to
show toward all, the year after; before whom, their good works must abound and
multiply, as fish in the Sea, that is, numerously; exercising our selves
sincerely at all times, in the things that may accompany Salvation, and
wherewith one may edify another, unto which Circumcion of old, did morally
enforce, and Christ's Baptism with ours also, doctrinally proposes.

IN the Kingdom of Portugal, there has been for above three hundredth years,
an order of Knighthood, entitled of Jesus Christ that King being Sovereign of
the order, and held in great esteem, ( not to sensure the Acts of Princes) if
Cnicht, or Knight, in our old Saxon English be interpreted, a servant as James,
and S. Paul were, of God and Christ, how soon might the rude swain, the
country lossel, the clownish Boor, the whistling plowman the earthy drudge,
find out a way, for nobilitating, his family and Gentilizeing of himself, in
observing the rules and orders, belonging to the badge, and profession of the
Gospel? Let those of Castile, pass for born Gentleman, the Bereans are far
more honorable. Alexander and Nimrod, may do great, strange and bloody feats,
while Paul and Cornelius, keeping their bodies in subjection least they should
be cast-aways more splendidly writs their name, and with a greater flourish in
the volumns of repute.

TAKING heed to Gospel rules, holy laws, observing the outgoings of the King
of Saints, even of the paths, walks and orders of Jesus the Sovereign, and Heir
of all things and Kingdoms, being King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only
wise God, 1 Timo. 1.17. makes the clown a Gentleman, the Gentleman a noblesse,
yea all men from the basest of Pesants, Kings unto God the Father, and younger
brethren to our Lord, (that is, partakers of the whole inheritance with the
Son) of which dignity if you be religiously ambitious, or earnestly covet after
you shall do well; for Jesus then, in all cases, shall be a Jesus, that is a,
Savior in time of trouble.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERY OF THE WISE MEN, Unfolded, and applied. For
Epiphany-Day Ian. 6. Tolbooth Chapter 1671 But preached- Sunday-Ian. 8. Tolbooth
Chapter 1671

MATTHEW. 11.1. Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of
Herod the King, behold there came wisemen from the East to Jerusalem,

Saying, where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his Star
in the East, and are come to worship him.


THOUGH it be said, that God is no respecter of persons; yet its to be
understood, in his eternal decision and sentenceing men to happiness, or
misery, conform to the Regularity, or extravagancy, of their actions; for
otherwise, he eminently signalizeth some above the mass of plebeian beauty, by
signs and wonders, making their ingresse to, or egresse from, the world
prodigious, or auspicious, by unusual occurrences; not to speak of the three
Suns, which appeared when Nero entered upon government, or that fearful comet
some months before his slaughter, nor of that shining bright, before many
lights of the Germain Church, were extinguished by death, as being portentuous:
it is upon record, that glorious worthies, have been saluted at their births,
by visions from heaven, auspicating the felicity of their government, grandour
of their lives, and glory of their fame, as his late Majesty (to pass old and
musty Registers) of glorious memory, journeyed from his Palace to Paul's Church,
to render thanks, for the birth of a Son our present Sovereign, about ten of
the clock May 29. in bright-day a star was seen to shine predicting as some
then said, his out-shining and breaking forth at last, though for a time, he
might be out-shined by another; not to comment, God does not always speak by
his Prophets only, but by the meteors, and elements likewise, in persons
especially born for government; and if in persons merely temporal this be, what
shall indicat to the world, the birth of the King of Kings rather then a goodly
star, and that in the east? by whose rays, the Religious Magi, whether by Day,
or night could spel, if not read, the birth of the King of the Jews: for as
there were many new things about, and at our Saviors birth on earth, and all
wonderful, as the Angels appearance, Zacharias dumbness, etc. It was seemly
that, the Heavens should also lift up their voice and declair, that wonderful
work of God, which lay in Jury; yet shined to Persia; coming to them who were
nigh that they might be saved, and to them who were afar off that they might be
redeemed; Therefore there came Wise -- Men from the east, etc.

HAVING seen our Lord born for, and circumcised by the Jew we should wrong our
selves, if we beheld him not worshipped by the Gentiles: for though Salvation
be of the Jews, John 4.22. yet it is effects are to the ends of the earth; at
first, the Shepherds adored, here Philosophers are come to adore, they directed
by an Angel, these conducted by a star both from heaven, to him, who was to
unite them in one unto himself, and of them so united, as living stones to
build a Temple for the Holy Ghost, that is, a Tabernacle for himself.

IN a Mystery behold Araunah the Jebusit offering gifts, and David the Jew,
doing service to our God, for the health of both and salvation one of another;
the Gentile exceeding the Jewish spectators, in his the Lord thy God accept
thee, he knowing the Israelite to have (as he had until the Gospel was
revealed) a more peculiar interest in God, so Christ was King of the Jews, that
is, eminently, but not only, for he was also the God and King of that King-like
Araunah, a Gentile.

ONE day, (viz.) January the sixth, has been famed among the Ancients, and
it is first appearance highly revered, because of a fourfold miracle, wrought
thereon, God even the Father proving as on a Theater the Divinity of Jesus his
Son: for when he began to be about thirty years of age, and baptized in Jordan,
the Trinity was discovered, the Father being in the voice, the Spirit in the
liknesse of a dove, the Son in the flesh, and proclaimed to be the Son,
well-beloved; whence by them that day was called Theophania, the apparition of
God ( viz) from heaven, that same day of the next year, he at the Marriage of
Cana of Galile turned water into wine, because of which, they called it
Bethphania, the appearance of God in the house; On the same day next year, he
fed the five thousand with five loaves, and two fishes, wherefore they called
it Phagiphania, the appearance of God eating, or in eating: of this last there
is some more scruple then of the other; but let him be Anathema that denies the
appearance of a star unto these Wisemen, which some will have to be shining,
when this King was thirteen days old, others will have him two years old,
however the day from this was called Epiphania, the apparition of God above or
from the heavens, and this as being more sacred and more miraculous, the
Wisemen seeing, believing, journying, searching adoreing and offering, have in
the Annals of the Church swallowed up, almost all the other, that is, for the
time, he being adored now as God; which we find not to be done in the other
wonders, by Jew, or Gentile, and the solemnity by the Ancients, in all ages, is
especially observed upon that account; unto whose venerable, and gray headed
practice, we shall in all humility conform, this universal Lord, and Sun of
Righteousness, having a morning star in the East, giving intelligence of an
approaching day for man's perfect Redemption, and by it good tidings to these
Magi or Wisemen, and by them to Jerusalem, and thence to all the world,
whereof we our selves are witnesses; and if I speak the language ^f the
Prophet, Arise, shine, for your light is come, I hope you will obey the ensuing
charge, and lift up your eyes, and see, and then as convinced show forth the
praises of the Lord, which is also foretold, and as Gentiles, come to the
light, Isa. 61.

IT was said of Solomon the Kings of Tarsh^sh and of the isles shall bring
presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts; its true Tarshish was
never a Kingdom, but by it is prophesied, what the rich Kings upon the coast
of the Red Sea, near unto which Tarshish was a famous inland Town, should do,
and what the Kings of Sheba a chief City of Ethiopia, and Seba, another in
Arabia Faelix, both famous for gums, and precious stones, should perform as
tributaries or as Favorites to Solomon, a Preludium of that homage and
good will, which the world owed unto, and should repay unto him, of whom
Solomon was but a shadow, even to that King whom these Wisemen come to worship.

LET us veiw these holy pilgrims, and their pilgrimage; in there came Wisemen
from the East, the place they traveled unto Jerusalem, their Question in that
place, where is he that is born King of the Jews? their errand with him, we are
come to worship.

THEY are called Wisemen of the east, otherwise Magi or Magicians, of old an
honorable appellation, and applied not unto vizzarts, or negromancers, as now,
but to the students of Philosophy and Mathematics, observers of the motions
and government of the Luminaries, Sun, moon, or stars, inferring conclusions
for orderly walking in matters of regiment and intrinsic projects of state;
and got that name from Meditation detecting and diveing into natures deepest
secrets, foreseeing the probability of things, and were held, of old men of
renown, by Indians called Gymnosophists with Grecians Philosophers, Caldeans in
Babylon, Druydes in France Sapientes with the Latin, and with Persians Magi,
who were of that high estimation, that none was thought worthy to reign, except
he had studied their art; and from their Colleges were persons taken, for
being petty Princes, and governors of countries, whence, it may be, sprung the
conceit of these Magi, being reputed Kings.

WHENCE they came, is not yet determined, some brings them from Caldea, they
worshipping the stars, others will have them of Balaam, who prophesied of a
star; There are who fetch them from the utmost parts of the earth, its most
likely they came from Persia, because of their gold incense etc. of their
motion it was east from Jerusalem, from their learning, there being in the
City Susan, the Kings seat, near the Palace in a stately garden, a
Philosophical College of Magi, students of History, Philosophy and Divinity,
with whom Daniel, Ezechiel, in the captivity conversing, and by their unwearied
seriousness, in searching Records, and Antiquities, might arrive to the
knowledge of much of the Law of Moses, the promises to Abraham, the truth of
the Prophets, and of the expected Messiah, which by the weeks of Daniel might
be by them now looked for; not omitting the wisdom, or direction of the most
high, to those, whose acumen was to unty knots and Mysteries, qualifying them,
to become tutors unto Daniel, in all humane literature, whose religious Zeal,
in gratitude might bequeath some of his spiritual instructions, for their own,
and others advantage, pairing off the excrescencies of their endeared studies,
by his life, wisdom and visions, that they might be more intent upon that one
thing necessary; whence in probability flowed at this time, their worshipping
of Jesus; for they believed and therefore enquired, and therefore offered.

HAD they been called Philosophers it might have been conjectured, they came
from Greece, but the term Magi, speaks them Persians, being given by that
nation to persons studious of knowledge, only if the distance of Susa from
Jerusalem be computed, which is 920 miles, it would be imagined they could not
come so soon after our Lords birth, as our observance will allow, which is but
13 days: not to speak of the swiftness of Dromodaries, upon which in those
countries men traveled, the star might appear sometime before the birth, and in
their travel, their stay in Jerusalem, something more then a year might pass;
for certain it is, that Herod, according to his information of the stars
appearance, slew the Children of Bethlehem, from two years old and under and
this interpretation seems more agreeable to the text; though it may be the
star appeared not, until the birth, and have, care, zeal, with true piety,
might cause the journey to be expede in the alloted time, though in the
appearance of the star, Herod might be mocked (there being greater slips not
censured in Scripture, of more experienced Persons in Divinity,) the men wisely
forseeing hazard to themselves, and danger to the bab.

TOUCHING their number, they being called Wisemen there can be no less
supposed then two, and in regard there are three sorts of gifts, some will have
them so many men, and tell you a tale of 3. Kings of Evilah, where there is
much gold, of Magonia where there is much frankincense, and are so wise, that
Appellius, Amarius and Damascus must be their Hebrew names, Galgalath,
Megalath, and Sarachin their Greek-names; Caspar, Balthazar, Melchior, their
Roman names: more then twelve I have not found them to be thought; it is likely
there was a train, a retinue of the most curious, pregnant, devout, learned in
the Society, with the worshippers, for they put all Jerusalem in an uproar, and
Herod himself was troubled when the intelligence of the Shepherds but six miles
off for ought we read was not so much as headed by either.

THE heavens to David declaired the the glory of God, and to the Magi the birth
of his Son, the Jewish shepherds had an Angel and tokens persuading them to
belief, the Gentil Philosophers had only a star, and yet they believe, both
seeing that one Christ, which was then born, and designed a cornerstone for
uniting these together; giving them his right and left hand, from the affection
of his heart, both being now alike precious to him, because as they, he is the
Son of Man. The Shepherds were nigh, the Magi a far off, yet both received, he
moderating the Jews insolence, because of the synagogue, and illuminating the
Gentiles ignorance, because of his light, joining them, as one building,
himself as the cornerstone, both beautifying and strengthening the structure.

AND into this Church as into the house, with the Magi, let us enter, he being
our Lord; and saluting him, let us worship, they opening the door for all
nations, as Ambassadors of peace, offering to his greatness; the mercy of God
in Christ giving ample assurance of reconciliation, to all offenders, though
Magicians, Wizzarts, consulters of witches, as to Manesseh, when so wise as to
lay aside the works of darkness, and behold his wonders in the firmament of
his works, and heaven of his word, wherein they shall perceive that Christ is
born, that is, the promised Messiah, in whom all the Kingdoms of the earth is,
and was to be blessed; therefore in no Nation is there ground to despair.

AND though some degenerat from these their religious Gentile Ancestors, either
by loyttering at home in their carnal security, purposing neither to take pains
for, nor travel after salvation, or play at the door in their superstitious
formal idolatry; or Debauching within, by their scandals, and impure
deportment; yet having wise Preachers, experienced in the study of heavenly
Scriptures which as the star over the house, show where Christ is to be found;
let us unite in devotion, and being faithful, with the Saints, part with
whatever lust is dear and sweet, knowing it is our wisdom so to do* being
Christ and his Gospel are above the price of all lusts, though supposed Rubies.

LET Herod be troubled, and great men moved against submission to the scepter
of Christ, ( for touch the Mountains they will smoke) and Jerusalems
inhabitants be in an uproar, each one about his particular concern suggesting
trouble and war* by changeing of Kings and Governors, upon which (in all
probability) their fear was grounded; for none went with the Magi from
Jerusalem, either fearing to appear, despairing of success, or for such like
cause; yet this is but the course of wordly wisdom, which being Earthly,
sensual, is to be avoided by the Man of God whom neither Herodians, of
ambition, nor Ierusalemits of pannick fear so far shall obscure wisdom, or
occasion defiling of conscience, as to make him afraid of, or tremble to hear
of Christ's approach; but rather calls, why tarrieth the wheels of his
Chariot, having a desire to be with Christ, obeys that sound, of heaven the
charge of Jerusalem his Mother, the Church, going forth to meet this King,
Cant. 3 11. now crowned in his cradle, and having heard of this in Ephrata,
seeks and finds him in the wood of the Cratch, and ark of the Church,
rejoyceing as they that find rich treasure; and good reason, for he is found in
Bethlehem (i. e.) the house of bread, and under that notion, implys all
happiness to his visitants; to his Receivers, the tittle of life adding
Eternity to his crumbs, which when enjoyed, the snars of death are avoided.

AS these Magi left Jerusalem a crafty Herod, the skillful Scribs, who durst
not deny what the Scripture recorded; yet shuned to believe what the Wise
revealed, bringing damnation upon their souls, the more speedily, for their
base ingratitude, the more desparingly for their great knowledge* the more
inexcusably for dissembling with Herod; so let us relinquish and turn our backs
upon those Sirens, stopping our ears against the songs, and counsels, devices,
secrets, that by the wicked witty, the demure in hypocrisy, the knowing in
disobedience, are laid any way, to debar us from the regular path of Gods
revealed will; in persuance of enjoying that blessed sight, which is in the
star light of a promise, offered to us, how difficult soever it may seem, to
flesh and blood, leaving the politic and carnal to their Interrogatories,
their Questions, their fears their scruples, what may be? what shall be? rather
then what is to be done? things; which is to be feared in our days, have made
our Lord to go further from us then he was once, dare I name that place to be,
in Egypt?

HEROD'S Hypocrisy made him promise adoration, his timidity made him search and
ask, not where the King of the Jews, but where Christ should be born? the
Question to the Jews is made in private, by the Gentiles it is made in public,
the reply represents and infers the Jews to have answered, where our Savior,
not where their's was to be born, because they believed not in him, nor
rejoiced at his birth* nor traveled to his lodging; and at this day for
unbelief they are a scattered people through the earth, still beholding that
faith published, and gloried in, unto which they are enemies, which no doubt
adds to their torture shame, despondency and grief* having neither Temple*
Priest, nor sacrifice of their own, as other Nations, yea hardly retaining
their name, but by a few absurd and ridiculous ceremonies, for which being
derided by all Nations, and accounted murderers, Jesus being deemed innocent,
increases their astonishment, and is reckoned by Travelers, the formal cause
of that pregnancy or rather subtility of wit, which proverbialy, is applied
unto them, their Religion putting them under a general odium, they are driven,
to help them-selves by base shifts, whereby bandyting themselves against the
rest of mankind, they are better studied in malice and mischief, then other
men, for which each Vizier, and Basha of state in Turkey, keeps a Jew of his
privy Council, by whose malice, wit, experience, intelligence, it is thought
most of that mischief is contrived, which is executed upon Christendom; yet at
the same time, that Jew is so hated, that would I might die a Jew, if this be
so, is one great curse in Turkey, and he dare not, yea cannot become Turk,
unless first Christ be acknowledged, a true Prophet, which still must edge his
envy, and more ferment his spite.

IT is said one of these Magi was a Black Moor, and master-painter, limns
accordingly; but I shall not swear to the truth hereof, yet there can be no
danger to maintain to such who credit the report, that in our addresses unto
Christ, the outward appearance, the difference of, or about things external,
the clearness of the souls knowledge, or doubtings in the bosom, blackness of
the soul, contracted by fear and horror, or dwelling in the torrid zone of
persecution, affliction, or desertion, as it ought not to deter from the
embracements of our Lord, in the house of the Church, so neither in others,
should it represent any cause, of interrupting their well intended progress,
in those religious duties, of prostration, or adoration, since the Savior of
the world is an Advoca^ with the Father, speaking peace, and shall accept of
their attendance before the throne, in good and comfortable words; as be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven, whereby they shall not only be clothed in
white, but like David have a goodly and ruddy countenance, that is, be well
favored, in the serenity of a good conscience, marching forward toward their
own, because desired, country, with as large strids of zeal affection and
discourse; as amply how, and which way their service was accepted, prayers
heard, doubts cleared, as any of them whose complexion, (i. e.) whose soul, at
first setting out, was of a more amiable color, or allureing temper.

ARE there not persons, who with the Scribs can readily inform where Christ
should be born, and that he is to be believed upon in faith working by Love;
can talk of the Kingdom of God; tasting the powers of the world to come? by
many fathoms go deeper, in the speculative parts of Divinity, speaking as if
they had seen the Trinity, talked with God, first take wing; and then flee, out
of the sight of ordinary capacities, pronounceing words in talents of election,
the Sons mission, Antichrists destruction* yet in the mean time as great
strangers from true worshippers, as the black Ethiopian (yea perhaps more)
whose Divinity may be is no higher then the star light of dim nature, dictating
unto them an, unknown God, whom yet knowingly they might worship; And should we
meet with these men, we might with the Magi get a true answer and sound
direction, burdensome enough also, yet with the Magi again, must serve him
with solitary devotion, those Pharisees refusing, to touch the enjoined load
with one of their fingers, that is, in the least, to walk according to those
impositions they in a pretended strictness recommend to others.

IN all Zedekia's Court, there was none pleaded for, nor pitied Jeremiah; in
the Dungeon, but the black Emedm^lek only, the star was unseen to the Magi,
while in Jerusalem, yet none of Jerusalem goes to worship, but they of Persia
only, whose gifts when baby Jesus received, he might have said, what afterward
he did, in riper years, Verily, I have not found so great Faith, no not in
Israel; the forementioned pretenders to Sanctity like the Scribs resting upon
notional acquaintance with things divine, pursue their own particular; and in
the end conclude their peace, not once going forth to negotiat for, or seek
after, the pearl of price, contained in Christ, and in his merits; and it is to
be feared, that young Indian Christian, in the story, ( I call him young,
because but two years old in Christianity) who being asked what sin was?
answered, It is a continual sickness in my heart, shall condemn thousands, that
wonderfully can expatiat upon, it is being a transgression of the Law.

FIND we not ignorance, attended with fervid desires, of knowledge, in the
Magi? where is he say they who is born King of the Jews? which is yet
infinitely preferable to the knowledge of the Jews, attended with supine
sloth, being but a key they put in the hand of others, for opening a door of
Salvation; yet not offering to turn the same for their own entrance into
bless, discovering as the Angel to Hagar the fountain of life to others, yet
dying of a desperate drought themselves; happy these pilgrims, though not
knowing, yet asking where their Lord lay? happy the ignorance of those infants
that dyed for him; yet inquired not after him, but cursed be that knowledge,
that can, as a statue, demonstrate the way to the city of refuge; yet stand
still, or as the Gnomen on a dyal show how the Sun moves, yet still remain
fixed to the plate; in Jerusalem the Prophets speak are heard, and understood,
but not obeyed, in Susa the star is seen, and followed, knowing more by, and
fearing more for, that, then they by the other, fulfilling that of the Prophet,
For that which had not been told them, shall they see, and that which they had
not heard, shall they consider, Isa. 52.15.

INDEED they had considered so well, that they question not of Christ's being
born, though they found him not in Jerusalem, the likliest place, in the whole
world for to find the King of the Jews, the City of the great King, and justly
now expected to have been the joy of the whole Earth, their old Kings being
dead, strangers ruleing, and a King of their own country born, and in it, among
them, unto them, and not to be found in Jerusalem? is strange! and yet it is not
strange, to see Adams Sons, when leaning to their own understanding in finding
out, or searching after, the marrow, contained in the cavity of things
mysterious, to be as it were befooled, the plain Shepherds in Bethlehem,
instructed from above, had broke this bone where is he? and saved much cost,
care, and it may be lives, for that Jerusalem had been a city of blood, that
it is temple was profaned, that the Law was corrupted, and in a word, that true
Piety was banished it is gates, that Bethlehem Ephrata, where David was anointed
the second time, South of Jerusalem was to be the place of the nativity was not
clear, or it may be, not known; but that he was born they knew, and that he was
not heeded they wondered, where is he?

Condemning the Jews, that being subjects to others ( for it was in the days of
Herod the King) should know nothing of their own King, whom they, though
strangers came to worship, let Herod be troubled, or the Synedron either whom
likely they went first unto, they say we are come from the east to worship your
King, and as unwearyed we are still upon search, you that are wise, and
understand these things, where is he? and knowing where delays not, the
meannesse of the house, the poorness of the furniture; yea the meannesse of
the dress, staggering them not into unbelief, and really, it is faith in the
truths of God, that holds out longest, and only unbelief makes men blind,
neither now nor then is the union of the Gentiles to the Tribs yielded unto,
(which might be one motive for the Scribs not to travel with the Magi) or that
Jesus is the Christ, though Moses be read every Sabbath in their synagogue, in
which they read Moses to Mary an Ethiopian woman, that Iaphet must dwell in the
tents of Sem, though in Abraham all the nations of the Earth were to be
blessed, Melchisedeck to be priest of the most high God, though Rahab the
Harlot was saved, and converted at Jericho, though Iethro was Father in Law to
Moses, though Moses spoke of a Prophet, and speaks of the Scep^ers departing
from Judah, which it was, when these men came from the east for Herod was King,
and that Christ was that Melchisedeck read of in the Synagogue, offering in
Bethlehem, the house of bread; the bread of life, and not of that in Judah, but
of that in Ephrata, (i. e.) fruitfulness, having store of all fruits, and what
if I say of the Vine, to offer them as Melchisedeck; if they will encounter the
Kings of their lusts; the reigning of sin within them; but all these will not
do, they, yet remaining under the darkness of infidelity, which is the shadow
of death, especially when attended with tenebrous and dark calamities, which
every where befalls them, yet not beholding this star, this Gospel, which is
his star, newly created, differing in cleanness, nearness, and in motion from
all lights, the ordinances, which God ever gave his Church.

AS Moses with them, so Christ, is daily taught in our streets, and whereas we
ought thereby to grow warm in our desires, after the sense, and virtue, of the
doctrine, in receiving the Holy Ghost, it is suspected, were the question put,
the known answer would be returned, we have not so much as heard if there be
any Holy Ghost, that is, heeded, or felt, what those gifts are, whereof the
Holy Ghost is inspirer, which verily is the ground of all our sinful debaurds*
(viz) our unbelief, leaving off heavenly matters, if not acquired by a wish, a
look, hearing may be half a Sermon for a whole one, is thought infallibly to do
it; yea some tarrying at home dreaming as Pilats wife, waking, give good
directions, thinking all as true Revelations, what their fancy, malice or
prejudice, can suggest, as was that of the Wise Men to return to their own
Country, concludes their salvation to be sealed, not considering that their
wisdom, made them travel onward, embraceing difficulties cheerfully, and that
they saw not the star, until they left Jerusalem, and that they had no vision
in their sleep, until they had sought out Christ, diligently, when they were
awake: so that in earnest, that text, which most of all, grounds the Jew in his
incredulity, and what they, stick most unto, in their malice against the
Gospel, (viz.) neither did his brethren believe on him; may be by them,
Atheistically urged but neither do his followers believe on him; and to our
shame may be a dead stroke, to the point, for which they press the former.

WE read that Simeon had revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should not
die, until he saw the Lords Christ, the occasion of which revelation, we find
to be this, (vi.) He doubting of the truth of that Prophesy, A Virgin shall
bring forth a Son, an angel stood by, assureing his not tasting of Death,
until he saw the accomplishment of that truth, whereof he scrupled; not to
comment upon the story, it is sure, that inadvertence, idleness, and sloth, in
things spiritual, are not attended with the knowledge of sacred Mysteries,
Daniel saw the vision, and searching for the meaning; Gabriel was sent to cause
him understand, when the Angel appeared to the Shepherds, they were keeping
their flocks, and the star appeared to the Wise Men, at first employing their
gifts for advance in learning, God deals often with men in their own way* God
gave Hezekia a sign from the Sun it is given out, he was a great student of the
Mathematics, the second time the star was seen they were upon their journey,
in Jerusalem they saw it not, there is time, and place wherein Christ is
inquired, after, and not found, to seek consolation, in things terrene, is to
seek the living among the dead, or as Joseph, and Mary, among their kinsmen and
acquaintance; some seek him as Herod, to destroy him, to many we may say, ye
ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to bestow it on your lusts, there
is, place and time wherein Christ is to be sought and found; Mary sought him,
and found him, in the Temple, yet she was at pains three days; the woman found
him in the garden, yet they sought him with tears, Zacheus sought to see and
found him on the Sycamour, yet he sought him with care, and our Wise Men sought
for him with care, hazard, zeal, love, and cost, and found him.

FIRST let us know our selves to be Magi, Wise Men, own and know our selves to
be but MEN, that is, flesh, such as have separated from God, worshipping
stocks, and stones, and given over to direful lusts; next, let us come from the
east, with Abraham, Isai. 41, preferring Christ to country, kindred, despising
gems, riches, and costly Jewels, chiefly to be found in the east, which as soft
beds ^ull the Soul asleep, making flesh contemn the invitations Christ makes
for entrance and do this betimes, at the sun rising of our days; Mary Magdalen
came about the sun rising, saw the sepulcher, not her Lord; and being there
were several of these Wise Men, let us learn the benefits of religious
Associats, for where two or three are gathered together to seek, he will be
found; but our meeting must be in peace for they came, and they came together,
and they came together to Jerusalem, the vision of peace, for only when we are
in peace, he will come and speak peace, saying, be not afraid I am Jesus whom
ye seek.

OBSERVE there is not a state, or condition, wherein man can fall, but Christ
has been discovered and in it found, as in a married estate, under which he
was born, though not by it, in a Virgin estate, in which he was born, in a
studious estate, for he was found among the Doctors, in an Artificer or
handycraft estate, so he was often found with Joseph at an honorable treat, so
he was by Mary Magdalen, in a crowd, or pent up, in a throng so by Zacheus in a
Garden, so by the woman, in poverty, so by the Shepherds, in any place in
Judea, in Egypt, among the Samaritans, and lastly in the house, the poor house,
the despised house, as by the Magi, yet still as condemning idleness, and
exciting to diligence, he was found of them that sought after him.

WE have seen his star in the east (say the Magi) but whether they in the east
saw it over Jerusalem, or over themselves in the east, or if it was an Angel as
a star, or a star and a Child in it, is not worthy of search, or refutation,
for it is, we have seen, and are come, exemplifying promptness, that with Lot
we should not linger, when by some secret inspiration, we are warned of
removeal, as Lot did, when advised to leave Sodom, but as Simeon, when the
spirit excits to enter the temple, remembering also Lots wife, seasoning our
selves by her salt, that corruption being exsic^at in our mortal bodies, we may
go forward, in our spiritual progress, at the removing of the Ark, or moving
of the cloud, it is motion being not for satisfying of our sight, but for
putting forward our feet; not to stand by, but to follow after (i. e.) these
Wise Men until we see our Lord, and who shall by the noise of the worlds
confusion. Jerusalems trouble, or by the beauty of g^udy pictures, of appearing
benefits, slight the powerful documents of the Gospel, despise the beautiful
face of an amiable Jesus, will be condemned by these Philosophers, who in duty
set their face as though they would go to Jerusalem, not fearing the wrath of
the King, though enquiring after another then he, or Augustus either, though
over the Jews they had made themselves Kings, whereas he whom they seek was a
King born, and exceeding Sapores of Persia who yet was crowned in the belly,
the crown being set upon his Mothers womb, for suppressing faction, but this,
was a King, and so conceived, and therefore named, before he was conceived in
the womb, had a star, to indicat his regality, which they call his star as
being deputed for that office, others, being made for times, and seasons, yet
this, for this time, to shine, to move, to stand, according as our progress
toward him advances, or is impeded, and when that is done, to withdraw it is
shining;

NO ways giving countenance to these two-peny, I mean Mercenary Astrologers,
who pretend from the stars, to judge the futurity of events, depending not so
much upon natural causes, as reasons, and deliberat consultation, seconded by
providence, assisting, or mar^ing the design, it were no puzzeling question, to
demand if the Magi by this star ordained to signify our Lords Nativity Solely,
knew or foresaw our Lords crosses, temptations, poverty slights, melancholy, so
to speak, since we read of his weeping, (not of his laughing) torture, death,
burial, etc. The probability of the contrary being so evident, or apparent:
This is not spoken to disgrace that noble Art, whether Astronomy, or Astrology,
being persuaded that the stars are both for seasons, and signs, and works on
this inferior world by natural qualities, and operations, as our herbs do
growing in our garden, known to the learned Phisician, in their virtue, upon
man; yet as this pours no honor on the head of cheating Mountebanks, or
Empericks, so nor the other, upon them whose covetousness, ambition,
arrogance, or other selfish interest, has made them pry into acts of Kings,
Counsels, Armies, and as they desired, have made the heavens speak, to the
discredit of the Ingenious Artist, and could they blush to their own confusion,
we are sure, to their scorn and reproach we have seen this star-gazer so often,
to erect Schemes, for such different purposes, with different tones, unskilful
prophesies, that laying him aside, let us worship GOD in love, reverence and
fear, as the Magi.

THIS King, we have not the star of his birth; that evanishing the sun of
righteousness himself, shining with meridian luster, in ordinances, and means,
yet no industry in the work of God, among us, but contemning Religion,
revileing piety, scandalously by cleaving to the earth, refusing to eye the
heavens, though the signs of the Son of Man, be come, wars, and rumors of wars,
scarce faith on the Earth, and the love of many waxing cold. These men of the
east shall rise up against us, and condemn us, who it may be repented, at the
preaching of this single Star, and arising from their bed, awakeing as men out
of sleep, came and worshipped.

WHAT more? all here is Mysterious Christ being born in Bethlehem, which is
supposed to be the center, or middle part of the earth, that the virtue of the
Son of Man might be more regularly diffused to the Circumference of the utmost
bounds of the glob, and he again to be their object, as equally near as equally
dear, uniting in him, who is called the desire of all nations, the impulse or
star leading to the house, is that lively* and heavenly gift of Faith, by which
the serious, and industrious, shall be led for embraceing of saveing truths, the
Air, heavens, or firmament, in which that star was, and the star it ^elf again,
speaking as it were with a tongue Christ to be born, is the Church, and the
Prophets, Apostles Ministers thereof created, that is, qualified, for that end
( viz.) edifying of the Church, until she come, to the stature of Jesus
Christ. The Ethnic Magi honoring Christ more then, and far above, the Jew,
tipifys the amplitude of the Gentiles conversion, and prognostics, it shall be
more then that of the Jew, Herod's slaughtering of the infants to the number of
an hundredth forty four thousand, (not to be thought incredible in so populous
a place as Judea) though others shrink this full mouthed number, into fourteen
thousand, where of his own son was one, man^festly shows the Devils rage, his
emissaries fury* against the Church of God, and of his Christ in all ages, yet
as Christ was preserved in Idolatrous Egypt (in which by the by, it is said the
Idols fell at his entry) so shall his Gospel out live all heathen vanities,
Christianity, at last, enjoining all Idolatry, as holy Alexander in the
Tripartit did the Pagan Philosopher at Constantinople, who preparing to
dispute, was charged thus in the name of the Lord Jesus, I command thee to be
silent, and the Philosopher immediately was mute, so great shall be the force of
truth, of Christian verity.

THE Magi were Wise Men, Kings say some, Ambassadors from Kings, say others,
how ever good-men, and who perceives not, that not Manners with Wickams motto,
but Religion makes the man, the profane having, but an external sign of Man
hood, a Fool, a Madman, as beside himself, for though Reason make a man with
the Philosopher, Honor with the Herald, yet Religion is all in all with God
and good men, hence these are called Wise Men.

WHEN the Magi entered the house, they found says the Holy Ghost the Child and
his Mother; it cannot be granted to them, who thinks, there was a good
providence here, that Joseph was absent, least he should have been taken for
the Child's Father; since that same Spirit, that revealed so great a matter, and
inspiring them in so high a way, as to adore him, did in likly-hood forestale
any such surmise, yea possibly every punctilio of the conception, might not be
revealed to them and so her Virginity not thought upon, for the scruple about
the Father, might have come in their heads whether Joseph was present or no;
the Mother may be only named here, as in other places afterward, she being
indeed real mother to Christ; Joseph not named, not from his absence, but as
having no relation to that Child before whom they fell, and worshipped, first
next opening their Treasures, presented unto him Gold, Frankincense and Myrhe.

THAT which is here called worship, is in our civil adoration called homage;
which in Scripture language is Kissing of the Son, and unto Kings, is a symbol
of subjection, acknowledged here above customary salutations, exceeding all
court-ceremony, being a paying of homage to Divinity and respects both soul and
body, adoring the Word, in flesh, wisdom in infancy, the truth of the Deity,
truly in humanity, the blessed Lord hideing these things from the wise and
prudent, who at the birth of a King, had looked for pompuous trains, splendid
attendance, stately lodgings, ravishing music, but these men had not so
learned Christ, falling down, giveing ( as is the custom yet in Eastern
countries) head and knee, hand, eye, and love, zeal, and true adoration,
preferring him to themselves, their learning, their possessions, presenting
with some of the fruits of their land, as Gold, and Frankincense and Myrhe.

THE two last being plentifully offered to God under the law, which being now
finished, the reserve, and store, is returned to Christ, there being no more
offering for sin upon the altar; but the Gold, typifies their trampling upon
secular, or worlely wealth, in comparison of those riches they had acquired by
his advent, which proceeded not from inspection into glasses, books, or maps;
but from heavens inspiration, that giving the sign, gave also the thing
signified, the Myrhe which preserves the dead from putrefaction; offered to
him, is in the Mystery acknowledging both ours, and their hoped for
Resurrection, to proceed from him alone; Gold the price of our Redemption, to
be told down by his satisfaction, and righteousness, the incense (a perfume
used in sacrifice with both Jews and Heathens) given to him; shadoweth
abolishment of all legal offerings* and diabolical services, that he (viz.)
Christ may be all in all.

A King they asked for, a King they found, and like unto a King they offered,
Herod said seek (not the King but) the Child and I will worship him, in scorn
at them, in scorn of him, yet willing to secure himself a Christ* being to be
born, Go seek and I will worship but just as Iehu would worship Baal, these
sought the young Child, the King of the Jews, found the young King at which
God, made them old in knowledge, they giving gold to him, as a King, Incense,
they knowing him to be a Priest, Myrhe they saw him to be a Prophet, Gold they
gave him because he was great, incense, because he was God, and Myrhe for they
knew him to be a man. To have brought gold only, his mothers poverty
considered, had caused men to suspect her supply; had only been regarded, or at
most his education, but Myrhe and Incense, intuats that his paternal eradiation
is concerned, yet all the three a help to their indigency in going down to
Egypt, for in all the highest matters of heavens acquisition, the necessities
of men, may be turned upon, and behold, and then it is our duty to relieve them.

AMONG the Persians it was thought dishonorable to salute, and therefore there
was a Law, against, accosting, the King without a present, whereby to procure
his friendship, or his Grace, wherefor one Sinetes, in travel meeting
Artazarxes, and having nothing, ran to the river Cyrus filling both his hands
with water as being at that time the readiest present, which the King caused to
be received from him in a golden cup then, and sent afterward to him greater
presents, as a persian Vest, a golden cup, wherewith to bring water always from
the river so acceptable are presents, that they even reconcile an Esaw to a
Jacob and makes the Queen of the south more acceptable to Solomon, which these
men knew, and from their own country custom offered, yet led by a higher law,
having either heard of or read, or inspired with that law of God, commanding
none to appear before him empty handed, Exodus 23. prompting the Magi to obey,
and in them gives order, against uncharitable devotion.

THREE gifts are mentioned, if it be questioned, whether all gave three, or
each one, one to allow in this the wise men's number to be three it is sure they
either had particular treasures, or then several treasures for all in one,
which were first closed, then opened, Faith closed up in the heart, without
confession of the mouth, being of no avail; but that each one g^ve for himself,
may be drawn (with some) from the gifts given, they shadowing in him, the union
of God, and Man, which each one particularly believed, as also the three
persons of the Trinity, and if delivered by one to the Baby Jesus, makes the
heart reflect upon their unity among themselves, Christ's three fold office of
King Priest and Prophet, being also believed by each, has some influence for
this belief, they worshipping whole Christ all of Christ, first in body they
fell down next in mind they worshipped, thirdly, in goods, they presented unto
him.

GOLD the best of metals, and most respected, and which loses nothing in the
fire, earthy its true it is, but if well managed, can be beat out, unto a
heavenly length, and to be parted withal, when Christ's poor members are in
want: yet remember, it is a proper gift for a King, therefore offered here with
worshipping, for until we depart from evil, by fearing the Lord, our alms, and
charity cannot be accepted frankincense used in sacrifice to God, and so
necessary for perfumeing, that the prayers of the Saints in the Revelation
Chap. 8. are said to be sweetened thereby, and Cornelius prayers, and Alms came
up together, for a memorial before God, Myrhe, a bettrr yet conserving gum,
used in enbalming of the dead, and prayer, when attended with mortification of
flesh, is then most savory, and sweet, it is as it were the tears of a tree,
woozed out, and how prevalent Piters bitter tears were woozing from the
bitterness of his heart, is known yet each Wise Man had all these three, or
the most part of the Ancients are out of the way; and in the assurance of our
Saviors Divinity, Humanity his Priesthood, Prophetic, and Regal office, each
believer for himself, must offer up, to him, and for him, praise, prayer, and
Alms; the ointment of Myrhe in holy and brotherly communion, that being given
in charity to the dead the incense of a sweet and innocent report, which we ow
to our liveing brother, the gold of a bright, pure, and shineing conscience,
which we ow to our great Creator King of all the earth.

FINALY by gold, understand thy self exorted to rejoice in, and love God, for
the good things he has performed toward thee, by incense, religious
thankfulness, for the good he has prepared for thee, by Myrhe unfeigned
sorrow, for what evil has been done by thee, the sincerity whereof is best
discovered, if thou separat thy self from sinners, and thy life from bloody
men, in not returning to thy old companions or sinful counselors, as the Magi
did not to Herod, nor liveing in thy old path of vicious courses, as they
returned another way (I shall not say, lodging in caves, and dens, for fear of
Herod) into their own Country, the birth of him whom they visited in it^s
purity, innocence, harmless simplicicy, persuading to temperance, and the Magi
as the first fruits of the Gentiles by their gifts, in coming and going,
inforceing retiredness from carnal ease; sinful sloth, cruel intentions
reverent actions, Religious obedience, which once acquired by pains in study,
prayer, and meditation, with practice, though but with star light, yet until
we see him who is invisible, we shall have Angels (not to say dreams as the
Magi had) to direct us from hurting others, or our selves, growing in
familiarity with God as they also did being afterward baptized by S. Thomas,
one who could as sensibly assure them, of our Lords Passion and Resurrection as
they him, of his Nativity, and being born, of all which being well persuaded,
they proved instrumental in saveing the Souls of many, in their own country as
the Eunuch after them is also said to do) preaching the truth of that Jesus,
whom they sought, and savingly found, according to that promise, he made to
his, They that seek me early shall find me.

CONCERNING the death of these Wise Men we have not any probability in record,
but the reported death, the cost, care, diligence used by Queen Helene, in
getting, yea gathering of their bodies, bringing them unto Constantinople, for
honorable sepulture, there translation afterward to Millain, their removeal
the third time, to Colen, whence Vulgarly they are called the three Kings of
Colen, being there worshipped, with great reverence and pilgramages, made unto
them, by the ignorant, and superstitious has no Mystery, save that of
Iniquity, and of lying Vanity, therefore not of our province; being also
persuaded, were the bones, or dust, of these Magi there, and could speak, they
would be so good, so Wise as to say to their simple worshipers, Dearly beloved
flee from the Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.14.

IN the Kingdom of France of old, an order of Knighthood was institute, called,
of the Star, which in the days of Charles the seventh, became contemptible, the
Honor becomeing dishonorable, being given to pages, yeoman of the guard, and
other attendants; so that the Knights laid asside the badge, and cognizance of
the Star, whereupon the order evanished; the Magi in a holy, and respectfull
sense, might be termed of the Star; but Religion in Gospel preaching having
descended unto the poor, many great in their own esteem (as the Jews repineing
at the Gentile) shifts off devotion to their Chaplain, and servants menial; and
in a distinguishable sense, is it not sadly visible, that the poor have the
Gospel preached unto them? great men* landed men Wise men, or men ( for any
thing) of renown, gilding their sword, garnishing their board, embroidering
their apparel, as if birthright, nobility and gallantry, did ipso facto, and
of it self, qualify for glory; piety, and religion, in the mean while, exposed
to nakedness, and contempt, bleeding, and trod-underfoot, as injurious unto (
because debasing) greatness, and suiting rather the Tenants, then the
Landlords habitation, whose revenue provyding, against course fair, hard beds,
shifts off prayer, reading, holy living, as inept guests, or complemented with
a dinner, and then farewell.

UPON this score, not many wise, after the flesh, not many mighty not many
noble, are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. yet because their are not many, it would seem,
their are some mighty and some noble called, wherefore freeing your souls from
this abuse, embrace holiness as an honorable inmate as the Crown embellishing
al your virtues, the preservative of al your excellencies, the engine, mean, or
instrument, to augment your fortunes, enlarge dominions, dignifie your issue,
protect your dwellings, guard your persons, secure your consciences, and
acquire glory, for Godliness has the promise, and the sinner will die accursed.

THE Natural Sons of the Kings of Spa^n, by law are never to enter the gates of
Madrid, Don John, (as we read) was never nearer it, then a league, the court
leaving the palace, that that mighty Austian, might be capable to give a visit
to his Catholic Majesty; as if their were so black a stain, or so thick a
fiber, somewhere in that great body, that royal blood could not so encircle the
person, as to nobiliat, and on all quarters, in all parts, properly make him,
his Highness, his Serene Highness; just so it is with wickedness, and
unbelief, no gold can beautify it, no silver adorn it, nor throne, honor it
nor greatness make it, or the breast in which it lodges, to be capable to see
the face of God, or admit it to his holy Habitation.

INDEED God condescends so far, as to descend to sinners and by them may be
visited, and spoak withal, in the acts of his worship and temple of his Son, as
Christ, was beheld by the Magi, but so, as we find not first, and second; he as
Death* making no difference between Rich, and poor, High and low, and if any,
it is to the poorest, (that is) in Spirit, all before, and in comparison of
him, being but dust, and ashes, and he who is loosest upon the earth (that is
puffed up) is because such, soonest, and easiest blown away; all epithets
declairing greatness, being unsuccesfull* fading, and evanishing, as smoke,
from the tunnels of their own well furnished kitchins: known it seems to Joan
Queen of Spain who gave on a glob a moulting peacock with Vanitas encircled, as
if all earthly glory, without the coronet of Sanctity, and piety, were but like
the splendour of that fowl and beauty of his train, which a rainy day, will
cause to disappear, and a warm spring (a small calamity) shall make the prey of
any baser born, scattering them in the path, of this world's contingencies, to
adorn the cap's, of it may be their own Skip-Jacks, followers, and footmen.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS OR THE MYSTERY OF OUR LORDS CROSS Unfolded, and applied.
Passion-Friday, April 1. High Church, 1670. Good Friday, April 1. High Church,
1670.

PSALM. CX.VII. He shall drink of the Brook in the way, therefore shall he lift
up his head.


WE read of a Holy Man* whose library being ill stored, furnished himself
richly, with store of Literature, by serious revolving, upon the matter
contained in three books; whose leaves were of different colors; one whit,
wherein he was directed, to walk, talk, and do, conform to that favor,
patience, long suffering, God had exercised toward him; another was black,
representing, the formidable number, and sad consequence, of his infinite, and
multiplied transgressions; the third was, red which to his affections
passionatly discovered, the great secret, of the wisdom of the Love of God,
toward, and for his Soul, in contriving the death of his Son, whose blood as
the Red Sea destroying the Egyptians of his lust, made him both rejoice, and
weep.

IN which meditation, holy men of old as they were moved by the holy Ghost,
(nothing being more us^ful, necessary, comfortable, mysterious, then the
knowledge of Christ and him Crucified) were much conversant, and among them
David is eminent in many places, particularly in this Psalm, pointing both at
Calvery, and Olivet for he shall Drink, and then he shall lift up the head,
which expresses a trium^h, a Trophe after a victory, and fight he must, for he
shall strick through Kings, and fill the places with dead bodies, ver 5.6. which
cannot be done without some loss of blood unto himself, which eventually,
shall procure honor, and that for ever, the Lord saying to my Lord that is to
David, yet in the Mystery unto David's Lord, Christ, sit thou on my right hand
until I make thine enemies thy footstool, the Father giving him not only the
right, but the Act of dominion, judging, governing all things, until Devils,
Belialists, Heretics, Shismaticks, Antichrists, and every evil work be dashed
in pieces, the fathers grandor not being ecclipsed by this donation, he
reigning in the Son, and remaining in that account, still Lord, also by him for
ever, his sweating, bleeding, dying, burying, serving but as medicine, to
evacuat his holy body of humors, and disposing him to rest; after which, as a
Giant refreshed with wine, he shall rise out of sleep, and smit his enemies in
the hinder parts, making them a shame unto themselves, in uncovering their
fo^lies, before the whole creation, and in the sight of Angels of men,
contumeliously causing them smart, for their heart enormities, when he shall
after his drinking lift up his head.

AFLICTION is in general compared to water and bearing of the CROSS to
drinking, and the measure providentialy alloted for each creature, may be
pertinently expressed by a cup of which it is decreed by heaven* all must drink,
though not all alike, the dregs of the cup of Tribulation, being appointed for
the wicked: Psalm. 75. Let the Jews therefore this day fret, curse, murmur, in
their carnal way, (...) a pompuous Messiah, while the more spiritualized, exalt
the name of Jesus who as another Paschal lamb, was on this day slain, in the
evening of the world, before as another Moses he could deliver us, from hels
Pharoh, and sins slavery. Now the waters of Noah are falling, and we are to
enter, into the wooden ark of his CROSS, the blood of this our Abel, slain by
his brethren, calling, and inviting us, to expect, and enjoy, better things
from which, though the Tribs run; Let us run to seek him; and know where he is
laid, to carry him into the more proper sepul^ure of hearts and consciences.

HE shall drink is prophetical, and in the Gospel accomplishment it is* that he
gave up the Ghost, that he was bruised in Genesis, or that he washed his
clothes in the blood of the grap, with Jacob, is with the Evangelist, his drops
of blood. Adams coat, made him of the skin; of those beasts killed for
sacrifice, is in the mystery, robs of righteousness made by faith in the
merits of his death, for die he must, since Isaac was offered and upon a tree,
for Adam says, if inquired, he eat of the tree; Abraham will testify, that he
must bear his own CROSS, for Isaac bore the wood, Jacob assures, he must die in
the open field, for there, he saw the ladder, and visions of God, he must be
nailed, and then lifted up, upon the CROSS for Moses lifted up the Serpent
upon a Pol, he must be sold, at a small price for Zachary saw him vallued, he
must die among thieves, for he was numbered among transgressors, he was also to
ly in Joseph's tomb for he made his grave with the Rich, Isa. 53. He shall,
shows futurity (i. e.) that it was to be done, and let the mystery of the
bloody Sacrifices be vewed, this draught is foretold, yea the rites of the
heiser. Numb. 19. respects the sublime work of Christ's death, and if Matthew be
inquired, he saw all this done, nay himself, and Moses, spoke of what he should
suffer at Jerusalem.

YET let none expound this shall, as denoting compulsion, or hinting coaction,
as though he did not consent, for though by F^ther let this cup pass from me,
he seem to savor himself, and to plead from fear, from infi^mity; yet not my
will but thine be done, is from the spirit, the first instructing what he was
to suffer, even terrible things in this red sea, the other what we ought to do,
when encountering hazard, even embrace them, saying welcome be the will of God,
not repineing, or starting back, from the burden, so as with the Romans to
have us goaded forward, as unwilling of the CROSS, or pricked to march on, as
slaves were, whence that phrase, to kick against the pricks but cheerfully, to
undergo, what God thinks fit to lay upon us, for though there was a necessity,
that Christ should die, in respect of the intended end, for our redemption, and
of the Father, in respect of Justice, against sin, and as Christ, before as
man, he could enter into glory, yet still not my will, but thine be done: is a
strong reserve against all objections, proveing, he was not dispirited in
himself, but teaching us his Disciples, least raveings and despair in cups of
adversity, should cause a disrelishment of the sweetness, kindness, and good
things of God.

THE Father says, he shall, the Son says, I will: for a man's consent was
appended to his sin, so must his Saviors assent, be obtained for it is
remission, as it was, not only in the garden, but in the manger, all the parts,
and changes of his life, being but as so many little deaths, or draughts,
before his large one upon the CROSS, a potion, which he saw prepared and
appointed in all it is ingredients* and yet not withstanding drank of it, giving
his back to the smiter, saying to the Traitor what thou do die quickly, the
words not of a desperate, but of a prepared man, even so Father, because it
seemed good in thy sight.

THE Scripture speaks of his flying from place to place, yet not fear of dying,
but care to die, at his hour, is to be understood an unwillingnesse to work
miracles at man's pleasure, that is, at man's lust; and that precept, arise take
the young Child and his Mother, and flee into Egypt, to pass the application
thereof unto that law, thou shall not sees a Kid in his Mothers milk, Exodus
23.18 if he were not to be killed young, the charge insinuats a pilgrimage,
rather then a flight, for out of Egypt was GOD to call his Son, and that his
escape from other place was not principled from fear, is deducible from this,
that afterward he chused to die more shamefully, publicly and more
tormentingly, then any death formerly his enemies had forecasted; he resolving
to die, not by necessity, debility or weakness, these having no hand in his
death, as his loud cry at his yielding up of the Spirit clears; discovering
such a degree of divine virtue, that the Centurion impungs all proffers,
enervats all accusations, in this one truth, truly this was the Son of God.

WE read of some, who could sleep when they pleased, and wake at the same time,
as Henry the 4 of France but Christ can die when he will; and until he will, he
will not, passing through the midst of his haters, and escapeing, he having
only power to lay down his life, and at his own appointed time laid it down.

HENCE it is not to be inferred, that he was not killed by the Jews, for it is a
truth he was, though not as other men, in whom things natural, are not subject
to the will, as the conjunction or separation of the soul, with the body, for
then is a man said to be killed, or murdered, when that is done or suffered,
which in it self, and in nature did, or naturally does, produce that which is
called death; Now Christ had a will in spite of his enemies, to cede, or not,
to yield to death, as he pleased; but because they put upon him such apt means
of destruction, and tendencies to dissolution, it pleased him to yield unto
death, having really suffered so much, as in nature might have procured death,
in them who were purely natural; and mee^ men therefore dyed he, before the
thieves, because he would, therefore also before the thieves, because he had
suffered by watching, fasting* it is possible bleeding, (since we read not of
their removeing the thorny crown) his scorning also, and reproach, adding to
his langour and in Pilat's wonder, Hastening his death; before their's, so that
with Stephen, it is to be attested, that they, viz. the Jews, were of him the
just one, the betrayers, and the murderers.

THE pronown He is personally to be understood* He, that is, the Lord, the
second person, shall drink, therefore He that is, again himself God, shall lift
up his head: He that is the man, shall drink, therefore He, that is, the
Father, shall lift up his head, and in this Mystery of Godliness, of the
passion, we are not to separate, what the Father, and Spirit, has joined
together, (viz.) God and Man; confirmed by two witnesses, not called, but
compelled, he is the Son of God, said the Centurion; A just man, said Pilats
wife: which under the pain of damnation, is never to be really separat from our
creed, both being received, and both to be believed.

PILATS wife, his own disciples, were against his drinking, both of them
having pity of him, but yet he would drink having compassion for them; and
not for them only, but for the whole world; for which he was sent to lay down
his life: and as at Lazarus death, when observed to weep, it was said, behold
how he loves him, see him drinking, all may say behold how he loves it; mark
how he loves men, of which the inscription over the CROSS or tittle (on which
the Romans declaired the crime for which the party dyed) does amply discover
being in it called Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, in Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, showing the vehemence of his affection; for as all nations had heard of
his works, Pilat resolved, that each nation should know the cause of his death,
and these three languages, answering to the three famed parts of the wo^ld,
(viz) the Romans, the most powerful, because martial; the Greek, the wisest,
because most learned: the Jews the holiest, because of the Law, and the Devil
prompting to this Jesus of Nazareth for nourishing a gross error, that Jesus
was of Nazareth, whence the Messiah was not to be, but of Bethlehem, that none
in this respect should behold him as that Prophet, which was to come, and
though sometimes that expression is used, yet it is ever unto the Jews, whosoever
supposed, and expressed him that way; for all this contrivance of men Gods
intendment was, that all, of all nations should on the CROSS behold their
Savior, and that Jesus was to be their peacemaker by his blood; and this to be
reported, in the three quarters of the world, then all the world, that Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews was crucified at Jerusalem, according to the
Scriptures.

THIS riddle to unfold, veiw the sense of each word, Jesus, that is, a Savior,
for sin, a Redeemer of captives, the hopes of the exiled; the Strength of the
labourer, Enlarger of a strai^ned soul, the Cooler of a heated, and Comforter
of a galled conscience, behold him, Of Nazareth, this name was given for
fulfilling of that Scripture, He shall be called a Nazaren, Mat. 2. by
interpretation it signifies a branch, one of his names, in the old Testament,
and who was to build the temple of the Lord, by joining as living stones, the
elect of all nations, kindred, and tongues; ^s also crowned, sanctified, and
seperat before, for that holy use, showing the authority and commission, he had
to save to unite, from the Father, which was fit, since he was King, a word of
old pronounced Conning expressing his wisdom and skill to govern his subject by
known, and established Laws, and therefore not a tyrant, deserving not so much
as a censure of that people, who were Jews, Gods people, glorious in David, and
to be blessed with the whole Earth, in the posterity of Abraham, they remaining
faithful as Abraham; who believed in God, who now had accomplished his promise,
in sending that people a Prophet like unto Moses, and caused them to behold
David's Son, by which they are the more culpable in importuning his death from a
Gentile.

AT last, that cursed Nation for their cursing shall come under the Scepter of
this despised King, and worship at his holy footstool, mourning for his
wounds: for which though himself did not, yet the sun laid aside his robes of
day, clothing himself in mourning night like darkness, rocks broke and rent
assunder, because no Jew did rent his garment, at crucifying their King Mary
weep'd, (not he) what the Son of my womb, the Son of my desires, while he
boasted, and would not come down from the CROSS, but suffered from the Gentile,
by means of the Jew, what both could inflict, for the salvation of both, Jew
and Gentile, then and at aftertimes, the voice of their Brothers blood crying
still, what he did at first, Father forgive them, (i. e.) for my sake for I am
thy Son, for thy own compassion sake they being my Brethren, for according to
the flesh he was the Son of Abraham, the Hebrew, as flowing from the loins of
Heber the Son of elected Sem, he was also the Son of David the King, and so a
Jew, who was the grandson of Ruth a gentile a Moabitess, and so in fraternity
to both, by Father and Mother to Gentile and Jew was he a Brother.

PRY into his holy zeal, which for Gods house did eat him up, and how was he
straightened, and with desire desired, to eat his passover, his viaticum, his
last-food (unless the Angel even that way strengthened him) sweating, until
every thing that stood in the way of man's happiness, was removed; he not
laying down, but drinking of the brook in the way, swallowing up hels kingdom,
hasting running to destroy the works of the Devil, his redoubts and
entrenchments, yea all that both his hands in drawing to sin, and halling to
punishment could eff^ctuat, weakening the one, destroying the other, that he
should no more lead captive at his pleasure, into labor and dolor, which
Jesus here, not only beheld, but made entrance into, because of the first he
cried in David, I am poor and needy: and because of the second in Jeremiah he
sighed Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by, behold and see if there be
any sorrow like unto my sorrow which is done unto me.

YET as the Ichneumon, an Indian Rat, enemy to the Crocodile, will watch until
he sleep* and leaping into his throat, descends in^o his entrails, and eats out
it is way, through and side of that his terrible and great foe, and so destroys
him, our Jesus did enter into the jaws and through the bowels of this Devourer,
liberateth himself and all believers, allowing perfect freedom in the rest,
peace, and continual feast of a good conscience, in joy unspeakable, that they
triumph with S. Paul, over Hell, over Death, over the grave, with an, O Death I
will be thy Death, O Grave, I will be thy Destruction.

A work of great and excellent contrivance of laborious difficulties, if the
number, strength fury, policy, of adversaries be respected, and the torrent
which flowed from heaven, more imbittering the cup be considered, the
impetuousnesse of all these together toward Christ, in the word brook showing
how plentiful his sufferings were, and what store there is yet behind for
others that come after.

THERE is a cup of red wine which the ungodly must drink up Jesus drank much,
but not all, the Son of God drank deep of, but not the brook dry, yet largly of
it, for it was a brook which some will have to be a rivulet flowing more or
less with water, as the clouds more or less shall empty themselves therein,
which though not granted, yet it may be pertinently inferred, that his
suff^ings, outcryings, were more or less, as heaven less, or more, ordained
them to flow, or swell, he was silent before the Governor not terrified at,
but contemning his accusers, suffering innnocence to plead for it self, in
strong though mute oratory; but directed in servour a prayer to heaven, for
acquittance, for deliverance, for exemption, from the Death he feared,
discovering more dejection then ordinary malefactors, nay then the thieves that
dyed with him; but upon this score, that they had only men, he had Almighty
God, and omnipotence revealed from heaven to struggle withal, for neither
Pontious Pilat, nor Jew, nor Gentile, to the worlds end, dare, or can, make any
professing Jesus, to unde^go that, but which heaven has before hand determined
to be done, and when all have drunk sufficiently, the brook shall be d^yed up.

THERE is a cup of new wine the feelings of spiritual comforts, refreshing the
soul in the apprehension of the Love of God, whereof many of the Saints drink;
another of sour wine in the grief, anxiety, and soul rentings, feelings of the
horrors of accused, and accusing consciences, darkened minds, occasioned, by
the noisome vapors of sloth, lust, or uncleanness, this the penitent must
partake of; lastly there is a cup of worm wood water of suffering hard things,
doleful, calamitous, inward, and outward, perplexities, of which Jesus drank
and of which, all after him shall; because heaven has so appointed, allowing
such, and so much, to each one, as by infallible wisdom is found to be for
spiritual health, and good, which when acquired, the dregs poured forth upon
the ungodly, the Religious then, prosperously enjoying rest, being elevated
above the level of indignity, and abuse, yea attempts of Hell.

FOR the Lord said, to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, and then the Lord
said to his Church, he shall drink of the brook, for the Lord God had said, thou
shall bruise his heel, and he shall bruise thy head, after which, he shall
reign, and his enemies become his footstool, wherefore he got this
Commandment from the Father* to lay down his life, John 10. From the Father,
because he fitted him as Man, to suffer hard things, though spotless, exposing
also his naked body to the contempt, and malice of the Jews, and his harmless
soul, to the darts of his own displeasure, for that sin, which by imputation
with God, and reputation with men, he had took upon him, for he was numbered
with transgressors, that is, esteemed one of them, this commandment having
also received from the Father.

WHILE Herod, Pilat, Priests, Scribs, Pharisees, were in there stately
lodgings, palaces, and parlours, drinking wine in bowls, that is, at ease in
Sion, was Joseph's antity^ the Son of God drinking bitter water, salt water, not
from a Sea but from a river; not from a river, but a brook, muddy water as it
were rainy water, for as in life, he had not thereon to lay his head, so at
death not wherewith to satisfy his thirst, but a brook, no Tagus either, where
in is golden sand, no famed, because rich Ganges, as ^n India, nor Padus ^s in
Italy, to increase his treasure; but as he came to the world poorly, so he
leaves it again in poverty, he borrowed an Ass in the way, he lived as he dyed,
and both dyed, and lived, as he taught (viz.) blessing Religious and innocent
poverty, as that naked young man, mysteriously inculcats, Mark. 14. and if the
Gardners son, this observe is good that neither idleness, nor sloth* nor
plenty, nor abundance, was to be expected upon attendance of Christ Jesus;
Cinna of old, was poor to the utmost degree of necessity, and resolved to be
accounted the poorest, so would Christ; yet because he was a King unto whom
soft clothing is allowed, his woven vesture was singularly majestical,
indicating greatness, and recording his Godhead, that being one, and worn
above, as more noble then his garment: which some will have to sound forth his
Manhood; in both which* God has set him as a King upon his holy hill.

THERE are four brooks, celebrated in Scripture, first Iabock, where Jacob saw
almighty God face to face, Genesis 32. the word signifies to empty, or scatter,
and here Israel scattered the cloud of Esaus fury, by soft words, and emptied
his heart of rancour, by goodly presents: the second is Zered, Deuteronomy. 2. where
the Tribs made a famous pass from Kadesh Barnea the word signifies a going
down, as if men ought to descend, and search the low valleys of their deepest
thoughts, before they go up to Canaan; a third is before which David ^oorded in
his persuit after the Amalekits it signifies glad tidings or incarnation,
which indeed as relating to the Words being made Flesh, was good and ref^eshing
news, to all in heart circumcised Isralits the whole being recovered what was
took away by the Amalekits, of lust, the two wives of Jew and Gentile* lost in
Idolatry, and uncleanness: regained again, by the edge of the Lords sword, the
Lords, so that this, may be the burden of this days exercise, this is David's;
that is, Jesus spoil, 1 Samuel 30. The fourth and last is Cedron the word
imports blackness, the water whereof, rising from a mountain Southward from
Jerusalem* (...) through the valley of Iehosop^^^^, a far, and ^ruitful soil,
receiving a blackish tincture, and is less or more filled, as the weather
proves more or less rainy,

OVER this brook Christ in David crossed, when that King fled from the face of
Absalom his Son, and over it also did Jesus in person foord, when he entered
upon the last act of his passion, John 18. unto which pass, this text might
have an eye, and as the Disciples eat of the ears of corn, in the way for
hunger, I trust, it may be no heresy, to affirm the probability of Christ's
tasting the water of this b^ook in his way to Gethsemany, for thirst,
occasioned from deep resolves of an ensuing violent Death, though we read not
of it, as we read not of the literal accomplishment of that Prophesy, in the
history of his passion, I gave my back to the smiters, and cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair, Isa. 50.

BROOK then is to be expounded the floods of ungodly men, the blackness, and
darkness was brought into his very soul, by the gathering, and falling of the
many waters, of the desperate multitude, hurrying him, (as Cedron was to the
dead lake of Asphallites or cursed Sea of Sodom which God judged) to the death
of the CROSS, a cursed death of old; because on a tree, such who dying
thereon, being lifted up from the earth, as unworthy to touch it; being judged
for sin, which flowing from the tree, the tree is cursed above other deaths,
and Christ enduring the curse, must undergo the tree, by which also; now is
taken away the curse from the tree, no death since his, being accursed in it
self, the sinner being penitent. The Ground near Cedron was also accursed,
there standing the Tabernacle of Molech, as if every thing: or any thing,
relating to the death of Christ had been appointed for a curse, so ineffable
are the Mysteries of his CROSS, and horrors of his suffering, and yet his
drinking thereof: (that is, the enduring, and undergoing of them) exceedingly
pourtrays the vehemence of his desire for accomplishing man's happiness, which
all his Sermons, miracles, actings, watchings, fastings, evince, saying still,
I thirst, but at last conquered, and triumphed over the Devils and men, making
us this day to bless the Lord, in the house of the Lord, as did our elder
Brethren in the day of Iehosophat, when fighting against the Moabits and
Ammonits in this same ground, calling it Baracha that is, blessing, 2. Chro. 20.

THE curses being removed due to fallen man for sin, makes no death, to be,
though the sinner may d^, accursed, wherefore in death, the tree is, still, and
may be used, though in honor to our Savior the use of the cross, was
abolished, by Constantin the first Christian Emperor, having seen before his
famous battle with the Infidel Maxentius, in the South, a shining cross in the
air, with this inscription in hoc vince, he conquered by which the Church had
peace round about, Christ sent his Disciples two and two into every City, where
he was to come to prepare eyes, ears, and heart for his own reception that at
his comeing, they might receive the Holy Ghost, so eminent was his thirst, so
longing his desire, whether in earth or heaven, for man's benefit, for man's
Salvation.

DAVID in many things was a typ of Christ and in this prefigured him also, that
as the Heart panted after the water brooks, so panted his soul after God, David
in Christ was crucif^ed, and Christ in David, thirsted as the Heart, which
beast, bearing naturally an antipathy to Serpents, first sucks them out of
their holes, then rents them they again when not prevailing by force* claspeth
about his horns, lies on his back to bit* he for defense roulleth on his back,
and brusing them, ^layeth them, with which he is so heated, that he is not at
rest, until he drink; the applicablenesse of which to Christ is conspicuous,
who by the power of his breath commanded the Devils out of the possessed, and
by lying on his back a few hours in the grave, overcame their greatest force,
before which how mightily he did glocitare, pant, and roar out, that terrible
cry: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? an expostulation, in death,
showing the things he suffered, and contents of what we are to do, speaking
this for his peoples instruction, in taking inspection in calamitous times,
into the principal cause of their distress^s where faulty with the thief, to
say we indeed justly, if otherwise since^ity appear in our tendencies to please
him, then to plead with him; Remember, Lord said Hezekiah, I have walked before
thee with a perfect heart: why then should I die Childlesse? why should thy
promise made to my Father David fail in me?

THOUGH with Job for a while* we suffer for secret causes, yet with him let us
hold fast our Faith; as Christ, not saying, O God, but My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? words that discover so much of a man* that, but, for, to Day,
shall thou be with me in Paradise, we might demure upon his being God; and in
themselves hard to be understood; yet this is perceptible, that in strong
temptations, the truth of things being hid, we judge of them, and of our own
state, worse then they are, the ingemination, shows innocence to be enflamed,
because it suffered; and the affluence of his sorrows so directed, as to
Eclipse in him the wonted consolations in the Fathers fellowship, which though
wanting, yet he endured, his own zeal, unexpressibly irritating him, for ^ins
removing, his teeth on the CROSS, being set on edge; because we in the field,
so greedily had eaten sour grapes.

CEDRON is also said to be black, from it is shadinesse, as being shadowed by
the mount of Olives, over which David p^ssed bare-headed, and weeping; his Son
our Lord was appointed for the same pilgrimage, though not upon the same
ground, David weeping for his Son, who had moved Rebellion, Christ weep'd for
sins committed by Rebellion, David saw something in himself; meriting that
blackness, and therefore, cried: Christ saw that nothing was in man that
deserved clearness, yet that his head might want no ointment, and that his
garments might be always white, he traveled toward this black brook, under
Olives, the very place inspiring this observe, that because of it is
fruitfulness of oil used in med^caments, and one of the ingredients of the
Samaritans recipe, for the cure of the wounded traveller our Lords death is
declared, proper for cure of our spiritual wounds, for strengthening our
weakness; in wrestling against principalities and powers, Devils who may by
permission embitter our waters; yet as the horn of the Unicorn, is medicinal in
healing infected fountains; the plunging, whereof by it, causing other beasts
to drink securely, so application to his CROSS, as Moses to the tree, Exodus
15. makes our bitter waters to become sweet, our afflictions to become easy,
our burden to become light, he having antidoted their evil; by drinking, that
is, by bearing of them, before us: yea by it our sins shall, our very lusts
shall, have a tendency for good, the remembering of Piters sin, made him
bitterly weep; yet may we not say; it made him diligently to watch, he
afterward not comparing himself with others attested his own Love, not falling
back again into the condemnation of the Devil by overrating of himself.

FILTH or Earth may cause ones hands to scour the better, and after washing to
become the whiter, this was designed in his blood (viz.) that we should be
pure, white and holy, by washing our selves therein, his blood having that
property to make our very garments white as in the vision, Reve. ^. hinting at
that remission of sin, which by blood was obtained in the Law; As Herod
therefore sought this Holy Child's life, to take it, and destroy it: let us seek
his death, that is, the benefit of it, that we may live by it and in it, with
as great earnestness, as he laid it down, for he is said to drink of the brook
in the way.

IN the way, that is, walking forward, that is, taking no rest, until as
Naomi he had settled his Church, he being that Goel, Ruth. 3.9. the next
kinsman, appointed Redeemer of his Church, and by right of inheritance, to
betroth the Gentile Church, as Ruth unto himself, he as Boaz being a Jew born
in Bethlehem, not by pulling of his shoe, but by being stripped of his
garments, yea robbed of his life: Judas lingered as did Lot, but was ^oused,
with a what thou do do quickly, a charge not enjoining diligence, but
evidencing impatience, wishing for, and suggesting sufferance of that, which a
treacherous heart had in dissimulation contrived, and concealing from the other
Apostles his treason by this declaration, least a moments stay, had been
occasioned by debates and quarrels, which our Savior so prevented, that when
Judas asked, Master, is it I? least his silence should have betrayed Judas, the
answer was thou say it, (i. e) thou have said it, not I, thou condemns or
betrays thy self, not I.

WHEN the band told him, they were seeking Jesus, being strengthened by an Angel
Michael, say some, he being Captain of the Lords host, Revel. 12. Gabriel, say
others, the messenger for his birth, and his name importing the strength of God
or the man of God, fittest therefore to comfort God Man; being, I say,
strengthened by him, both in a natural way, by food as is thought, and Ghostly
Counsel; he told them, I am he, they not knowing his voice, discovered not his
person until he pointed out himself, which voice made them afraid, letting go
forth so much divine virtue from his face, mouth and eyes, as to make them fall
before him, through fear, though armed, their knees ( as no creature is) being
not able, to support them when conspiring against God, unless even God whom
they oppose, let out of his clemency some emanations of beaming power to uphold
them; respiting them from that grave, that death, that hell, which waits upon
them, in, and after, their sinful compliance with paultry lust, to reclaim men,
when convinced by wonders, or put to straits, from the error of their ways, as
here was done, when they came, as in the Psalms, to eat up his flesh, in their
stumbling, and falling, yet the second time he suff^red himself to be taken,
checking them for their delay, and ordering his Disciples freedom to go away,
John 18. the set time of his departure being come, his hour being come, and all
things near to be fulfilled, touching his delivery to the Gentiles he hasted,
as the Sun unto his setting, being judged, and condemned, in one night, and
that the first of his apprehension, whereas ordinary judgment, and sitting in
judgment by law, use and custom, in other cases among the Jews, was still in
the morning, Ier. 21. Eccle. 10.

GIDEON trying the valor, or cowardice, of his Army, was ordered to observe at
the water who lapped, and who bowed down, such as bowed, were in probability
the stoutest, not fearing the enemy, and those that lapped, the more fearful,
not dareing to stoup for drink* if the lappers discovered Zeal, showing
earnestness for fight, or those who bowed down, weariness in^flight, or
whether the lappers were the most cowardly and chosen therefore, I disput not:
this is sure, that our Lord ran and drank, that is, hasted to his sufferings,
and suffered with have, dying in the 33. year of his age, resolving not to be
old, least the world should die in sin, and men go to the grave, their bones
full of the sin of their youth: and let all the ages of the Universal world be
reveiwed, it will be found from the vexations in them; that of all things next
being born, it is best to die betimes, was a true saying of the Philosopher: but
the sins in them, and temptations to sin, increasing a hundredth fold; the
dotage of the world being more encumbred, and plagued with perilous times. the
end of life being also glory, to be translated by death, with Enoch to be taken
up to God, early, is a blessing with Divines.

THE first that tasted of death was Abel, he was accepted of God, and was in
heaven in the ^^our of his youth: not tasting, not knowing of old age; a center
of diseases, a very treasure, continually emptying it self, of Rheums,
Catarrhs, defluctions, gouts, hydropsies, gravels: to the tormenting of men;
all which to evite, as Joseph stood before Pharaoh, being thirty years old; our
Savior beginning, to be about the same age, stood up, preaching of plentiful
times, for spiritual food, for the twelve hours of the day; but ^ight shall
come, says he, and then no man shall work, in which time, if the years of
plenty be remembered, it shall only make the hunger of the damned, the more
biting, which he prophesied of, and forwarned in such zeal, that, in or about
three years, he finished the work that was given him to do, which was to take
away the sins of the world, sins, both of soul and body, defraying the one in
being heavy to the death, the other in bearing death, and the instrument of his
death, for he carried his CROSS, choosing that death, before John the Baptists
sword, or Isaias saw, making it as the tree of life, to stand in the midst of
the Church, communicating it is virtue, fruit and shade, for life and salvation,
to all the world about, no deadly weapon being capable to sense the fruit of
his death, nor answer the typs thereof so well as that.

OUR Lords CROSS being David's shepherds staff, Noach's ark, Samson's gates,
Isaac's wood, Jacob's ladder, Moses pol, Esdras pulpit, the Spouses palm tree,
Phineas spear, sl^ying the Zimri of thoughts pollution, and Cosbi the inventer
of lies, for such almost are their names by interpretation, that the plague
might be stayed from the people which had been brought among them by he counsel
of the first Balaam that is, destroyer of the people, the Devil by a woman, in
place whereof the CROSS affoordeth life and health, by beholding it as the
Jews the Serpent to be cured, giving life, in opening our eyes, as the honey on
Ionathans rod to see, pursue and overtake our enemies, all by his death; the
immensurable pains whereof, with infinite patience he endured; being the more
bittering, that it was lingering, for the removing of that guilt, which by man's
dallying with, and delightfulness in sin, had been contracted.

WHAT he did typically here (viz.) drink, and really afterward did, (viz.) die,
must Mystically, by all his members be followed, the first condition of
Christianity, being self denial, and that unto death: for to that must his
steps be followed, Pet. 1.2. we have in much pleasure drank of the goblets of
Satan's mixing, to expiat which the black Cedron waters of mortification must be
tasted, going forwards with him to Gethsemane, by interpretation, a fat, or
plentiful valley, as affoording (especially when Christ is in it) abundance of
good things, new and old, new for pleasure, old for health; for though in the
gardens of earthly paradise, whence sin had it is rise, there may be pleasant
fruits; they are but seemingly so, and if not so, they are only so, that is,
pleasant; whereas this garden has store of all manner of all good things; for
all purposes, times and seasons: Christ's bloody sweat, having watered it, for
excellent products, the Universe being but a wilderness when compared to those
fragrancies, wherewith the garden of the Church is planted, and replenished:
which to him who falls in a spiritual agony as Christ, religious conflicts, and
in earnest sweats, in the resistance of the old man, that he may do all
according to the will of God, shall from heaven be strengthened, as he by an
Angel: and know that Grace is sufficient for him, and in that garden, shall
find from self experience, the brusing of the serpents head.

PROVIDED he come not as Judas, to betray him, or his cause, for love of this
present world* the poison whereof infecting the heart of Judas to merciless
treachery, eating up the bowels of compassion, made (to retaliat his crime)
his own bowels to be cast into the earth: yet, not so low, but they stand as a
beacon, that we may avoid an evil custom, pilfring and stealing, the
consequence thereof, an evil conscience, and the perfection of that, the place
prepared for hypocrites, and unbelievers: but what Pilat said, thy own nation
have delivered thee unto me, may both Turk and Pagan say of Christ the lives of
Christians scandalizing the nations, through avarice, pride, interest and
malice, contradicting that good confession, My kingdom is not of this world,
securing, Pilat from fear of rebellion, or disturbance in his Government, by
stratagems of war, or engines of State, whereas by both, we seek not only to
invade the territories and dominions of those differing from us; but malig^s,
corrupts, de^ames enviously, calling, away, away with them, who in principles
of Religion, are one with our selves.

AS Judas avarice one the on hand, ^o Peter's Arrogance is to be avoided on the
other, ingoing over this brook, he also went with Christ, arrogating to
himself, what was not in him, he seemed as the Pharisee to despise others, and
gave to his Master a flat contradictory speech, in the vehemence of his
supposed constancy; a warning for the strongest to say, I am weak, since his
fall from the occasion of it a Woman, a Maid, a Wench, pricks the bladder of
self confidence, and causes the informed to bear a low sail, least if by his
example, doctrine be not drawn of humility, Pride become our ruin, as we see
in those days, in which holiness, that is, strictness, getting an honorable
name, becomes a shelter, a pent house, for more subtle sinners, their subtilty
being only in this, (viz) in a high ungrounded conceit of themselves, from
which if we this day arise, it shall be good friday; forgetting the l^cks
(which by many of you is eat this day as a proper food) as well as the onyons
and garlike of earthly sensuality, making the breath of our Spiritual
converse, too too ranky f^ast upon the sour herbs, of lowly, and repentant
considerations, being circumcised Israelits, and proper for the Paschal Lamb of
the Gospel, compensing the d^shonour we have given the most high, by sinful,
because fleshly dainties, by the sorrow and sighings, bitter reflections, from
a mortified because converted soul, for denying the Lord that bought us, being
first remembered by the Cock cro^ing, next by Jesus looking, that is, by the
sound of the word; next by meditation thereof, remembering he said, the Lord
resists the proud but gives Grace to the humble, as the justifying the
Publican in the pa^able discovers.

THE ancients in their baptism, did dip or sprinkle three times the baptized,
in remembrance of the holy Trinity or the three days lying in the grave of the
Son of man, that even in this demersion, they might be conformed to the
sufferings of their Lord; and how has S. Pa. boasted of his being crucified
with Christ? and presses to the likeness of his death, for our being
crucified, by keeping from the filthiness of the flesh, and walking with
Zacharias, Righteously, one hand being nailed, that is bound up against the
injustice of the world, and with Elizabeth Blamlesly, the other hand detained
from the intemperance of the world; making straight paths for our feet in a
prudent heeding of our ways, our hearts, and sides, pierced with the spear, or
sword of the word of God, and thence as blood and water, to flow forth, Love to
God charity to man, crowned with the sharp thorns of inward compunction* for
our folly, and of outward compassion for our Brothers adversity, beholding the
solidity of this world; to be but emptiness of a Sponge, and all it is delights
as Vinegar, to the teeth forbearing to drink of that Myrhe of envy; malice, and
all uncharitableness; wherewith the world does in extremity, furnish her
prisoners and captives, as Christ knew.

THEN may the soul cry, the prince of this world comes and finds nothing in
me, and again, Father, into thy hands I commit my Spirit: which at the bowing
down of the head in giving up the Ghost by dying to sin shall cause thy soul be
clothed with the fin linen of the Saints, and be admitted into the Paradise
of joy, the body being hid, during the three days of suffering what God shall
impose, laboring to keep a good conscience, and grieving for the abominations
of the world; after which, in the morning of the Resurrection, by the Ministry
of the Angels, meet the Lord in those mountains of Galile, whereof he has told
us, that is in the clouds.

IF any will be so charitable ( as who should not) to heed and see where Christ
is laid, remember he has been laid in three Sepulchers or places, first in the
Unity of the two new Testaments, which is, as the Virgins womb; next in the
bosom of the Church, which is as the manger: the third is Joseph's rock, which
is the soul and heart of the elect: watch this last, and make it as sure as you
can, but wake him not, by the noise, tumult or rumbling of unruly and unholy,
because unruly cogitations; which are not pleasing to him; but rather provide
ointments, with Nicodemus, of Myrhe, in continence and chastity, of spiritual
sorrow for all delinquencies, of Aloes, in withdrawing from such as are
disorderly, and cleansing your selves from the sin that so easily besets;
making a mixture of both these, by eyeing the doctrine of the Law; which
requires inoffensivenesse toward God and man: and working them into an
ointment, wherewith to enbalm the poor members of the body of Christ,
refreshing them, that their loins may bless you.

THE Paschal lamb was slain in the evening, so was Christ, which it prefigured,
giveing up the Ghost about the ninth hour, that is, three in the afternoon; he
came to give light unto the world, which by his life, doctrine and miracles, he
did effectuat, and none hates him but they who hate the light, least he should
detect their evil deeds; he came in the evening of the world, to enlighten the
Gentiles and be the glory of his people Israel; he crossed the b^ook Cedron, in
the evening before he suffered, still endeavoring to have the end of things
good, Judas leaves him in the evening* Peter boasted of himself in the
evening, he enlightened both, because he forwarned both favoring neither the
one, nor regarding the other, looking still to the close of things, a policy,
yet Christianity mantai^s allowing good beginings, but approves only
continuance in good; Ind^^ had a fair morning and began well, ended miserably,
selling his Master, and buying his own damnation, for three pound fifteen
shilling sterling, his rendition of it, not abating one farthing of the guilt,
his confession at it, not assoiling the soul, for in ordinary law, the money
was neither his, nor their's, to whom he gave it; being the price of the
highest sacrilege, and of which as of the censures of Dathan, and Abiram* God
was to have been heir, and by consequence, the poor, which the consciences of
the Scribs knew, and therefore laid it out upon, and for, strangers, as their
own charity, he making no confession of his former theifts, discovered not the
manner of his apprehension, h^^ged himself, a sad ending, a fearful close, a
dismal evening, of such a fair day as the Apostleship presented to him.

IT is much to purchase, but a greater mercy, to secure goodness and grace: if
therefore there be any good thoughts this day, for Christ, saying if it be so,
why am I thus? with Peter, sink not for fear, with him is love and
forgiveness, with Judas, sell him not for greed let not the cares, pelf, or
trash of this world, chock that good seed, remembering that Peter and John, was
only sent to prepare the passover before he suffered, the first signifies a
rock, the other grace, and such as are established by grace, in their heart,
are only they with whom Christ the truth of the passover shall be found, for
(because with) the cup of remission of sin, which shall in the evening of their
days, as the bloody mark, secure them from the destroying Angel.

FRIENDSHIP of old was effiged bodily with an open side, discovering the very
frame, figure and position of the heart, without which, it was concluded, true
amity and fellowship, could not be secured; and is not true kindness
represented on the CROSS? where bodily our Lord hung, with a peirced side, not
only showing, but, the heart emptying it self unto us, pouring forth blood, and
water, not blood only, for justification, as by beasts slain, under the Law,
but water also, for purifying the vessels of the young men, that they be holy,
and this visibly from the heart, being sub dio, of the Brook, that is* of the
field, not the wells of a house, dying, that is drinking at Jerusalem, a
public City, at a passover, a holy feast, not in the town, but on a mount,
not privately massacred, but publicly adjudged by Pontius Pilat, not in the
Temple, by Tumults, least Jews should plead a priveledge, but in the open Air,
by the hands of the Gentiles, for purifying of the air from the defilments of
both Nations, clearing it also that he dyed for both, and is as clear as the
parting of his garments which yet being divided in four equal parts, projects
his merits to be open, and to be applied by many in the four quarters of the
world, and that in the self same day, wherein there passed four glorious
occurences, eminent passages in relation to the Church, the day of his death (
though at long distance) being the selfsame day, in which Abraham was called
from Vr of the Caldeans, in which the Israelits were called out of Egypt, with
whom went a mixed multitude, and in which the decree went forth to build the
holy City, to which the Gentiles contributed, these three meeting with this,
according to the time of the passover, and the best computation, denotes the
general influence his Death, the last of the famous four, has upon all the
world: and in evidence whereof, he would not die a private death, choosing rather
to drink of the brook in the sight of the Nations, that is, in the way.

IT is said he was crucified, with his back to the city, as if his
prophannesse had been so great, that his face was not worthy to behold their
holy Temple: but was it not (if true) a shrewd sign of the fulfilling of that
prophesy, I will show them the back, and not the face in the day of their
calamity, Je. 18 ^ and has so long taken his countenance from them, that that
wherewith they apbraided Jesus, of his being a Friend to publicans, to sinners,
is now their greatest, and most ordinary employment, in point of trust, among
the Turks, they being under that disgrace, that in no Nation, are they
martial'd or embodyed in an army for the field; and as they always resisted
the Holy Ghost, and became the murderers of the just one, still they persist
in that obduration, seeking the blood of his followers and Disciples, polluting
in their desperate malice, the pure annual celebration of this our Lords death,
with crucifying to death Christian children, in derision of our Savior and often
to their own destruction, in the shedding of their own blood as murderers, and
banishing their posterity as the vilest of miscreants* as from England, France
and many other places.

IT is stupendous, what is recorded touching that mystery of iniquity, the
necessity the Jews are in, of having Christian blood, a secret not known to
many Rabbis, discovered but An Dom. 1500. by a converted Rabbi of Ratisbon:
avouching that they at point of death, anoint the sick with Christian blood in
these words; If he who is promised in the Law and Prophets, be already come,
and Jesus who was erucifi'd, be the true Messiah, let the blood of this
innocent man, who dyed with faith in him, wash thee from all thy sins, and also
conduct thee to Eternal life. So that his blood, upon them, among them, and by
them triumphs.

AND of old, after the destruction of Jerusalem, those of Tiberias would
whisper into the ears of their dying relations, believe in Jesus of Nazareth,
who was crucified whom our Princes slew upon the CROSS: for he is come, and
will judge thee at the last day.

SO that yet he lives, his drinking, being but in the way Everlastingnesse or
Eternity, having no power upon his sufferings; for by this phrase, Way,
understand the brevity of his passion, being but to taste of death, which as a
sleepy drench, a potion of popy water, had a while dominion over him, and then
he awaked, to their shame, sorrow and astonishment, as the wisest of them at
this day declare, observing since his death, their desolation, finding no term
of their captivity, as in the other two, nor promise of a third return to
Canaan, which either from policy, or conscience, made those Jews, who of late,
An. Dom. 1666. had the eyes of the world upon them, pretending to a
restoration, give out that they were the posterity of the ten Tribs, carried
away into Babylon, who never returned, and not of the two who did, and
therefore not the successors of such, who put Jesus the Son of Mary to death,
which yet did not hold him, for wanting sin, whereby the dead are fettered in
their graves, he first stouped, drank, dyed; and then lift up his head, it
being impossible for death to retain him; because of innocence.

BUT as at his death, his very disciples were offended, that is, in a Scripture
sense, stumbled at the Cross; and it is not to be questioned, but something of
doubting entered into Mary's soul, as if all her hopes, memorials, relations,
revelations, about her Sons kingship, Government, Godhead, had been so many
gracious mistakes in her, of the Angels Anunciation, so it may be, some are now
offended: and those even good, at this memorial of our Lords passion,
accounting it Idolatry to speak so particularly of his death, at this time; and
indeed as Mary, so the Church of Christ, which is his Mother, is yet wounded by
slanders and misreports, and made to drink of the brook: and taste of those
black waters: some of her Children offer to her; But know, that as Christ was
innocen^, for all his d^inking, and harmless, though crucifi^d to death, as
Judas will proclaim him, though not yet judged by Pilat, who found no fault in
him, and his wife who accounted him a Just man, as he was, Ceremonialy, being
circumcised, Moraly being subject to his parents, politically paying tribute,
religiously, for he gave eyes to the blind, knowledge to the ignorant.

IN sum, the reid heifer was to be without spot, and he was found without
sin, though put to death as seditious, and with seditious persons, executed as
most guilty, whence that word King is affixed on the Cross in scorn to the
Jews, for except for one crime, two dyed not in one day among them, therefore
the three dyed as troublers of the peace; thou art, said the other thief in the
same condemnation, viz. with our Savior as dying for the same cause with them,
and they suffering all for one thing, viz. Sedition, Luke 23. yet as Christ, If
I have done evil, bear witness of the evil, if not, why smytest thou me? so
me thinks this day speaks to our Opinionators, I say, this day, in which he was
lifted up, and (though innocent) accounting it superstition, to behold him on
it, or it to mind us of him; his white rob^s this day worn, darkly shows his
non-guiltinesse; and the voice of our Brothers blood, calling to heaven, it is
strange if the sound may not be observed: we find Pilat to have been a Bastard,
and in sober sadness there is none will condemn Christ, nor Christ's Disciples
that are legitimatly begotten of the Church, whether ancient or modern, in this
holy service of attending to behold the man: for, know,

THE Church reformed, keeps this day and others relating to the mysteries of
our redemption, expressed in sacred Writ, as Germany, Helvetia, Hungaria,
Transylvania, Suitzerland, France, Holland, having printed Sermons, in and
upon those days preached; and were the least of these three memorable things
said, to be in the death of Christ observed, we should not account them
Children of the Church, who would condemn these there brethren, one is Patience
be not therefore offended, that the Church primitive observed such days,
holily, though they could not as they did not, attempt to make them holy: or
that the Church Reformed estimats them worthy of celebration, being anual
catechisms for edification: the other is Humility, and none here ought to be so
unsober in their talk, or so haughty in their own conceit, as to account the
Church of God, for so many ages, not so wise, nor the present Church not pure,
nor so holy as themselves; the last is Charity, and therefore let none condemn
them in this their practice, no^ us their brethren in our conformity, to which
if they assent not, they may withdraw, but not judge, for the Lord comes, the
judge is even at the door

IF this will not stop some men's mouths, but will still call crucify it,
crucify it, I shall ^ay more, then Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do: for as the brazen serpent was lifted up when the Isralites were
stinged with serpents, though, as Naturalists observe looking upon brass is
hurtful to those so affected, who knows? but as the Centu^ion such who may
come, to crucify this service, or with the rabble to behold Christ die, in a
discourse, may go with Augustine somewhat affected and smitting their breasts;
and though nothing of this be, yet to the patient, Humble and Charitable Soul,
it is a lifting of him up, for imitation, and let no man trouble these, for in
those they bear about the marks of the Lord Jesus.

FOR fear of disturbing the good man of the house, or troubling his family,
wherein our Lord eat the passover, and wherein it was made ready for him;
among other mysteries, he retired into a garden there to be taken by the Jews;
it being a matter of greater moment to scandalize, to trouble the soul, to
disturb the peace of the Church, even in this particular, in repeating the
story of the passion, then some of our pretended Zelots do imagine, the Church
in all it is vicissituds, having accounted this a good-day indeed, bearing
about, and holding up, the instruments and fruits of her Lords death, as
trophies of that victory which he had, and she expects to have over all her
enemies.

IN it dehorting from sin, particularly from reproaching, or tempting to
reproach, the observers of it, least either the curse of the serpent, or the
reprobation of the thief be their portions; for as there were three about the
tree of life, one condemned for ever, and two pardoned; so about the CROSS (an
Emblem of life and Hierogliphick of eternity among the Egyptians, and figured
upon the breast of their filthy Idol S^rapis, though not figured as the Crux
Immissa thus whereon it is thought our Savior dyed, but of that Commissa after
the form of a Roman T. whereon also it is given Moses lifted up the brazen
Serpent) I say about the CROSS there were also three, two carried to paradise,
and one left in his sin; from whose punishment, reasons against taunts, upon
known sobriety, might be multiplied and drawn, unto that leangth, as to cause
the di^cerner glory in the CROSS, professing their belief in him who was
crucified and slain, burying him boldly in the new sepulcher of a new because
broken heart this day.

AND if any yet say, the blood, that is, the guilt of the contempt of this
service, be on us and our Children, I say again, fear ^he issue; for the
affixing of a Jewish taunt upon a Christian exercise, may have a Jewish, that
is a cursed end; the CROSS it self teaching better things, the height thereof,
typifying our aspiring to things above, the breadth of it to the works of
charity below; the length of it perseverance in that good until the end, the
depth of it, that good will of God, in his own bosom yet now revealed for our
beholding of his Son, finishing the work of our redemption.

ACCORDING therefore to the custom of the Jews, let one be released from
death, by judgment, it was done as some say, in remembrance of their delivery
from Egypt, at the passover, of Isaac's, with others, from being sacrificed of
Ionathans from Saul: however let it be our duty in those days of judgment, to
let the Church Reformed escape, and then we trust to stand not fall in
judgment. And as Annas, and Caiphas, Herod, and Pilat, at Christ's death were,
ruleing together, pointing at the division, and contention of the people, yet
united, and agreed against him, let us, for his sake, not fall out with one
another, but agree, to crucify those lusts of envy, whispering, uncleanness,
backbiting, which war against the Church:

WE are not gradua^s in all Arts, knowing but in part, and ought not to be
positive in our determining, Christ is dead leaving us an example of humility,
seldom found in the Chambers of the Censorious, this day we preach of our
freedom from the curse of the ^aw: and I charge, by the Lord Jesus, judge of
quick and dead, and who before Pontius Pilat, witnessed a good confession,
curse not the day for us, nor us for the day, cry out rather with Tremel, that
famous Jew, when demanded at his death, if he continued Christian? (Jewish
converts though to the degree of Priesthood being to be suspected) answered,
in detestation of his cursed countrymen let Christ live, and Bar^abas be
crucified.

AS Kings judge not their Crowns sufficiently honorable, without the CROSS
(showing it is victory and conquest) be on the top thereof, judge your worth, to
be of no worth, if not vir^uated by the doctrine thereof, whereby as Friends,
or Sons, we shall have happiness in receiving, or understanding the nature and
wealth of these legacies he left his relations; Leaving on the CROSS
Persecution to his Apostles, Peace to his disciples, his body to the Judge, his
Garment to the soldiers, if they were such, which is doubted, being rather
servants to the executioners, and called soldiers, in a general way as armed
and guarding him for death, the number four making it probable, his Mother to
his beloved, Paradise to the th^ef, and his Spirit to his Father, which last
shall not be received, if not attended, with Mar^s tears, John's respect, Theifs
confession, Joseph of Arimathea's a Jew, his justice, Simon of Cyrene a gentile
his asistance: when Christ in his poor flock, is at a pinch, with Christ's own
Purity, Humility, and Love, which alone, and together, shall cause thy
conclamatum est, or consummatumest, thy end, to be happy: for then its finished
(i. e.) the Law, and Prophets in thy obedience, and the desire of the holy
Angels in thy conversion.

BUT whereas some think Romes doctrine is here asserted, alleging we
symbolize with Papists; know it is not Romish, though taught at Rome, but the
doctrine of the Church taught in the purest times that were, and of the Greek
Church, that is, enemies to Rome more then we: and as the Jews, made Christ's
death the medium, or mean, to keep the Romans from them, and it proved the very
cause that brought them, it is evident the Reformed Church might say to such
concluders, (for this and several other positions and inferences,) verily,
verily, one of you shall betray me. etc.

THANKFVLNES for our mercies in enjoying the truths of the Gospel, might be
more becomeing, that our eyes might be toward him, for Grace, Mercy, and
peace, from his merits blood, and wounds and what ever properly may be produced
and effected by them, walking after that light shown us by oil from him the
olive, in the religious performance of Borgius Duke of Gant, who seven times a
day, presented himself before God* praying for seven gifts, conform to that
seven times, our Savior shed blood, desireing for the honor of the
Circumcision, to attain wisdom and chastity, for what he shed in the garden,
knowledge and abstinence, for what he shed in being scourged, tenderness and
charity, for what he shed when crowned with thorns humility and fear what he
shed* when his hands were nailed counsel and compassion, for what he shed, when
his f^et were pierced, courage and perseverance, and for the blood which issu^d
from his side, god^inesse and patience, that being therewith sprinkled seven
times, as the leaper under the Law, he might be pronounced clean, that as
Christ himself said, when I am lifted up, I will draw all men unto me; he might
do that all in men, that is, all spirits, souls and bodies, being raised, that
as sinners we may detest our follies, as penitents receive hope, as Just
prepare for the Cross; apprehending with all Saints the extent of the love of
God, revealed by it, answering in carriage and manners to our Saviors
triumvirat, the three beheld him in the garden, having Peter's confession,
owning him for the Son of God, John's affection, in standing by him to the last,
James devotion in fervent calling upon him, for it is said his knees were hard
as a camels, by frequent kneeling in prayer. by which, despair being closed up,
there shall never be cause, finally to say, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me.

FORSAKEN, may be Ierusalems proper name, as it was once her nick-or by-name,
Isa. 62.4. once the Joy, now the scorn, of the whole earth, formerly for her
inhabitants delight, and to Forrengers admiration, her coasts furnished her
with abundance, of necessaries, of delights, her meadows storing her with milk,
her woods sweetning that milk with honey* her valleys storing her with wheat
and barley, her mountains as, high in charity, as in height, ( though brassy
bowelld) out of compassion heated themselves, and in case of reluctance, did
beat and knock one another that she might have plenty of metal, for her
strengthening, 8. Deuteronomy. 9. And she her self thinking it dishonorable always to
take, g^ve them again gold, silver, precious gums, spices and honor, in such
plenty that Israel became the glory of all the Lands, Eze. 20.6. Yet now has
not where withal to buy her self bread, save what relats to our glorious
Savior, his sepulcher, and it is temple being the greatest ornament within or
without her walls; besides which, so insignificant is her po^t, that when
Selymus, the Turkish Emperor, came on purpose, to behold so famed a place, he
almost disdained to take on nights logding within her avenues and quarters: her
pristine, and Jewish glory, lying contemptibly in the dust, the very ground
where Solomon's temple stood, being covered with a Mahome^an Mosk, into which if
any Jew enter, he is certain to meet with death at his comeing out.

AT such a distance has her Lord and husband put her for multiplied
adulteries, and so tar^ly has he drawn up her bill of divorce, that neither
the Art, power, reason, indulgence, graets, privileges, Heathens, Egyptians,
Jews, Christians, Turks, could ever cause her have a good coat, a clear face,
much less a fair one: Christianity was at much pains, for pitys sake, to have
her restored to her Lords bed, and for fourscore years, was their Kings and
Patriarchs of Jerusalem, in Jerusalem, fighting for and preaching up our Lord
Jesus, but in the most persuasive entreatings, and more earnest solicitations;
I mean their bloodiest, and most chargeable encounters, to preserve her, there
were seen and heard almost, as many hundreths of terrible visions, astonishing
cracks, and sights in the Heaven, Earth, and Air, evidenceing heavens dissent
from such amicable proposals; God resolving in probability, to make her
a-cast-away from Royalty, since she crucified her King, having only a name
among the many empty and flaunting tittles of the great Turk and the Catholic
King: both as relateing to Christ, the last without honor, the other with much
profit, arising from the customs, and imposts, exacted of pilgrims whom
c^riosity, or superstition, shall conduct unto that soil, where if any will
engadge, to avoid dishonest gain, reconcile differences, shun the company of
infamous persons, refrain from swearing, perjury, blasphemy, drunkenness, and
pay some money, undergoing some ceremonies, he may by the Pater Guardian of the
Franciscan Convent, be ordained a Knight of the holy sepulcher of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in the Name of the Father Son and Holy Ghost, of which order (as
most seemly) the most Christian King* is, or was Sovereign.

HOW should our Christian Cities flourish, in the fight of the Nations, and the
Theaters whereon our Lord conquered, and triumphed over all his adversaries: I
mean not the places whereon, as Bethlehem, Gethsemane, Mount olivet, and the
rest, but the Registers wherein these things are recorded, as S. Matthew* S.
Luke, S. Paul, and the other Apostles, if all that Traveled through the Holy
Land of the Christian Dominions, were qualified for this Honor; But to our
shame as Turks, in Jerusalem, we make advantage, our scope, in designing honor
to the Gospel, so far crossing it is true intent of Godliness as it is cross,
th'warts the projects of our selfseeking, lucre, gain, betraying in kissing
Christ, a-fresh in our covetous enterprizings, and crucifying him, while we
Crown him as a King, in the blaspheming and villainy of our actings.

BY the Mapps of Jerusalem in Christ's turnings, and returnings, from Annas, to
Caiphas, from him to Pilat, from him to Herod to Pilat back again, from
Gabbatha, to Golgotha, that he traveled the best and greatest part of the City
over, is visible to be seen: he rendering thereby his passion more public: and
offering the fruits thereof unto as many as would, or will by faith, come forth
to behold him; has he not traveled through our lands and Kingdoms? and as
cursed Jews have we not scorned, mocked, compelled him to bear his CROSS? in
our charging him with deplorable actings, the most inhumane butcheries,
pretendedly said to proceed from the zeal of his Spirit? Is he not daily in his
members persecuted by our uncharitable talking of, and walking before one
another? whereby ruin may easily be predicted; and a divorce suggested ready
for sealing, that we may abuse Gospel-priviledges no more? as is seen in that
Babylon where our Lord was crucified, wone once from the Turks by the slaughter
of twenty thousand of them, by the sword of Christians upon a Friday, about
three in the afternoon, as if for once God would beautify Christian verity in
that Unbelieving City by putting it in their hands, who professed the Gospel,
and who wore the CROSS on their clothes; the same day and hour, his Son dyed
upon the CROSS.

FROM which let us fear least Mahomets growing greatness, occasioned by our
Unchristian broils, provoke God, to make him become a scourge, and a CROSS to
our Cities and Nations, pretending adherence to the Gospel, but not receiving
the same in the love thereof, by bowing down our heads, giving up the Ghost, in
walking with all lowliness of mind, and dying unto sin.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERY OF THE RESURRECTION of Jesus Christ,
unfolded, and applied. Pasch-Sunday, April 3. Tolbooth Church, 1670.
Easter-Sunday, April 3. Tolbooth Church, 1670.

PHILIP. III.X. That I may know him, and the power of His Resurrection, and the
fellowship of His sufferings, being made conformable unto His death.


THE holy men of God in Scripture, mentioning the death of Christ, seem often, as
posters, to ha^t from, and briskly to exped that subject, intending to lodge,
that is, to insist upon, and rest in the doctrine of the Resurrection: not
slighting his passion, as if not comfortable; but because not satisfactory for
Gods justice, or man's happiness, unless the rising from the dead be a
consequent thereof; he styled himself the first and the last, I am said he, he
that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for ever more, Revel. 1.

SO our Creed, as fearing to damp belief, goes forward in haste, omitting many
glorious passages, in being crucified under Pontious Pilat, unto the rising
again the third day; It is Christ that dyed, says S. Paul, yea rather, who is
risen again, Romans 8. and verily it is usual, to see his dying, and rising,
handed together, they being the cementing matter, whereby God and Man, the Soul
and Happiness, Joy, and the Cons^ience, perfectly, inseparably, knit and
united in one: for, what ever felicity can be concluded from the virtue of the
latter, depends upon those promises, which evinceth the truth of the former;
seeing him die, that is, persuasions of his Death* the knowledge of which death,
and the fellowship of his sufferings, that is, being made conformable to his
death, being only the proper and effectual mediums of knowing the power of His
Resurrection.

HERE the Apostle discovers his desire of knowledge, and next to benefit
thereby, meaning, the righteousness of Faith, that is of Christ, in point of
doctrine, about his Resurrestion, and his imitation of the other, referring to
practice, in being made conformable to his death, so that we are enforced to
speak first, with Peter, and before him with David, of the Resurrection which
is not rightly known, until the virtue, efficary* and energy, of his death be
understood; consisting in the expiation of sin, liberation of guilt,
acquisition of righteousness, and the hope of ^mmortality, the scope and
tendency of the Resurrection being perfectly and inwardly, for the applying of
these things as from it, toward our selves, he being delivered for our
offenses and raised again for our justification.

CONCEIVE him dead, sealed, watched, and writ upon his Tombstone, here lies
Jesus Christ, of Nazareth, who was crucified, An. M. 3982, Aetatis suae 33. yet
by power did make a spoil of death, his grave clothes, those ensigns of
mortality, laid by, baffling the envy of the Scribs, the fury of the people,
the force of Herod, and in one morning confounded all the adversaries of his
life.

HE dyed about the ninth hour, about three in the afternoon, order so
requiring, for about that time, ( viz.) in the cool of the day Adam was cast
out of Paradise; about which time also, it was congruous, for the second Adam,
to make his entry therein; both in the evening, enjoining all, in the Mystery,
to die unto the worlds pleasures, before night, that is, the eleventh hour,
which was, to the master of the Vineyard, the time of payment, not of calling
unto work.

BUT least we speak of, ( as the woman sought the living among) the dead, see
him raised, for he is risen, and tha^ while it is yet dawning, at break of day,
directing us to infer, that he was no more to die; the linen napkin within the
sepulcher, giving caveats to us against the surmise of his after using such
apparel: Lazarus indeed came forth, bound hand and foot, with grave clothes
being afterward to wear the same robes, not so Christ, death having no more
dominion over him, Romans 6. being swallowed up in victory, as Moses rod,
swallowed up those of the Magicians, as the wide Ocean, does the small drop, in
which it is to be more seen, as the Sun the dark cloud, which it either
scatters, or illuminats.

THIS Lion of the tribe of Judah, overcomeing that devourer of men, even in the
grave* his deepest den, resolving from first to last, for conquest, in the
Manger, in the Hall, on the Cross, in the rock, their mocks, their blasphemy,
their swords, their guards: for had he been possessed by the tomb, or his holy
body seen corruption, after his Viniger and Gal, what benefit had men accrew'd
by his death? It was therefore a religious error of Mary Magdalen and the other
Mary, to come early to the sepulcher, with ointments, being grounded upon their
thoughts of finding death; whereas he was up before, to take possession of his
new purchase, having so punctualy paid the contracted -- for sum for sin unto
the Father; thereby becomeing Lord of heaven, and heir of the utmost coasts of
the earth.

MAKE his Resurrection, a question, and for once put it to probation, David's
seed, in whom the Kingdom was to be established, 2. Sam. 7. Adams sleep, and
his awaking out of that, after Eva his spouse had been forming, the promise of
ransoming from the grave, H^s. 13. Isaac's delivery from being sacrificed, in
the old Testament, an Angel from heaven, Christ's own prophesy, Peter's
testimony, Thomas believing in the New, does almost overstock us with
sufficient proofs: his eating, drinking, walking, talking, priviledging the
expression, yea the simplicity of the arguments brought against us by the Jews,
evidenceth it is reality: for if he were stole, why was he not resceu'd? If by
his Disciples, why were they not questioned? and if either of these be true,
how is it known to them, since the watchers declare they were asleep? what
more? the order and neatness in disposing of the grave clothes, the confident
declarations of the pious women, and the calamities the Apostles cheerfully
underwent, evinceth the Resurrection to be no fallacy.

IT was attended with that power, that the watchers became as dead men, when
they came to apprehend him, or to eat up his flesh, they stumbled and fell,
amazed at some discovery of unexpected Majesty; but here, beholding an Angel,
from heaven, preparing to liberat the innocent, it was just on the other hand
to strick, as (if not altogether) dead, the guilty, and give check to unbelief,
especialy when heaven is at pains to refute impertinencies, as their keeping
was, since it flowed from cruelty not piety, earth also laboring, by an
earthquake, to invalidat their strength, shaking their greatest confident,
that is, their arms causing them unfit to handle the weapon, their ground
disableing them to stand, their authority to keep him in the grave being
recalled, by a stronger then either was Pilat, or the Council.

FOR yet once more was the earth to be shaken, and the desire of the Nations
then to come, which was the Messiah that is, Christ sent to all Nations: for as
at the giving of the Law their were Earthquaks, and shakeings, even in heaven
by the thunder, and smoke, shakeings of the Sea, at the making way for his
people, so once more he will, as in Christ's suffering, the sun was darkened, the
rocks rent: here at his rising, there was a shakeing of hearts, upon earth, and
moveing of Angels of heaven, some being shaken out of their dumps, doubt?
fears, and sinful carnal condition: others, not desireing him, being shaken out
of their wits, out of their lives, out of their arms, and justly, having
refused him whose face was lovely, and society desired, by all Nations, by
Angels, and Men unto whom they should run, as the camp to the standar^, as the
eagles to the carca^e, bringing as subjects to their Prince all their
desirable things, offering unto him not only of the best of the fruits of the
land, as gold, frankincense, and Myrbe, but the choicest of their hearts, as
love, fear, joy, obedience, which all Nations ow unto him, and the elect have
paid, being shaken with the wonder of so great a mystery as his death, and
rising again from the dead, which the unbelieving Jews denying, and mercenary
Soldiers, striving to obstruct, he that sits in heavens, did laugh at the
confederacy, and said in spite of them in the morning of the Resurrection, thou
art my Son this day have I begotten thee.

THE mountains skipping like Rams, and the little hills like lambs, to respect
him in his exite, from the grave, and prepare his people to admire, believing
his heroic atchiefment, of subduing Hell, and Death, curbing by it, and
shakeing their insolence, who cried, we have no King but Caesar, and said,
crucify him, crucify him; but on the other hand, comforting his followers,
with a fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus, he is not here, for he is
risen so that the Church may salute Jesus, as the Angel Gideon, the Lord is
with thee, thou mighty man of valor. Judge. 12. for has it ever been heard,
since the beginning of the world, that any wrought wonders in their death, or
that wonderfully raised himself again to life, Jesus excepted* whose
Resurrection is the sine qua non, of the joy, in all believers, the living
having no hope, no comfort, save in it, and by it.

IT was refreshing news to the eleven, and unto these two, unto whom he was
seen in breaking of bread, and so much the more cordial, was his perception,
that he was at first concealed from them, having wrapped up the face of his
Humanity, in a skreen by the power of his Divinity, which no sooner drawn
aside, then they behold the Lord that bought them, which brought new life, and
vigor to the heart-broken, and doubting Disciples, breaking that silence,
which for grief had been more then half an hour in the heaven of their society,
where sorrow had caused mutenesse, about forty hours, (for so long it is
reckoned he lay dead) Adam after the ejectment from paradise, is never recorded
to have spoak, and after the second had admittance, we can find among the
Apostles little mirth, but now all preach, and teach* Angels descend, women
walk, Peter and John run, the two talk: whence the Church of old, this day sung
the Psalms of Invitation, inviting all creatures to praise the Lord, because
Jesus who was crucified, is not here, ( viz.) in the grave, but risen, come
said, the Angel, see the place where the Lord lay; affoording matter for deep
contemplation, Jesus, discovering the truth of his being Savior, who was
crucified, a holy abridgement and true repetition of his passion, He is not
here, discovering the truth of his being dead, and his once being there, come
see the place, where the Lord lay; by Lord, acknowledging the soveraignity of
Ies^^, and by the word lay, enforceing a belief of his rising.

THE Jews craved a sign; and those that mocked, said, come down, and we will
believe, but that being the time of suffering, he disdained the motion, the
sign of the Prophet Jonah, which was of rising up and opposite to their coming
down, being appointed, all other signs were rejected; and because that of Jonah
was fulfiled, let us believe, and go before him unto Galile, by interpretation,
transmigration; or going over, that going from infirmity to virtue, from
mortality to eternity, from contumely to glory, we may more fully participat of
those sore-expected joys, in being treated, yea feasted in the company of our
ever to be adored Savior.

Worshipping our Lord, beginning to practice, and celebrat our Sabbath, when the
Jew rendeth his, acting not only contrary to him; but spiritualizing his
superstitious deportment thereon, he will kindle no fire that day, let us blow
up that of the spirit, in the hearth of our hearts, for elevating our thoughts,
and raising our minds upward, heavenward, to this day they allege the
destruction of Jerusalem solely to have flowed from the neglect of the Sabbath,
in putting no difference, between the holy and profane, Ez. 22. Let us compute
it is desolation, to spring from ^he innocent blood shed on the preparation day*
for the Sabbath, and in hiding their eyes from the Lord of the Sabbath, they
will not put so much as their finger, to any serwill, or country work, let us
not fear, to exercise our selves about, works of piety, charity, or necessary
with both our hands, our Lord giving ^s example, whose servants I mean the
Christians whom they keep, being put by them in this day, to their drudgery,
which yet and by the way might be rectified by Christi^^ laws and magistracy,
as they will not writ, nor blot out what is written on that day, let the
errata's of our soul be reviewed, and weekly (...) be exactly corrected, that
the next weeks impression, of our civil, or spiritual conve^^s may be both more
clean, clear, and holy, being emended from our former mistakes, by religious
watchfulness, and future taking heed, do they knock on the door when calling
unto a preparing for the Synagogne? it is (...) to provoke to love, and to good
works. They will not on that day, begin a journey, and justly having killed him
that was the Way, yet let us walk, and be undefiled in the way of the Law of
the Lord, keeping our feet from the filthiness, that is, our affections, from
those lusts, that are in the world through sin; they crowned our Lord with
thorns, let us adorn both his holy Temples, in exalting his two fold nature, by
a firm adhering, to the truth thereof, and laying out for him and his, the best
of our substance, somewhat of our rich possessions, entering by the gate of the
Church, into that of Paradise, from which impenitent Jews as the Reprobated
Theif, are for ever excluded.

The sixth Psalm, and the twelth are entitled pro octavo, for the eight in the
Vulgar translation, from which some will have many mysteries to emerge,
particularly, the change of the Sabbath, for respecting our Lords entry into
Jerusalem, in our computation on Palm Sunday the day of his rising will be one
of the seventh, but not upon the seventh, the prophesies therefore, and
conquests also of our Savior, to be by us celebrate in the Church the eight
day after that account, will be the Lords day, in the new Testament, beginning
our holy day, when the murderers of our Lord ends his Mosaical weakly feast,
it is nearer to affirm that as God had Circumcision, Sabbaths, and other rites,
to difference his people from the mass of the world, it is fit to have now,
some difference to discriminat his Church, and since there is a change of the
Temple, of the Sacrifice, of the Circumcision, of the Paschal supper, of the
Priest, a necessity may easily be suggested, of an alteration of the Sabbath,
heightened when we consider that Christ came to work a new creation, Isa. 65.
for which, a celebration of an old Sabbath, had been incongruous, and his
kingdom beginning from, and his resting dated at the Resurrection; how
consonant is it, to name this day, the Lords day, and in the proportion all
it is followers?

HIS sleeping or resting on the seventh day in the grave* typifying that the
old Sabbath dyed with him, as all other changeable ceremonies of the law, which
none ought to judge us in respect of a Sabbath, or a holy day since Christ has
triumphed on the eight, let us rejoice, beholding as badges of his victory, the
scares of his wounds, the print of the nails, the wound in his side, not only
as probable tokens of his rising, but as jems to adorn his royal body, as a
testimony of his victory; and as some think, to be seen yet in heaven, that as
in his Church militant, he has bread, and wine, continually as visible
memorials of his bloody agony and death, for his peoples stronger confirmation;
so in the triumphant, the scares of his wounds, remain in his body, before the
glorified, for more fervent, and eternal Iubilation

THESE same wounds, when seen and felt, besides his own faithful Testimony, so
strengthened the Apostles, that the ghastly frownings of an incensed crew, in
this wicked world, was but a whet-stone to edge their zeal, for publishing this
truth, this glorious truth of the Resurrection: for though it be said he was
stole, yet who durst rouz this young ly^n? and a little more money, would have
made the Soldiers tell another tale; he quickened in the grave, by receiving in
the second time, his soul then rose from out of the grave, astonishing death,
amazing the keepers, yet so heartning, and heating his Disciples, that they
spurn and disdain the threats of men; accounting all the worlds wrath, or
fawning to that degree of naughtiness as to comput it dung, in comparison of
the excellency in the knowledge of the rising from the dead, all created beings
in the power of man, being but a cipher to the Resurrection, Christ by it; and
in him, themselves conquering* and flying above all the powder Crakers, the
ungodly should frame or fire, to disturb the power of it is Doctrine, or the
progress of it is publication, the voice of all the Martyrs being like the call
of Heli^dorus, who refusing to sacrifice to Idols, and being tormented for
denial, cried out aloud, O Lord Jesus Christ, assist me, and when the crown of
the Church is now beheld, to have been but made the pu^er, by the fires of
devouring persecutors, and the ancient Stanza or holy Doxology of our Quires,
now heard in giving glory to the Father, and thought upon, who so dull as not to
anticipate the rehearsal, and suggest the famed answer given to the same
Martyr, is yet returned to all Saints witnesses, and confessors, be not
afraid for I am with thee?

FOR ^s unhurt with torture, how have the heathen and Jews been braved, and
outbraved by Christians through the hope of the Resurrection; Paul was thought
mad* and Heliodorus thought a witch, but he called, my Charms, my Art, my
Craft, is Christ; and demanding respite for three days to advise what to do; he
repaired to the Idols Temple, and in fervent prayer obtained from heaven, the
falling of them all like Dagon; for which being set upon a fresh, he made ample
confession of the truth of Christ, yea his tongue being cut, he preached
heavenward with his hand, until he was sl^in, rejoyceing in hopes to see God
in his flesh; desireing also to depart and to be with Christ.

BY the Resurrection, the Believer has a privative and a possessive good, the
first contains an abolishment of hell, and death, that they be not the
portion of his cup, Christ's appearing to be the Son of God by it, having
brought life, and immortality to light, is the substance of the other, 2 Timothy
1. opening the gates of Death, a typ of the resuscitation of our mortal bodies,
having made out peace, by defraying as a surity, or cautioner what we were
endebted to justice, whereby we are accounted just and righteous before God,
his egress^ from the prison of the grave, testifying a discharge, and ma^s
ass^ilment: whence still to our being condem^d* there is opposed, his rising:
for who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is Christ that
dyed, yea rather who is risen again; and in this righteousness it is, wherein
S. Paul desire to be found, making it his own by faith: and rejoyceing in his
own security thereby, blessing God for that victory* which in Christ he himself
obtained, the day book of his sins being crossed and the head of his adv^rsary
bruised, by the substance of the Cross in the power of the Resurrection, which
so far virtuats his life, that as raised in Christ, he accounts not himself any
more in this world, having his conversation in heaven, not regarding the
knowledge, even of Christ, after the flesh as did not a latter Saint, who
seeming to behold his Savior in bodily shape, visionally, cried out, Lord keep
that sight from me here, but let me behold it in thy own Kingdom in the other
world.

RISE therefore from your vain conversation, from your graves of lust, your
reward, is slighting Christ, or selling Christ, being no other then what the
Patriarchs had, when they sold Joseph, or what Judas got, when he betrayed
Jesus, viz. shame and fear, which whosoever would avoid, must follow him, who is
the way to young beginners, the truth to such as affirm, and life to those that
persevere, the way, to them that ask the, truth to such is have found, the life
to those who pass, the way to them who travel, the truth to them who rest, and
the life the righteous do enjoy, all procured by the death Christ underwent.

IT is said the lions whelps lying as dead, three days after birth, are awakned
by the roaring of the Sire: certain it is that after three days this lion of
Iudahs trib, was raised by God the Father, for though his rising be attributed
to the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1. as also to himself, having a power to take
up, as well as to lay down his life, John 10. yet it is also expressed to
originat from the Father, for God said Peter raised up Jesus, Acts 2.
scattering the least mist could arise from doubts, temptations or surmise,
improving faith against all stumbling blocks, the holy Trinity joining in one
for Christ's manumission from the grave, all being reconciled to man in his
Saviors actings upon that particular, the Lord God, who had sentenced Adam,
raising the Son, who was God, and by the Spirit, who with the Father and the
Son, is one, all equally willing, equally appearing for, and equally approveing
what by the determinat counsel of the Father, was under agitation, in that
affair.

SHOWING withal, that as Christ's manhood, was raised by God, through the
Spirit of holiness, so the quickening of man, against the deadness of sin,
ignorance, and unbelief is the sole work of Omnipotency, which alone can remand
back, the Spirit of sanctified illumination, men possessed, in the loins of
their Father Adam, and adapt them by a receive the holy Ghost to walk as Sons
of God, not of men; yet as nothing quickens except it die* so neither can the
sinfulness of sin, be taken away, until man know he is sold under it, and by
it betrayed as by a Judas into the hands of the Devil, who has the power of
death, that is, of execu^ing, not sentenceing: which conviction of heart, only
makes man to die with Christ, and necessarily must preceed a rising with him.

TO some it is true, Christ is not yet born; such are the lofty Spirits, the
touring souls, behaving themselves not as Children weaned from the mothers
breast, but as so many Giants begotten of some Goliath, and born of some radiant
Amazon: which conceit makes them conceive themselves some great body, and
being contrary to our Lord, who was born a Child, that is, for humility, and
meekness debonaire and affable toward all, soar in their carriage, and
Pea-cock like, moutting in the sunshine of their own vain glorious
imagination, as if with the Pea-hen, all must then be in love with their
mistaken transcendency, and couch to the shadow of their greatness, whereas
quite contrary, self denial, religious pensiveness, for the loss we have had,
for the things we want, a reversing of the Escutcheon of that excellency, which
fortune or parts have bestowed, because ensigns of our mysery, and badges of
our poverty, tokens of the infamy because sinfulness of our birth, are still
in those true Children moraly, and in their own esteem little ones, to whom
belongs the Kingdom of heaven.

TO others he is not yet dead, these are the carnal, the fearful, the sensual
minds, who desireing to live in the affluence of fl^shly pleasures, fly from
the Cross as a bugbear, and sailing in the Pleasure-boat of a bare profession,
in the least cloud gets into the coast, snugging under the wind of alluring
comforts, hat's nothing more, then to ride out a storm, with the warelik
builded and storm prepared for Christian, knowing he cannot weather out the
tempest; and judgeing himself no further in safety, then that the next step
lands him on the shore of ease, delight, and ticklish pleasure: where, loving
this present world, he embraces it with both arms, saying to tribulation, at a
more convenient time, I will hear thee again in this matter; and so with Peter
denying ( any soul saveing) knowledge of Jesus, chooses the warmth which the
fire of the Mammon of this present world does afford, accounting beloved Paul
mad, for ( because of the Gospel) enduring a storm, or abideing a night and a
day in the deep, judging the cargo of a soul not to be valued at so high a
rate, that the loss of the vessel of the body (which is but the h^ll of man)
should be suffered, to endure such hardship for it is security.

TO others he is not risen, these are the thunderstruck, the
conscience-smitten sinners, who with Iosuah, ly all day before the Ark of the
Lord, complaining of flams, kindled in their souls, through wrath for^een*
being invaded by sudden incomes from above, as by a troup, before the Lord
himself come to pull down, and to destroy, to sentence, to condemn; with Mary
Magdal^n, they cry, who shall roll us away the stone? of our sadness
sloathfulnesse, ha^d-heartednesse, and bitterness?) wretched m^n that we are,
who shall roll away the stone from the Sepulcher of our hearts? from the sight
of our eyes? and in pithy Harangues* de^ats upon their own misery, because of
ransgression, with broken pauses, again feelingly sigh, because of aggravated
circumstances* calling out with that convert Thais, who having led a life
unchaste, and purchased great riches, by unlawful embraces loathed her self,
and casting away her wealth, not daring to name God, her ordinary prayer was, O
thou that made me have mercy upon me.

BUT there are to whom he is risen, making them to rejoice, with exceeding
great joy, becomeing rivals, even to Angels in point of exhileration, rising
from the deadness of rottenness, and filthiness darkness, and horror, found
in the vault or grave of polluted Adams ^ff^pring; having the lively color of
a sanctified countenance in the face of their conversation, by being conform to
the amiable aspect found in the behavior of the old Saints; which if denied,
they answer as the blind man did the Pharisees, one thing we know, whereas we
were dead, now we live, and behold the things that are above, not bowed down as
before, but making straight paths for our feet, toward the mystical Galile,
to see our Lord, avoiding the s^arch of these Finical Apish, Trivial, and poor
things in the valley of this world, to enquire after, 1. what is in that mount
to which he has ascended and 2. whereof he has told us; for remember, to seek
the things, to affect the things that are above, to be dead with Christ, and
then to live like him, are the only four scriptural tokens of a spiritual
Resurrection, flowing from the power of our Lords rising from the dead.

OUR elder brethren the Jews, kept one passover, and their first at their
comeing out of Egypt, Exo. 12. another was observed in their journey through
Sinai, Numb. 9. a third at their entry into the holy land: that Christ is our
passover; and that he is the lamb of God, and that this is our Paschal feast
in the truth verity and substance of the old rite of eating the passover, is
clear and evident; yea let the Mystery of that lamb be reviewed, and both the
Christians duty, and the Christians Savior, are beautifully delineated; a lamb
pourtrays Christ's meekness, innocence, and harmlesnesse, that the lamb was to
be of the Male kind, respected his courage, activity, and Spirit; it is
spotlesness, his undefilednesse with guilt or sin; it is being a year old, the
perfectness of his age, and ripeness of understanding, exactly qualifying him
to preach; it is taking in the first month, shows our duty of consumeing the
whole year in Gods service, the first month whereof being consecrated unto
him, by this formal worship, points out that he is enfeassed of the whole; that
it was to be in the fourteen day of the month, shows Christ's comeing in the
darkness of the soul; and with full Moon clearness, shins for secureing it
against the darkness of error, and the evening does so evidently publish his
comeing in the last days, or ages of the world, that it needs no remark. That
it was to be eaten with unleavened bread, banisheth malice, and wickedness,
this day from the houses of your hearts; that it is blood was sprinkled upon the
door, is but the necessity, we stand under, of having our hearts purged from
an evil conscience; that it was to be roasted only not boiled, is but the
wholesomenesse of the Gospel of peace, and implys it is good nourishment, and
that the Doctrine thereof is not pleasantly to be handled, according to the
soft, or easy tempers of men; that nothing was to be left of it, enjoins
nothing of Christ to be reprobated, slighted, or set by and that no bone of it
was to be broke discovers, that as Christ lost nothing by his passion, so by
nothing since is he to be overcome, or hereaf^er to be ^uperate.

COMMONLY we call this feast Easter, from Eoaster an old Saxon goddess, whose
feast was either in, or about this time celebrated, but the name Pasch, (i e*)
a going over, a marching away, is more holy, more divine, more Scrip^u^al; and
the Resurrection falling upon the Pasch, rather to be used for our instruction,
in keeping this feast, which who so would keep with Christ, (who on it passed
from the grave) and his holy Church must keep it, with the sour herbs of
sorrowful contrition, as nobly resolved to hold fast the profession of our
Faith against all difficulties.

LET us with him, eat our passover standing, and like religious pilgrims, not
leaning upon the staff of our own understanding. but upon that of the Spirit,
which may be obtained, and preserved, by girding our ^oyns, abstain from
fleshly lusts, having the shoes of peace, whereby in holy solidity, and grave
deportment, we only make way and pass toward heaven, in have, that is, not
being tepid, dull, or negligent in heavenly matters, or soul-concerns, leaving
the spiritual Egypt, or Pharaoh, of Satan's subtilty, and earths gaiety, going
through Sinai, or the thorny cares, troubles, vexations, that are in this
world, still making progress toward Jordan, in the walks of sincere devotion,
until we see the Captain of the Lords host in religious confidence and as
Joshua, stood, so let us worship with the Disciples saying what says my Lord
unto his Servant? not fearing but to feel the virtue of that expression, all
power is given me in heaven and in earth, but, Mark 16. ye shall cast out
Devils, which is done by the Ministry of the Gospel; and when a Soul is
converted from the error of his ways, ye shall speak with tongues, (i. e.) the
profane ribbauldry of fleshly communication shall be renounced, the things that
accompany Salvation being the substance of your future discourses, ye shall
take up Serpents, in driving malice, wrath, rancour, backbitting, whispering,
evil surmising from the ground caverns, and hollow places of the heart, and if
you drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt you, in not being drawn away by
the enticements of the great deceiver; but rather in zeal cry out, depart you
cursed, or if by guile you transgress* redr^osse shall be obtained by a
vomitting up the sinful potion, in acknowledging thy sin by which you shall not
die, for some shall lay hands on thee, as sick* recovering thee by the light of
a good example, and provoking hereafter to love, and to good works, to joy and
comfort, as Peter was when Mary according to her charge informed him of his
Masters rising, and of his place of meeting, to him in particular, giving him
the sweet relish of reconcilement to his Lord after the sour and bitter herbs
of his tears, and undissembled sorrow.

WHICH yet the tidings of the Resurr^ction communicats to all who remember, and
genuinely confess, their fearful falls from a fair profession, their
frequenting the company of ungodly scorners, biasphemers, without a check o^
abhorrence of their crime; lastly* who by the crowing, or rather sounding of
the Gospel, mind the error of their ways* and accordingly renounce forbidden
pleasu^es, for if by that the sentence of death be past upon the Soul the
Resurrection like the Prophets lump of sigs* cures the boil, and by signs from
heaven, assu^es the prolonging of his days; his going up unto the Temple of the
Lord, d^scovering the line of his years, hereafter shall run pararel to
eternity, of which the promise of Canaan was bu^ a sign, and the certainty, the
dying fruitless, or childlesse, mad had, of having seed raised up unto
himself, by his brother, or next kinsman, in Israel was a dark representation.

NAMAN was perfectly cured by his washing seven times in Jordan; and likewise
was the leper cleansed by being sprinkled seven times with blood; by the same
number, in appearing unto his Disciples, did Christ cure, heal, and remove, the
diseases wherewith sin, and his passion being misconstructed had infected their
minds, and perplexed their souls about thoughts of him: creating in them, ( and
by that showing his purpose toward all converts for the future) such graces by
seven times manifesting himself, as must be had of the Spirit, for more fixing
of the Soul, in it is doubts and spiritual attendance; as first of the fear of
the Lord, in appearing to the woman, for they were afraid; next of the love of
himself, for he appeared to Simon whom he knew ( as he knew all things) loved
him* next the Spirit of knowledge, when he opened the Scriptures unto the two
going to Emmans; of Might, next, in his opening the door, when he appeared to
the eleven; next that of Counsel, when he advised to cast the net from the
right side of the Ship; and of understanding, while he opened unto them once
more the Scriptures: and then of wisdom, when they saw him taken up where he
was before.

THOUGH there are, who subdividing some of these again, will have him to
represent the mode of that assurance, he yet bequeaths to believers, in the
virtue of his Resurrection, making his first appearance to Mary Magdalen to be
the comforts he principally intends, to the most noted, if mouthful, and
penitent, offender, his being seen of those women returning from the sepulcher
who held him by the feet, mystically to discover his acceptance of the meek and
lowly, his being seen of Peter, either as he returned from, or entered his
grave, or in the place where he did weep, manifests his intentions to the
willing and obedient: for Simon by interpretation is obedience. Again he
appeared when they were gathered together for fear of the Jews, showing the
happiness designed, for those who unite in one, and his zeal, to be found of
them who sought him.

ON different daves and times he appeared also* a^ when Thomas was present,
hinting that the unbeliever at last shall increase in faith, and afterward as
they were fishing, typifying, that abundance of converts should by their
ministry be gathered to the Church; yet not by their labors or studies, for
they had toyled all night and got nothing but by his blessing, accompanying
their pains, through obedience.

HIS Disciples saw him on a m^unt, it is thought Tabor, where he was
transfigured; and how have comforts been multiplied upon retiredness for
religious contemplation? his upbraiding the eleven as they sat at meat, is but
a lesson construing his call to sinners at the eleventh hour, for though such
be suffered to dwell in sin, they shall in mercy be reclaimed, and their wisest
acts not being done in love, and fear to God, shall be by themselves deemed
foolish and unwise.

HIS last appea^ance, or being seen on mount Olivet, shadoweth, that the o^le
of m^rcy, given to the merciful, shall as a scale be a means to ascend up, or as
l^mp light, show them how to work the work of God burning in, or carried unto
them by the conduits of earthy vessels, that i^, earthy enjoyments, which as a
ladder shall more fit them for easy access unto heaven godliness having the
promise of this life, and that which is to come; and gives more Grace.

BY the way observe, that Christ, first of all appeared to women; blameing
such, who rant and curse at that sex, as being Mother to sin; whereas had they
been in Evah's happiness their felicity may be, had been sooner forfeted for a
cup, then hers was for a bite; but such ought to understand, that God is wiser,
then Satan, and stronger too, and has now made that sex to intimate the world
to be redeemed; and that unto men, moving them to tenderness thereby, our
lapsed estate being wholly restored by a woman, by women, out of a garden
through the report of an Angel, Christ and believe acting together, making our
Salvation more sure and better grounded, then when it stood either upon Adams,
or Evah's behavior.

MARY Magdalen a notorious sinner saw him first, why then should attrocious
crimes in Male or Female deter the affected, from accosting that throne, where
mercy sits, and benevolence invits, to crave a remission? in her saying, unto
all be not afraid; and not resting there, ordering them to proclaim his rising
to their, and to his Brethren, that the woman's blot of the fall might eternally
be obliterat.

FOR though first in the transgression she is again, and first also, at the
Resurrection, the history whereof, when read, we shall find that women as most
deserving, were first comforted and employed; for, when men thought it good to
sleep in a whole skin, were they laying out their money, watching from sleep,
hazarding their persons, to anoint his body; not fearing, but undervaluing the
sword of the keepers; these women saw two Angels, yet it is thought he on the
right side, clothed in a long white garment the same it may be who rolle^ away
the stone, said, be not afraid, I know whom you seek, etc. and the right, is
the hand by which the Church is embraced the hand of nimblenesse and action,
without which support, the present whiteness, or seeming comforts of this
petishing earth, might fascinat, and bewitch the heart into flaunting purposes,
were it not told that the comfort we seek, is not here to be found, or deject
it into desponding* and fearful meditations, were it not informed by the power
of the Resurrection, where Jesus, a Savior, might be spoke unto and treated
withal.

A Doctrine never capable of infirmity, or old age ( which is darkly seen, in
the Angels appearing as young men) still enlivning with fresh supplys of grace,
and ordering a retreat to whatsoever thought, amuseth, or amazeth the
inquisitive or self-s^arching heart; causing it still to be clothed in white,
by the vivifying robes of celestial purity, and contrivances of real and
forestalled heavenly joy; the prospect whereof in these women's diligence,
discharges wallowing in carnal ease, pressing to a speedy rising, even in the
dawning of the day, from the soft bed of sensuality, to that more soul
comforting exercise of searching after our Lord Jesus; enstating our selves in
his favor, by unguenting the body of his poor, crucified, and traduced
members, since he himself, now as well as then, needs neither our Spices, nor
ointments, that is, our alms, charity, and beneficence.

YET let heaven behold us at some cost, in preparing spices and ointments, at
the charge of self denial, with discretion, zeal and raised devotion: for unto
those is oil compared; and if Demosthenes thought men were likest the gods,
when they did good; sure we may affirm, they are very unlike Saints, but
exc^edingly resemble the Devil, who will not do good to Gods poor, nor ( pardon
the expression) to Christ their God; when he seems poor* as here he did, to
the holy women, wise Joseph, and holy Nicodemus, who teaches, to r^fresh and
to preserve in vigor, to keep from decay; and to comfort the soul now of
Christ, by the ointments and embalming Spices of sins mortification: for as he
dyed, by, so he also dyed for, our sin; and by Ointments of praise, gratulation
and thanksgiving, we prepare for him the rather, that he rose again, or was
raised, for our justification; which if not accomplished, you are yet in your
sins, the discharge not being procured from God, the true and just creditor*
then are we under the power of the Devil, and heirs of hell and damnation, being
children of wrath; but if Christ be risen, nothing of all these, to discover
which, an Angel was sent to roll away the stone from the sepulcher, as the
Judge orders the prison doors to be opened, signifying to spectators, to
believers heaven to be reconciled, and the work of the Resurrection to be
perfectly wrought without the power of Negromancy, which might have been
objected, had he, immediately with the witch of Endor's gods, rose from the
earth.

HENCE that inference is good, the Spirit shall convince the world of
righteousness, because I go to the Father, (i. e.) I go to the Father,
therefore I am righteous, for in his face might not I look, having had by him
sin impured, if I had not compleately satisfied for the same, and done every
thing to perfection, which I came into the world for, which was to take away
the sins of the world, which being done, I am righteousness in my self* and
the Spirit shall prove me to be right unto all, because I am gone to the Father;
wherefore he rose in the dawning of the day, the clouds and darkness about
himself, the darkness and clouds about the souls of men* being scattered and
gone, the Sun of Righteousness with healing under his wings (a metapho^ick
expression from the spreading of his beams, and stretching forth his rays, as
wings) covering us, and brooding over, by his warmth, ou^ young graces, for
their strength, and healing our old sores, and festred boils, that we might not
be darkness, but light in the Lord; no^ as lepers secluded his congregation,
but as his symbol had been like that of Maximilian of Bavaria, he brought
visible testimonies of everlasting reconcilment from all in heaven, toward all
on earth: that Duke gave in a field, two Turtles, standing on the brim of a
cup, on each side of a lance, which was adorned with a Crown su^mounted by a
Cross, illuminated from a glory out of h^aven, all upheld by two right hands
complicated, or joined together, issui^g out of the clouds, with this motto
Concordiae ae^ernae, as if by the support and Union and of the two natures,
there were a cup of Salvation offered, now to dove: like innocents, shining
from heaven by the Cross, offering a crown of glory, in laying a side
Hawk-like ferity, and uniting like kind mates one to another, since amnestia,
or oblivion like, acts are passed in heaven, toward us all, which is made out
beyond demonstration by our Saviors going to the Father, by his rising from
the dead.

DOES ^ot the Holy Ghost, press in divine writ a life Godly, Holy, and
prepared always for heaven, in forsakeing the unfruitful works of da^knesse,
upon and from, the doctrine of the Resurrection? as if those, who looked
toward it, should not look behind them, least they be concluded not fit for
the Kingdom of God, but love^s of this present world and catere^s for the
flesh: seeking to fulfill the lusts thereof, to mortify which, how incredibly
rigid has been the abstinence, and how strangely fervent has been the prayers
of the Ancients, in their Quadragesimal or Lent-devotions? in them ^ menting
their own and their brethren's excess, in their voluptuous embraces, studying
to live unto piety, not luxury; refusing often to pay Nature her just debt of
a^iment, and food, for her too often debaurds, making this feast a spiritual
Pasch, truly passing from darkness, and it is works, the deeds of the flesh, to
the operations of the Spirit, the renewing of the Spirit, by putting on the new
man after God created in righteousness and true holiness; persuading, by the
sanctimony of their carriage, others to receive impresses of the beauty of
holiness; beholders admiring their love* which wrought them unto an imitation
of their deportment.

THOSE that rose with Christ appeared unto many giveing infallible tokens of
their leaving the Society of the dead, whether Adam, or Job* were among them,
as some sa^, I know not; yet his is certain, that their Resurrection mystical
is to be questioned, whose acts do not quadrat with those ru^es of blameless*
and spo^lesse behavior, by law expected, and in con^cience also resolved upon,
by such who really are influenced with, and by the power of the Resurrection
animated to things above: We hear of the perverse, surly, morose lives of many,
but such as are risen with Christ are doing good, and walk charitably with all
men, tha^ such who are without, ( that is, out of the Church) as Pagans, Turks,
^ew^, may be won by their good conversation. We see many puffed up with
impudence; and arrogance, but they are clothed with humility; multitudes say,
come let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die: these are temperate in all
things, and not knowing what a day may bring forth, dye* daily, a number
grumbleth mu^mu^eth, repineth, at this and the other Cross; at this, and the
other, fancied calamity; these posesse their souls in patience: too many
assemble in Troops, to Harlots houses, are whoremongers, Adulterers, these
^bstain from the very garments spotted with the flesh, How numberless are
such, who curse, rail backbite, snarle at their Brethren? and like dogs swear,
that is, snarle, and grin at passers by, these honor all men, pray for all men
love the brethren, giving Religion a luster, and really beautifying the cause
of Christ.

AS the Jews fondly teach, that only the Godly, shall rise at the last day, we
may truly pronounce, that the Godless, are not this day raised, the
communication of those two who went to Emmaus, discovers the truth of this, who
though sadned at their Masters Death, yet were not Spiteful at the instruments
thereof, speaking how the chief Priests and the Rulers, delivered him to be
condemned, without any other epithet, expressing rancour, there be who will
have these, Luke and Cleophas: Luke, is rising up, and Cleophas has glory in
his name: and surely the rising from darkness and deadness, with the desire
of being glorious, is to go to Emmaus* which by interpretation is desire of
counsel: and how happy were it, if this age would advise with and about it
self, touching the verity of Christ, and Him risen, together with the duties
d^pending thereupon; leaving Jerusalem and all its g^udinesse, to walk those
sixty furlongs Morally; these two physically trod, it is a number arising from
multiplying of ten by six: The Ten Commandments being appointed by JEHOVAH, for
the rule of our Actings, and the renouncing this present World, amending our
Lives, crucifying Self, voyding Hypocrisy, keeping of the Heart, w^tching over
the door of our Lips, being the six paces to be observed in our going over the
moral Law, We cannot choose but have Christ with us, and our eyes to see Him
with great ^oy, where now because glorified He shall not only eat bread with us,
as in the History, but shall sup with us, and we with him, as in the
Revelation; unto which a serious reflection, and deep medita^ion upon the
Cross, and sufferings of our LORD, this passage examplifies to be a fertil-mean.

LAY your ear to the holy Communication these two had, and it is properly a
devout imagination, to conceit Luke speaking, Brother Cleophas, can you forget
the clamor of the Priests against our Master, when Pilat was determined to let
Him go; how they cried, away with Him, crucify Him, not this Man, but
Barabbas? yea a murderer; whereas our Master, shed no man's blood, but went
about doing good to every body, and that in such a way by commanding, praying,
advising that I should have sworn he had been the Son of God, whereas now I
conjecture his Father ha^ smitten them with blindness, as he did he Sodomites,
with Hemroids, as the Philistens, with fire as, did Elisha the Cap^ai^s o^ some
other way had been found, as by a v^ice from heaven, for his sons delivery, but
to lay hold on that tattle of his appearance to the women, is to be swallowed
up of error, Luk 24.11. their brains, their early rising, their ^ea^ has
certainly disturbed them, and made them fancy they saw, God knows what; and as
some think, the bells Cl^^k.

Dear Brothe^ might Cl^ophas say; I should almost be of your mind: but when I
remember of Lazarus (whom you mind me of; for you know we heard a voice from
Heaven) I s^y, when I think upon him* How fresh, how well-colored, he was
raised; by a Loud, not Che^ping voice, with words we understood, not dark
Phrases, as Conjurers and Charmers (...) to do, I must conclude him to b^ the
Son of God, though I confess, I marvel he wrought no miracle to save himself
from sc^urging, from dying, and since he said he was King of the Jews he came
not down from the Cross, that they might believe, this I confess sticks with
me, this I am sure of, if he be alive this day, he will be so to morrow and
next day also, and we shall see it and know it, his goodness, sweetness,
kindness, and merciful disposition toward all in distress, but especialy to
us, makes me confident, he will not conc^al himself long, but will come unto
us; and God, who in the simplicity of our heart does know we followed him, not
for any lucre we got by it, shall setle us in the truth at last, and reward us
according to the integrity of our hearts: therefore be not afraid, at our
return we shall know more, and your bells clink may be retorted unto, and turned
by a Cross Proverb, before the lame post, make much of one, there is few good;
a true axiom and holds here, the women being of excellent endowments forms
hope, of future comfort by a certainty of all things.

SVCH communication administrats such grace, that it is no wonder, if the fiery
chariot of Religious gifts, hasten to come down for conveying the heart aloft,
and the Spirit, as at Pentecost to come with full information of all s^ving
truths, taking the Scalls of doubtings, from the eyes of the mind, as Saul did
from those of his body, making it to be known for a truth, that Christ is
risen indeed; and if he should seem as though he were to depart, in the
coldness of the heart to those conferences, then be instant with thy Mane
^obiscum, abide with us, Luke 24.29. the evening of thy dark, and cold
surmises, clouds, temptations, and other perplexities, being approaching; and
if serious, he shall continue to the end, and make appear, that he is no
stranger to thy affairs, but well acquainted with whatso-ever has, shall, or
can, befall thee comforting thy soul in all, and all because of the
Resurrection.

IT was a Iwell expression, that fell from the mouth of the golden-mouthed
Father, that at the Sun rising upon the day of the Resurrection, it was
defraying of just debt, to begin teaching of brotherly kindness, and charity,
applying the power of the Resurrection, for cementing the hearts of men one
toward another: it appearing to unite God and Man, yea gloriously procured it;
but how can these things be without a conformity to his death? Not such as is
fabled in the Legend of that Popish Saint ( Francis) who is said to have the
print of the nails and spear in his feet, hands and side; or such either as is
recorded of the herb Granadille in America, in which (if we believe report) the
instruments of the Passion, to the whip, the pillar, and the thorns, are
visibly seen in the flour, nor it may be with St. Paul, to have the wales of
the persecutors rod, upon the flesh, the gore blood lying, and not cured in the
blewness of the stripe upon the skin: the Fellowship of his suffering, even to
his condemning by Pilat, being to be answered by a severe sentenceing our
selves, singling out every sin, and processing it before the bar of
Conscience, according to the judgment God makes thereof; causing execution to
follow, with as much Zeal, and as little delay, as did the Jews, after the
Governors sentence, of of which take one Copy in record.

Take you Jesus of Nazareth a contemner of Caesar, and one who calls himself
the Mes^i^h as has been proved by the Testimony of his own Nation, to the
Common place of execution, and in derision of his Kingly Majesty fasten him to
the Cross: but to evidence the uncertainty of this History, ^ake it as another
Copy says, it was I Pilat President of Jerusalem, adjuageth thee Jesus of
Nazareth for making thy self a King, and for calling thy self the Son of God,
and for making sedition among the people; Orders, according to the Laws of
the Roman Empire, thy fastening to the Cross, and to be lifted up un^ill thou
die* wave^^g th^s, every sin, pretending to have rule and command, has forced
us to deporable actings, and by usurped Authority, countermanded God,
harressing the soul by Sedition, having seduced it, from orderly, and peaceably
walking, Pride, Ambition, Lust, or Envy, having been made King by the wills
content, ordering obedience to our Maker^ dishonor, and our own disquiet,
Redness of eyes, Deadness of heart, Fury in face, wounds in the side, Death in
the fi^ld, moving on uproar, wandering thoughts, as posts running to and fro,
abbetting every lust almost to u^pardonable transgression; in that sinful
stayedness, as if because of Impudence, Corruption had been of God, for which
it is to be adjudg^d to the (...) by man, who is established under God over the
Commonwealth of his own Soul, having Common-Laws and rules for discerning of
matters, which if not hearkened unto by passion, fear or otherwise, may cause
deposition, which Pilat feared, who, when called to Rome to answer for tirany,
fearing contumely, and receiving affronts, sl^w himself: as Herod also did, who
is thought to be aimed at in the parable of the unjust Steward, and like him
when laid aside for maladministration, being banished by Caesar, proved
fellon ( de se,) a self Murderer.

AND hark, is it not perspicuous, how that all the persecutors of our Lords
body, which is his Church, or the instruments, and abbettors of his Death, as
Judas in himself, or the Patriarchs in his Tipe, Joseph, in selling him, have
bought sorrow for twenty pieces of silver in common sickles, the other for
thirty of the Sanctuary, they for their Brother had twenty five shillings
sterling; he for his Master three pound fifteen shillings, and for a Courtezan,
a Draught, a piece of silver, a morsel of Bread, a Madrigall, a Song, how often
is he betrayed into the hands of sinners? men selling their Savior to hugg
their lust.

THEERFORE such as design profit, by the Resurrection, must conclude the
additament of worldly pelf, or carnal pleasure, so basely purchased to be
sordid, and unhappy; studying rather the particulars wherein Christ can be
advanced, that estimation may be made according to real worth, and the account
of truth, he being the Truth, the way and the Life, the first of Religious
verity, the next of holy Conversation, the third of happiness eternal, which
are infinitely in true reckoning, preferable above and beyond the deceitful
appearances of temporal possessions, for appearances they only are, as is to
be seen in the agents of our Saviors Passion: First, of the Patriarchs, who
sold him in Joseph for a bondman, next in Judas, who delivered him to them,
who condemned him as a Malefactor.

HE was slain by Cain, in Abel, and for that Cain is to be censured, that is,
sin must be charged with his blood; In Isaac after, but he escaped, and the Ram
in the thicket served for a burned offering, we, as that Son of Laughter escape
the hand of justice, he is the other's seized upon, found in the thorns of his
Passion, which were planted by our hands, and made to tear his holy Body by our
folly; and since he has also escaped* let his endurance dash the lust of the
Eye, the lust ^f the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; which were the thorns that
pricked him, the nails that pierced him, and the Envy that caused him to be
persu'd, for which Crown him with Roses; and vailing our face as did Rebecca,
being ashamed for former delinquences, let us as chaste Virgins espouse him unto
our selves, returning into our houses, dead in sin, and crucified unto the
World; which is seemly, Christ having suffered for it, before us, for that end;
having promised ^n the third day to raise us up, we bearing our Cross in
sincere sorrow: not coming down from it, by consu^ing with Flesh and Blood, or
keeping any one sin back through profane Custom, rive ed in us: but bow down
our heads in humility, and give up the Ghost in constancy ( sle^p^^g) that is
resting in the se^enity of a good Conscience, looki^g for that hopeful
assurance of the Resurr^ction and blessed hope of the fru^tion of the Spirit of
holiness with H^avenly mindedness; in which, as by A^gles, we shall be
comforted, assured and solaced Until we meet the Lord, in the holy Mountain,
where he shall be seen as he is, and we know as we ar^ Known.

WE are said in our Carnal-capacity, to be dead in sin (though alive by nature)
as having neither Life, Breath, nor Motion for things Heavenly; the greatest
vants of Heaven, though set before us, in Word and Sacraments, or any other
nourishing spiritual aliment; benefiting us no more then the choicest B^^que
savor, or re^l^sh of the most delicious or (...), from the most artificial
cook, c^u^d replenish, sa^isfie, or fill the emp^y, because no (...), entralls
of one Deceased; Bu^ that Spirit of Holiness, which ai^^d up JESUS, shall
uicken this mortal body, and giving i^ a living breath, cause it become a
living soul, hungring, and thirsting after righteous^esse, groaning, that so
industriously it should have pulled misery upon it self, which can only be
compensed, by being naked ( as all Crucified malefactors were) in an
Ingenuous^cknowledgment; not putting on the Fig-leaf of an excuse, as Adam, but
rather, when reproved, answer as CHRIST did Herod, in silence; which indeed,
may put flesh and blood into a heat, a sweat, pleasure and re^enge, saying, Let
this be far from thee, pity by self and me, who has been ever with thee, yet
it must be endured: For, because of this, thou came into the World, and
Angels shall then comfort and strengthen, in that ^avishing sentence, the
Father has forgiven thee, thy iniquity is taken away, thou shall (...) die.

ONE Thief must be Crucified, that is, thy decei^full Heart: another, must be
peni^ent, and beg mercy, that is, thine own Soul, for delinquencie and
offending yet let it not be desperate, as those without Hope; but urging,
pressing, as earnest for Salvation, an^ infallible note of prepared Paradise,
and then of all thy sinful courses, cry, they are finished: Hanging still upon
the Cross by outstretched hands, in Obedience securing thy Soul in all
service, within the Rock of thy Saviors merits, fitting us for a Resurrection
upon the third day. First, from the plague of the heart, the boil of putrid
Corruption; as from the bed of Hezekia, next from the belly of Hell, in dismal
frightnings and starrings of Conscience; as from the Whale in Jonah, and from
the sentence of death, passed in the breast of the Law; as did Isaac from the
Altar of his Father, the third day being figured in that Patriarch, that Saint,
that Prophet, and a Day in which there was never one raised from the Dead: HE
excepted, the third Day being kept for him in Honor, and therefore, He is
said, to rise the third Day, according to the Scripture: A Sabbath also
interveening, in which it is observed, ther^ was never Man raised, either in
Old or New Testament; and CHRIST being the Hea^ of the RESURRECTION, showed in
this a purpose not to disjoyn Himself from those before risen; but to continue
Communion chused another time, which was the third Day; Leaving the Sabbath, I
might say Saturday-Sabbath, to rest with His Grave-cloathes, as never more to
be used; and ( a^ we learn from the Current of Antiquity, from the Universal
practice of the Church, in times, in, and so near the Apostles, that the head
of the Institution is not found, (making it the more venerable) though some
factiously in our ^^yes rant at the observance,) designed the Day of the
RESURRECTION for solemn ^ppearance before the Throne of GOD, which was so
revered, both weekly, and annually, that the Precepts, 1. Cor. 5. Let ^ keep
the feast, and that other expression, ^^. I. I was in the Spirit on the Lords
day, ^ by many understood, to belong to the ^early Feast of the RESURRECTION*
(...) observed.

REMAIN not therefore with Lazarus the Grave-cloaths of sinful custom four
^yes, by thinking upon, likeing of, by doing, (...) then continuing in the acts
of concupisence or, such, no doubt, stink in the nostirles of (...), and shall
be killed by Death; but rise (...) third day, that is, this Morning, with ^ur
LORD, and appear unto them that ^ow you, talking of the Kingdom of GOD; (...)
walking in the Holy City, and be more ^^rious, more sublime, more majestic,
(...) before, as Joseph was, when he was taken (...) prison, and as JESUS was,
when He (...) from the Grave; that Christian being Christian, who is not
conform to the (...), suitable to the RESURRECTION CHRIST, which we shall be,
if we rise, and talking, salu^ing our Brethren with Peace, and again peace be
unto you; that they may perceive we intend for Galile, forsakeing terren
desir^s, there abiding now Faith* Hope, and Charity: Faith in the RESURRECTION
of the flesh, Hope in the expectation of eternal life, and Charity in the holy
catholic Church, expressed in our Creed, by the Communion of Saints.

JAMES of Aragon, upon his Conquest of the M^jorca Islands fancied, and created
an Order of Knighthood, called, of Redemption: their service peculiarly
respecting ^ liberation of Prisoners and Captives, their habit was always to
be white: Is not ou^ JESUS appointed for deliverances? an^ did He not by
entering into the Prison of the Sepulcher, say to each of us detained under
ig^norance, force, and fraud, what the Ange^ said to Peter, Arise up quickly,
cast thy garment about thee, and follow me? Act^ 12.18 Abiding no longer with
the possessed amon^ the Tombs of the Dead, Graves of lust no^ Iayls of sinful
custom, let us go forth wit^ Him who is, so to speak, Sovereign of tha^
Order, other Redeemers, in comparison (...) Him, delivering from a flea-bit, he
shiel^ding from a thunderbolt, a sword, a poison (...) arrow, a burning fire,
a ^aging Sea, a ^inging Serpent, a roaring Lion, and a ^^wing heart-worm,
assaulting all at once, without hopes of rescue, except from His Almightinesse
alone.

BUT how justly doomed are they? who ^eing once freed will run the second time
to (...) stocks? who being washed and shaved with Joseph will return to their
former ^ench? polluting themselves afresh with ^he noysomnesse of
dung-like-corruptions; ^allowing in the mire of ungodly chambering and
wantonness, drunkenness and excess; ^aining th^se Vestu^es they have put on, in
embracing Gospel Truths, Swine-like lying down, in the pond, pool and puddle of
fil^hy conversation*

WRITE rather after the Copy of the ^^imitive Christians, who in this Feast of
the RESURRECTION, and many days after, refused to, or did not kneel in Pray^r;
judging that a more sorrowful posture, then was ad^quat, or fit for so joyful a
season, is their frequent Allelujahs expressed this to be, but stood; the LORD
being risen, as though their joy, cheerfulness and zeal had perfectly assured
them their next motion should be toward Heaven; It was Christ's Pasch, for He
left the Dead, they expected their Pasch, and being ready for the Father, stood
as alive, frequenting the Holy Communion, the pledge of Eternal Salvation:
Young Converts appearing in Church, clothed in white Raiment, the badge of
that purity acquired in their Baptism; of which Sacrament we partaking, let us
keep this Feast with holy Innocence, bat^ing the Garment that is but spotted
with the flesh; our news and tidings, our salutes, and complements being as
theirs was, The Lord is risen.

THE Answer in our Lives like theirs also in Words; The LORD is risen indeed.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERY OF THE ASCENSION OF THE SON of GOD,
Unfolded and applied. Holy-Thursday, May 20. High-Church. 1669.
Ascension-Thursday, May 20. High-Church. 1669.

JOHN VI.LXII. What and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was
before?


IN the History of the holy Gospel that express exactness of method and
dependence, in answering and questioning in other Arts studied, and required,
is not always to be found; Our Savior who knew the heart, to detect the
deceits therein, answering often according to them, for confutation, and
discovering, rather then conform unto, or observe contexture of words and
purposes: Among which, these words are evidently to be seen, where speaking of,
and proving Himself to be, the true Bread, which came down from Heaven,
infers thence a necessity of the Jews eating, that is of believing upon Him,
and from Himself perceiving their murmuring at the impossibility, or absurdity
of that matter, demands, What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up
where He was before? Whereas of his ascending up, there was no preceding
controversy.

YET as there is a secret digested Art by the wisdom of the Spirit, in the
compileing of that sacred Record in general; so there may be avowed a hidden
connection, even of these words, to the former: for His assertion of His coming
down from Heaven, implies evidently His being there, and that He was there, He
proves by His Descending thence; which words when the Jews were offended at, to
enstall their admiration, and heighten their wondering. He proposes His What
and if, etc.

A QVESTION which proposes ground for, yet expects no answer, prophesying
of, though but supposing His ASCENSION, and both by way of Question, the speech
being suspensive and seemingly defective ( q. d.) surely ye will wonder much
more then, that I whom you see a man like unto your selves, shall ascend up,
where He, that is, the Son of God, was before; that is, I, before. I was the
Son of man; and this being a greater matter, then my coming down, you will, if
you see it, certainly be more offended at me, or believe the other was true:
Offering it as conditional, by putting an if to it, yet would have it
positively to be understood, and expounded that He shall go up, and it may be
some of you may see it, which will creat a greater certainty, or breed a
greater indignation.

ASCENSION supposes Gradation, and generally understands an Act flowing purely
from the Power, Virtue, Ability, alone of the Ascender; and in Scripture is
interpreted a motion to a Holy and Honorable Place, it is a going down to
Egypt; but its a going up to Canaan, its a going down to Jericho; but its a
going up to Jerusalem, to the house of the Lord, and going up to God, 1. Sam.
10.3. and Ascending here, bears both this latter, and that former sense of
His own power, CHRIST not being translated, as Enoch, neither was He rapt as
Paul, nor carried as Elias, nor ravished in the Spirit as John the Divine; but
did Ascend, climbing up the scale of the clouds, until He got above all
Heavens; its true, His Birth is said to be an Ascending, the humane nature
being by it advanced, and is called a rideing upon a cloud, Isa. 19.1. His
Death is called an Ascending; for He was lifted up upon the Cross, that
Palm Tree whereof the Church is said to speak, Cant. 4.8. but these were
Improper and Metaphorick ascendings, this whereof we are to speak is proper,
corporal, bodily and local.

THE Understanding as chief Governor and Regent of the Soul, being first to be
informed, least ignorance mar our present design; and that the Will with more
opennesse, be sooner allured to advance toward, and choose the projected good,
this day labored for; wherein our LORD happily, yea gloriously finished and
ended all His Travels: We shall show whence, and then whether He ascended.

YOU must note, He had lived in, and trod upon the Earth, and woe was He for
abideing in that Mesech, being hedged, and entangled three and thirty years
with the thorns and nets of calamities and trouble; it being to Him a
perpetual Calvary, a place of suffering, so coupling him to sorrow, that He
was a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3. Once we find Him reading, and once writing,
often ^raying; yea* JESUS weep'd, the shortest ^entence in the Bible: Yet that
JESUS should weep, makes infathomable compassion conspicuously discernable,
and we know He did it more then once; but that He laughed, we have not one Text
that does so much as smile that way, His life being con^orme to His birth,
which was in tears, sighing out His time, and groaning in the Spirit, for the
falls, follies, and laughings of men.

THAT glory he had with the Father, when he was not the Son of Man: being
revealed to his Manhood by his Divinity, brought down the sale, and in his
esteem, the worth of those sights, the world, or the god of this world, offered
unto him; the glory and Kingdoms thereof; not abusing his refined
understanding, nor blinding his judgment, to the defalcation of that real
worth, which was in the solidness of a future expected glory; but left an
impress more deep in his Heaven-born Soul, to contemn those flourishes; the
Temple stones, or a Herod, or a Kingly Office, in all its glory, could
represent to his une^ring fancy, which did frustrate in him: and indeed does
in all, believing upon him, the fairest perswasives, or most prolifick
enjo^ments sensuality can, or could offer, He, and They, because of him,
accounting all of these in their sum total: what Solomon did in deep
knowledge, and Gellimer King of Goths in high grief attested; who being
presented as Captive before Justinian in his glorious Throne, rent his
garments, crying hideousl^y, Vanity of Vanities, all is but Vanity, the
Varnish whereof, he beholding with reluctance; did endure its flattering
promises, and with constancy, its eagerest and most stupifying menaces, this
day hasted to the Hills of Frankincense; and calls upon you, as upon His Spouse,
To come from Lebanon, the tops of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon,
from the Lions Den from the Mountains of Leopards, Can. 4.8. From P^aces and
Hills seemingly beautiful, yet Hazardous beyond expression, Syrians,
Philistims, as b^asts, devourin^, and destroying men; for with me there is
neither Judas, Jew, Herod, nor Devil; that can attach.

WHICH invitation if lifted unto; by Faith, we may supperad, that of the Church
1^ Can. 4. Draw me, we will run after thee; Showing willingness; but withal
inability, the imitation of his flight (pardon the expression) being the Period
of the Souls desire, detesting the Malignity of this world, and contending
against its Dignity; the first embittering its greatest enjoyment, as an iron
brusing the bone: the l^st founded as upon ice, ready to be dissolved, both to
the eternal hazard of all good. The Church wish^th and prays to be drawn
after him in imitation, to him by affection; yea, in him by Union and Impession.

AS the birds of the Air, though Jesus (by a compounded for, or conse^ted unto
necessity) sometimes touched ^he Earth for his meat; yet like them again, his
aspiring thoughts frequented the more holy and durable objects which were above
the Sun: (food for man being not only brought from bread) disdaining the
admittance into his breast the dust heaps of earthly trash, which the crafty
foxes and wild beasts of avaricious and carnal oppressors, worldly Muck-worms,
felicitat themselves in; which was expressed in this expression, A little while
and ye shall not see me, and again a little while and ye shall see me, because
I go to the Father, John 16.16. As if his abode upon Earth in any kind, was
still to be short, by which he gave assurance, Mortality in the image of his
flesh, was shortly to be put off; and the same flesh to be again invested with
the robes of Majesty and glory, which being heeded by his Followers, causes
support against the ruinous deceits this Mortality endeavors to entangle them
in* resolving to fight with him, even to suffering of death, concluding to be
victors in his Resurrection, and to triumph in the virtue of his Ascension.

OLIVET giving so much light, and Calvary that knowledge to the sanctified
head, that all sufferings, and glorious actings, how different so ever they
appear, (and how vast seems the discrepancie between Christ on the Cross, and
Christ in the Cloud?) when compared together; yet center in this one thing,
man's Ascension unto glory, unto which, as weak, yet, though weak, the Good Man
shows earnestness, and willingness to possess, in saying Draw me* promising
not to be sloathfull, in the acquisition of such dignity, subjoyneth we will
run after thee; and truly, as mercy began toward man at, or, in Christ's birth,
and continued in his death published at his Resurrection, so was it sealed,
ratified and confirmed in his Ascension, henceforth no more to be doubted, then
whether Christ's being there, is to be scrupled, that being the seal by which
all is made sure, which was Written in (...) word, subscribed by miracles,
supe^^scribed by death, directed in rising the third day; but signed as by the
Kings own signet, by the seall of glorious verity, this day, wherein, in our
flesh* heaven was entered, and we being flesh Enfranchised or Incorporat into
that City, naturalized into that Kingdom, as natives, as Citizens; or if you
please, have got seasment of that Land as the Bride, the Lambs wife; for which
Praise the Lord all ye nations, praise him all ye people: For his merciefull
kindness is great toward us, and the Truth of the Lord endures for ever,
Psalm. 117. All things being fulfilled which were fore-prophesied.

IT were not seemly to wave the particular place, whence he took his rise,
which was from Mount Olivet, by Interpretation, a Mountain of lights, either
from the Suns shining thereon, at its first rising; or the lights of the Temple
Splendour thereon at its setting, or, it may be, because the lamps of the Temple
were furnished with oil, from the fruit thereof, or, as others from the shining
smoothness which is on the skin of the olive-berrie: But from what part of that
Mount he made his exit (is unknown) it may be for the same cause why the grave
of Moses is obscure ( viz.) to prevent superstition; which offense, and sin, is
evidently seen in those ignorant and scandalous Idola^ers, about a rock, in
that mount where by Mounks is shown the the Image of a foot, which they say,
was impressed in the rock, by that foot which was last on the rock as our
Savior moved therefrom* to be seen yet in that beautiful structure the
Chapel of the Ascension, builded by the Famous Helena, just over the place
where our Lord took his ^rise, reverenced, both by Turks and Christians, as
fitted upon that score for Devotion; jointly performed by both Religions, the
last officiating, at the Toleration of the other, the house being in the
possession of the Mahometans: Curiosity and Supperstition drains the purses of
many, for beholding this, and other supposed Foollerys, but that all might not
be lost, from this Impresse, Travelers take some quantity of loose sand as a
Religous relick: yet the mischief is, what quantity soever be taken there
from, it is still supplied by new, so that the continuance of that miracle, may
be one ground to prove it no wonder but a cheat.

AT the foot of this mount Gethsemane was to be seen, where the oil presses
stood for pressing of the olives, and within the compass of that mount as far
as Bethania, did he travel toward his ascending, the same way ^e had rod into
the City, about forty seven ^yes before; and where his Friends Laza^us, Martha
and Mary dwelt, as if he had ^id, there is but one way unto glory, that is, ^he
way of the Cross; except in that rode ^here is no glory, except in that path
there ^s no victory, and unless you strive, no en^ring into the strait gate:
for as Olive^ is so ^ermed from light, so Bethany is termed obedi^nce; of which
grace his Ascension is a fruit, and who can pretend friendship unto him, or
^is, as did Lazarus, whose soul sets not his (...) unto Gods verity and truth,
in yielding submission unto that law, given the Church, of avoiding ungodliness
and worldly lusts, being sober, righteous, and Godly, in this present world?

ADAM through disobedience forfeited Paradise, and was cast into the valley of
death, and darkness, his Successors, must infer the only mean to review that
whereof it was but a ^^pe: nay which is more, to taste of the tree of life, and
ascend to the mount of God, is to forsake the way of Cain, and not aid the
conspiracy of Corah, but run that race of obedience, Christ has run before us,
causing every step that is, every act of our life, tend to the perfecting of us
in those graces above mentioned, whose light endoctrinating; to the splendour,
and rays of beaming good works, made bright by the oil of the Spirit, conveyed
into the soul, by the branches of Sacraments* and all other ordinances; are
abst^acted from earth, or earth^ mindedness, ascending to the hill of the
Lord, and standing in his holy place, foreseeing, and palpably discovering, the
direful issue of abideing in a tumultuous City, and bloody World, where in
place of Friends, and Marthas or, Marys, holy and friendly treatment, worthies
of whom the world is not worthy, flagi^iously are assaulted with Lanterns,
torches, swords and staves, and by fond flattery, villaneously betrayed into
the hands of those who hate them by a Judas Kiss, a Ioahs fair word, and a
Tamars embrace.

BUT behold the order, for that he ascended, what is it but that he also
descended first? Ephesians. 4.9. and in spiritual regiment, he who would leap high,
and far must stoup and press his body lower, and lower; He ascended, its true,
far above all heavens; but He first descended into the lower parts of the
earth, (i. e.) abhorred not the Virgins womb; it being expedient for him, who
desiderates heavens joy, the Seat of God blessed for ever, to descend first
into the deep places, dark cells of his vain imagination, the matrix or womb,
wherein is conceived all malice, wrath, blasphemy, and all lasciviousness; and
then when perfecting the will of God in crucifying the old man, walking with
Abraham to the Mount of contemplation; and then as Christ at Bethany, lifted up
his hands toward Heaven, arguing His affections being there, before his
personal aryvall: let us point at the permanency of these Heavenly pleasures,
accounting them more preferable then such, which this earthly Glob presents to
her admirers, which being but in pitchers of her own mould are brittel, though
fair, yet will the fascination be uncharmed; for Hell ( which is a hole) shall
resolve, that all promised enlargements, were but a bewitching, not a
refreshing of the Soul: And Canaans way being upward, made Elias to be carried
up, and why should I be any longer here cried Religious Monica? the hopes that
I have of things above, making me to delight in nothing that is beneath; why am
I here? beholding the flowery mead of this visible world, to be full of stinging
and poisoning serpents, noisome weeds, whereby it became despi^able in her
eyes, and accounted her self miserable until elevated above it.

A proper work, a significant fruit of Christ's ASCENSION, which as relating to
man, has a fourfold degree, First, to the heart, next, in the heart, next, by
the heart, and lastly above the heart; The first provoking the fear of God, the
second receiving Counsel from him, the third espouses Christ unto it self, and
the fourth makes a discovery of God, and beholding him as a fight delectable as
a sight beautiful, a disappearance is made of earth, a neglect, yea a hatred,
of its pretended only, and seeming delicious enjoyments.

BUT, What means this where he was before? or that other like it, No man has
ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven; even the Son of Man
which is in heaven, John 3.13. One He, viz the Son of Man, and another He, viz.
the Son of God the pronoun, the same in both, yet making a vast discrepancie in
the two: He Is He, The Son of Man ascending, where He not the Son of Man; but He
the Son of God was before, and that for ever; that is, in heaven: where He the
Son of Man had never been. Behold, the pronouns force; He, the Son of Man, on
Earth was He who though now talking; yet as God is in heaven: the word (IS,) is
urged, for as Man he was at the same instant on Earth, and not yet ascended to
that place where He, as God, was before.

THIS arises from the union of the two natures in him, (viz) that of Man, and
and that of God: where the properties of each other, are attributed to the
whole person, which yet in examination must be only referred to one of these
natures, as in these words save the Son of Man, which Is in heaven (...) if
then he had been there; which to affirm of his M^n-hood, were erroneous, He
speaking to them under the Sun: but as God it is ^greable to Truth, and
therefore the Ascend^ng of the Son of Man, must not be unders^ood of his Deity,
for as God he is uncap^ble of going to any place, being in all places ^t once,
and filling all by the infinity of his nature. His Ascending therefore, is to
be applied, to his huma^ne nature, wherein only he can properly be said to
shift places, and change seats; and where he was before: to his Godhead, he
being with the Father before all Worlds; which Doctrine of Union, puzzeling
Nichodemus, made him wonder; but remember he came to Jesus by night; and until
this Sun rose upon the face of the Church, this Doctrine was hid from the wise
and prudent Rabbis, but now unto Babs and Children this light shines:
comparing Scripture with Scripture, words with deeds, with the assistance of
the holy Ghost, it is known, that when Christ was crucified, the blood of God
was shed, and when the Son of Man rose, the and Son of God rose, when the Son
of Man ascended, God also ascended, the Personal Union of the two naturs
allowing the expressions. The Word which was made Flesh at this time, hav^ng
never seen heaven; the Word then Flesh, was to ascend and sit in heaven, where
the flesh, that was the Word had never been.

WHAT St. Paul mentioned of the several members of the body, which though
having their own peculiar functions, yet united, make one body, and applies it,
saying, so also is Christ, that is, the Church, 1 Cor. 12.12. May be alluded
unto here in these two natures of Christ, of which we say, so also has the
Church, every member thereof being the Son of God as well as the Son of Man and
their Ascending into heaven, as Sons of Men, with their flesh and bones,
ascends but where they were before, in their Spirits, and desires, Enoch (a typ
of Christ ascending and also of the ASCENS^ON of all the elect at the end of
the world) was but coached up bodily, into that place, where Religiously he had
often in Soul been; that precept of having our affections above, where Christ
is, Col, 3.2. By Faith in love, carries the soul aloft, giving it wings to
behold and see, feel, and ^^joy the joys, rapturs, sweetness, that is (...)
the Paradise of heaven; the new Jerusalem which is above, while the flesh, or
fleshly part of man, is represented in the Emblem as the ^ring at a birds
feet, in the hand of a boy, or (...) unto a stone, hindering the full fruition
^f the Souls Ardency, in ascending to the heavenly mansions (its clogginess
impeding the spirit) through fervent desires, to be upward (...) that He, as
man, in flesh when ascended; but ^cends unto that place where He when man in
spirit was before.

THE Ascension for man's Instruction is ^everall ways expressed in holy Writ*
two whereof are most Celebrious, its called ascending up on high, in the old,
and an ascending (...) the Father in the new Testament, Psalm. 68.18. John 20.17
In the first is insinuared the glorious blessedness and Majesty, he is endowed
with, and possess^d of; all things being in his estimate, as low, as they are
in their own site; the other unfolds his exaltation above all Creatures,
whether Heaven, Saints, or Angels, hinting at his equality with God; all
glorified Spirits shouting at his entry into the heaven of heavens; called in
the Prophecy* God's going up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a
Trumpet, Psalm. 47.5. And by the way, if heaven rejoice at the entry of the Son
of Man, what Jubilations ought to be on Earth, at the ascending of the Son of
God, since he did it only to receive gifts for men, Psalm. 68.18. That is, from
God the Father, that he being man, might deliver them to men, 4. Ephe. 8. And
the Quire of Angels beholding his Kingly gate through the Clouds, and manly
steps upon heavens glorious and shining pavement, Answered and questioned each
other, who is the King of glory? and warning the porters, yea, the gates of
heaven themselves (to speak after the manner of men) to be opened, to be lifted
up for the King, strong and mighty, this Lord mighty in battle, Psalm. 24. That
he had power and authority over Earth was eminently known, in Lazarus come
forth, his dominion over the Sea, was demonstrated by his walking on its proud
waves, that the Air was at his control, was discovered by his commanding of
the winds, that Hell was not exempted from his Soveraignity was made evident in
casting out of Devils; that Angels were made subject to him, was not or, in
that they ministered unto him, and served him: Now there wanted one thing and
but one thing, to show that he was Lord of all things, which was his ASCENSION
up to heaven, by which he proved himself Lord of the Universe, and for creating
this faith in the hearts of his own, he did ascend in the sight of his
Disciples, not of the eleven only, but probably of the hunder and twenty, S.
Luke Acts, 1. Having mentioned, both the women and brethren* that were with
Christ, and in his Gospel having spoken of them, who saw him after the
Res^rrection, has so carried on the thread of his History that the eleven
being expressed, the other seems not to be excluded; this blessed sight of his
Ascending, being so recorded as indifferently to serve all the persons
mentioned, that as being by all men seen, all should confess him to be Christ
for the glory of God the Father.

THERE is in nature some secret pressure of Spirit, when not vehemently
by-assed, with urgency of affairs, vehemence of fear, that makes a man long
for* and longingly to labor after a sight of his Native Country; Ulysses is
said after ten years travel in and about the H^lespont, to desire a sight but
of the smoke of his Country, from the godds, promising thereupon satisf^ction,
though he should die at the same time; yet was not that Rome, head of an Empire,
nor Athens, a University of Arts, bu^ Ithaca, a rocky, poor, fish town, in the
Ionian S^a: from heaven did the Son of Man come, that was his Country, his
native soil, there it was where he had been before, and toward it he had
always a months mind (as earnestness is expressed in the Proverb) Lifting often
his eyes toward it, and in parting from earth, spread his hands toward it,
saying in that Ceremony O Heaven! Heaven! Heaven! the delight of my soul, the
darling of my Affection, the beauty of my choice, the treasure of my wishes, O
Heaven! when shall I possess thee? O Heaven! how long have I wished for thee?
O Heaven! how often have I looked upon thee? O Heaven! when shall I enter in into
thee? O Heavens! I come, I come, open, open, open, ye everlasting gates, open,
that I may enter and possess thy joys after my sighing, fleeing, fasting,
weeping scorning, bleeding, dying, at last embrace me.

AND who knows not, that water will ascend, as high as its rise? and this water
of life flowing from the paradise (I would say the bosom) of God, instantly
was to recurre and fl^w back, and in the streams of love to appear where he had
been before, to which he pointed, that we might be enflamed for persuit, crying
o^^ with him Heaven! O Heaven! for though Man, who is of the Earth, be Earthy
yet the Spiritual man, being born of heavenly parents, as begot of heavenly
seed, nu^sed by heavenly milk partaker of the divine nature, of the offspring of
God, ^s a stranger and pilgrim in this present world, and because of perils by
land, perils by water, malice irritating, and corruptions en^^meing,
molestations from his own Soul, not yet perfectly made wise, ca^ou^, It is not
good to be here, Christ, Moses, and Elias, are above perfected, and Holy Saints
are above grief and fear: which last sea^ed upon the Disciples at Christ's
removea^, and because he ^ent to the Father, sadness filled their heart.
wherefore because he is with the Father, not with us sorrow should fill out
h^arts, prompting to call O it is good! O how good it is, to be there! Our
Saviou^'s stretching abroad his hands, ought to att^act our eyes merely to
behold, and desire it is beau^y, it is amability, the glory of the Lord therein.

BUT w^e befall, us so transcendent is our folly, we heed neither the purpose
nor cause of that indicati^n* loveing the valley, though it were of Sodom,
because of it is fatness, though as the grass it be perishing, or ascends the
high hill of Ambitious undertakeings by power, force, or knowledge, to be
accounted gods, which has already destroyed both Angels and men, the
principles of such vanity engulphing the Soul into Eternity of despair,
themselves consequentialy are to be avoided as Damnation, by lifting up our
hands together with our hearts unto God in the heavens, Lam. 3.41. and by the
feet of our desires, LOVE and DILIGENCE, run to the mountain of Religious
contemplation, the very reflection and shade thereof creating insearchable joy,
but reaching of it is to^, or apex the ultimate term of prosperous, durable,
and satisfying comforts known to that Solomon of this nation, Robert Surnamed
Stward who gave in Plate, the terrestrial Glob, dignified with a Crown
embelish'd with thirteen stars circumscribed with Vanitas Vanitatum and omnia
Vanitas, Vanity of vanities, as if Universal command, dazzling glory, respecting
or relating to Earth, had been but torture, and were to him vain, and should be
to any, vexation of Spirit.

TWO things amongst others, are chiefly denied to Man, as not to die and not to
fly, yet in this Ascension the first is known, and much of the last is seen,
much because somewhat more, for what shall we call this motion upward? was it
walking? sleeping? leaping? or flying? sure we are he went from the Apostles
eyes in an advanceing pa^e, but a cloud encompassing him, the Fathers Seat, and
his throne, fitter to carry up the Son, then a chariot, that having been done
for Elijah, a Ser^^nt, which cloud enjoins no prying; and ^^cha^ get questions,
as if the heavens yeeld^d? or winds ceased? aided or what other thing ^^riofity
can invent, yet presses the relin^^ishing, and treading upon the glory of a
gaudy world, and requires a lifting up above our selves, pregnantly exhorting
us as strang^rs, to have nothing of our heart effigied thereon, at most only
our feet to honor it with a ^ouch, he mounting over and above Olivet, seeming
to say rise up my fair one and come away, Cant. 2 10. from the muddy flo^e of
this lower and common hall, and ascend the stairs of prayer and meditation,
(more comforting then that Sancta Scala at Rome ^^id to be, and resorted unto
as the^ ^airs of Pilats house being the 28 steps whereon our Savior went, and
returned in his passion) and leap, or walk, run, a^cend, or fly to the upper
rooms of the heavenly palaces; where ^ighing, filth, death, or sorrow, thorns,
or spears, have no possibility to enter, even in their remotest causes.

THE Songs of Angels, Quire of the Prophets joy of the Spirits, the light of
God, and the glory of Christ eternally revealing, everlasting causeing,
ravishing, never cloying Hallelujahs: for auditing whereof, and directing to
which, earths pagentry, the hearts carnality, is to be rejected, crucified, and
cut off, these being heavy, will incommodate us in our j^urney and reta^d us in
our ascending heavenward, after our Lord, whose drawing the Disciples from
Jerusalem, is not without a mystery, operating upon our overcoming this present
world, or then it shall be ill with us, for as the men of Galilee, we may know
that the same Jesus shall come down again in like manner, that is, as some
conjecture from Zach. 14.14 upon Olivet stretching abroad his hands, blessing
the righteous, because ob^dient, and pure, cursing the profane, because
stubborn, and idolators, umbraged by the valley of the Son of Hinnon, a part of
which he journeyed through in his passing, but leaving it behind him in his
ascending the mount of his ASCENSION, a f^u^^ful m^unt abounding with Palms,
Olives, Figs, Gaessum, Pine-trees, typifying the Church; and the Godly, who
are, and which is fru^^ful, in g^od works, serving as mediums ^or the souls
^easce^ding unto God, and are as steps appointed for that end and purpose

OUR Creed stands not at his ascending into heaven, but registrars also, his
sitting at the right hand of God, at which place, S. Mark chap. 18.19. seats
him, ending at once his History; and our Saviors travel; which rest is far
above all principalities, and pow^^s* he sits, whereas the Angels stood, and
are expressed so to do, because servants, much more honor being his due
because of His Sonship: not that he properly sits for so there is no chair for
him to sit upon, nor right hand in GOD to sit by, but tropically it signifies
that equality, dignity, honor and ^espect, height, r^verence and power, which
equaly with God, He has obtained, in His humane nature, the heavens being high
above the earth, and the heaven of heavens ^he seat of God above them, the
Angels about the seat of God,, and our Lord on the right hand of him, that as
the earth is far distant from the heaven the upper invisible heaven, above
(...), the pavement of the seat of God above them, the Angels again above that,
who though glorious, yet are under Christ to the dignifying our nature; and us
being men, who being but dust and ashes at best, and worse, when sinners, at
the highest yet where sin abounded, grace much more abounding, the Father
receiving him into favor, as our first fruits from the earth, which obtained a
blessing for the whole Harvest of Adams offspring; God saying to such in him
sit at my right hand, which sitting clears his merits to tra^sc^nd those
workings, or purchaseings, of Cherubims and Seraphins, who stand before the
throne Luke 1.19. for sit thou is to be expounded, be thou my Fellow, according
to thy word shall all my People be ruled, as Pharaoh said, so hears this
Joseph, I am almighty God without thee shall no man lift up his hand or foot,
Genesis 41.44.

WHICH honor being given to Man, who once heard, dust thou art, and to dust
shall thou return, who was sent to the Ant accounted wo^se then the Ox, or the
Ass, not only sent to the birds of the Air to learn instruction but called the
sons of the Devil, discovers, infinite love, which should cause man per^ue that
passage of sit thou i^ his soul, until Gods love heat the heart, Christ's
merits cool the conscience, and God's sit at my right hand Nobilitat the mind,
and Christ's sitting secure the whole man, he no^ only resting for himself, but
preparing a place of rest for others.

MOREOVER the right hand is the high blessedness, peace* and joy, with
satisfaction, which God has in Christ's holy society, upon the account of his
obedience as Man in doing always his will, for the left in the Parable, denots
enmity, dissatisfaction and contrariety, and in ordinary gestures inferiority:
^t represents also three great properties therewith Christ is endowed, the
glory and honor of his Divinity; this Sun of righteousness rising at his
birth, clouded by death, did (...), so to speak, in his Fathers throne, ending
the day of his earthly appearance, and worldly troubles, in this felicity,
perfecting and finishing the work, which he came to do: ^ext the Authority of
his Manhood, we will ^ay, such a one sat forty, twenty, or Fifteen ^^ar, in
the chair, meaning government and ^are, so also does Christ, his sitting not
being (...) naked quiescence but expressing his vigi^ance, and thoughts, for,
and about the Church; for as again James the third of this Kingdom, gave in a
Medal, a Hen brooding over the Chickens shadowed with a Crown, with this device
Non dormit qui custodit, he sleeps not who governs, though they may rest, yet
in that rest, there is life, and comfort beneathed to others: Our Lord by his
word, Sacraments, and Miracles, does unweariedly uphold his Church, and all her
begotten by the mediatory office: lastly there is in his sitting, his power of
judgeing; Advocats, and Counselours stand, while Judges, and Justices sit,
especially when they give sentence; so he, when executing the ungodly, and
sentenceing them for hateing mercy, he having judgment on his left hand, fire
to burn, consume, and tear the fiery bloody Spirit, and sits in sentenceing, to
evince the deliberatnesse of the judgment.

IT IS true, once Stephan saw him stand, yet reflect that he is a Counselor,
an Advocate for the Church, and the gesture is not to be wondered at: for still
understand a Metaphor, by which figure ye may find, he sits as a Judge, stands
as a pleader; by the sentencing bloody Jews, and by the other intercedeing for
patient Christians; and again, by standing, he vows reve^ge to the enemies of
his servants; by sitting, he absolveth the enormity of his Disciples, sitting
not denoting circumscription of place, but the glory of the Deity, wherein
before al^ worlds, the SON was, being from Eternity consubstantial to the
Father; and in latter days, when Incarnate, the glory of His flesh being
exalted, because in the God head, to be adored above every creature; He coming
down by his birth, entered into the field o^ War, fought against all his
adversaries in struggling with death, conquering that King of terrors; in the
power of his Resurrection and entering his Royal City; He triumphe^ in his
Ascension, as the Roman triumphe^ having his prisoners in bonds, and
scattering medals and presents among the people; in the Scripture phrase,
giving gifts unto ^en, ending his troublesome journey to Earth in Heaven, as he
began, having the (...) of the Angels to Echo him to the World, the
gratulations of the Quire at his ingresse into Heaven; the Selah of all the
Glorious Prophets, the Euge of the goodly company of Martyrs, together with the
Religious Hymns of the Church, both East, and Went, in all ages until this
day; believing that he is gone to prepare a place for them; if it were not so,
he would have told us, Ioh. 14 2.

HE was once thought a stranger in Jerusalem, and was before that, so obscure,
that his brethren did not believe on him, (which the Jews yet press as one
great ground for their unbelief,) He acting as a Painter, who drawing his most
excellent draughts in the dark; when finished, exposes his Tables to public
veiw: so until now he carried himself strangly, as to the Syrophenician woman,
and confineing his Discples to the lost sheep of Israel; but now it is, Go,
teach all nations, suffering the Jews to deride his Miracles, to lie against
his Resurrection; but as he said, it shall be, and all the world must
acknowledge Him the everlasting Son of the Father.

IN order to which the song of the Elect is, HE that is God* HAS raised up a
horn of Salvation for us, in the house of his servant David* Luke 1.69 an Horn
indeed, growing out of flesh; yet more solid, more firm then flesh, yea
exceeding all fl^shly horns, being borne of the Virgin; behold flesh, but
conceived by the Holy Ghost; behold his excellency above flesh, yet when we
perceive him at the right hand of God; behold that horn raised, and as the horn
of the Unicorn, causes sweetness to all the embittered waters of our Jericho,
even by the touch; so does the applying of his ASCENSION, unto all our
perplexities, becomeing to all a horn of salvation: Let the Jews therefore
blasphem if they will; He is now made the Head of the Corner, exalted, raised
above all the buildings, either of Church or Synagogue, virtuating them for
beauty, strength and luster, that as in the days of Elias, the heavens were
shut up, so in the days of Jesus, after a barrenness of faith, love and hope;
there was a cloud, like the hand, I might say, like the footstep of a Man,
arising out of that Sea of Christ's Passion suffering, and a sound from thence
of abundance of precious good things, of Gods promising, and Man's needing, not
to say, asking in his ASCENSION; the Church being now as a field which the Lord
has blessed, by having Faith in Divinity, expectation of bless in the hope of
what he has promised, and Charity in the love and tenderness he has kindled
for us: so that the expression of Arethuse in his Martyrdom, is adequate, and
fitted to the Christians sublimated Spirit; for he, when hung up in Air,
exposed to B^es, Waspes and Flies, being anointed ( not to say daubea) with
honey, ^yeing his persecutors with a kind of con^umely, said, How am I
advanced, despising (...) that are below me on earth? the Soul, life, the
designs, acts of the Believer, being but a Comment upon Evangelick Precepts,
and Christ's like graces, I might say Ascendings.

ADAM is known to be put from Paradise, in the cool of the day, that is, about
the evening, admit it to be the nin^h hour, or three in the afternoon- Then it
follows, that the second Adam entered the Heavenly Paradise, when the first
Adam was exiled the Earthy: And about that time too, did the Dove bring the
Olive Branch to Noah; It cannot therefore be blame worthy to conjecture, that
the fourtieth day after the Resurrection about the same time; our LORD both in
Soul and Body entered in a manly pace, and majestic walk upon Heavens street,
and passing through the throng of Angels, took that place at the right hand of
the Father, resting there as in an Ark, having got no rest for the sole of his
foot since his comeing thence, I mean about the ninth hour; for it is said, He
appeared to the eleventh as they sat at meat, yield that to be the sixth hour,
or high noon; after which he talked, and went before them unto Bethania, Luke
24.50. or to Olivet (upon which Mount Bethania stood) from Jerusalem a Sabbath
days journey; the distance of the peoples march from the Tabernacle in the
wilderness, that is two thousand Cubits, or above half a mile from the City, a
convenient walk for the Citizens contemplation in fair weather, and for
pleasure; after which journey, discoursing and blessing. He ascended to his
Father, the Olive Branch of Reconciliation in his mouth, saying, I have
finished the work thou gav'st me to do. Father glorify thy Name, and ME with
that glory which I had before the beginning of the world; For of them whom thou
have given me, have I lost none, but the Son of perdition, that the Scripture
might be fulfilled.

AS on the ninth hour of the day, some will have his Ascension, there wants not
them who affirm it was on the fifth of May, ^he fifth day from the Sabbath,
even Thurs^ay, the day in which he was presented in ^he Temple, the fourtieth
day after his Birth, ^s holy to the Lord, being the firstborn: So the
fourtieth day after his appearing from the belly of the grave, about the same
time or hour, He presented himself in the Temple of the Jerusalem above, as
holy, harmless, and the firstborn from the dead, having after his
Resurrection, never entered into the Temple below, that Type being
dissannull'd; and having c^nsumate all Temple-service, Heaven he made his
Throne, Angels receaving thereby the product of their wishes, the Archangels
the ultimate of their desire; Man being restored, and enstated in the person of
the Son of God ( whose Tutors and Ministers they had been for that end) into
that p^istin glory, which by a Sa^anicall trick, had been cheated from them,
even from Union with God, and dominion over the Creature, which now in Christ
he has made sure unto him in heaven; and though the wicked may reckon this
security poor, because distant, and invisible, being in a far Country; yet let
them not send the messengers of Lust, Ambition, or Rebellion after him,
discovering a dislike, as if tha^ man should not reign over them: for there He
is, and there He will sit, until such and all other his enemies be made his
footstool, and thence shall he come to judge in the clouds, both the obedient
and refractory, whether Angels or men; the fear of which ought to beget in us
that reverentiall awe, it did in one Elias (not the Prophet) who is said to
have been most timorous, always dreading the approach of death, the comeing of
the Judge, the pronouncing of that sentence, Go ye cursed.

BE rather induced to ascend after him, to be with him, by going up in such
duties, as are thought to be enjoined in the Psalms, called of degrees, being
humble in prayer, as Psalm. 120. delineats; next steadfast in hope, then ardent
in desire, then fervent in meditation; and because of many remora's and
difficulties we meet withal in these, be invincible in patience then strong in
confidence, holy in cheerfulness, observers of providence, fearful of
offenses, thankful for victories* serious in supplications, meek in converse,
particular in pleadings, charitable in families, and encouragers unto all good:
the performance whereof, in a holy sense, will make each of you Adam hamahalah,
or a man of degrees; for as these Psalms were of old sung by the Levits, upon
the steps in their ascent unto the Court of the Women, at the feast of
Tabernacles, for their excellency, form, shortness and sweetness of the
matter; by these virtues as by stairs, we shall ascend, being men in this ( for
it is a reasonable service) into Heavens great Court, rejoicing with exceeding
great joy, in tasting those pleasures which are at Gods right hand therein, for
ever.

THE Priest under the Law was to bless the people at dismissing, or finishing
of the Temple-service; one form whereof is to be found, Numb. 6.23. and others
were institute by the authority of Rulers, it was pronounced standing, with
hands stretched abroad, and with a raised voice, as if he would have forced
into, or put upon the people, the mercies in those forms expressed* which is
promised in these words, And I will bless them; Grace ratifying the Priestly
benediction, when bottomed upon Divin law, for the Congrega^ions obtainment of
the desired good, which ordinarily in Religious-zeal was tarried for by the
people, who are said to wait for Zacharias, Luke 1.21. the Lords Priest, which
with that of the parent, poor and dying Christian, are known to be signally
efficacious, which made our Lord the Priest of the New Testament* when leaving
his little flock to put his blessing upon them, and with stretched out hands
also, Luke 24.50. evincing the removeal of the curse of the Law, in his bearing
of the curse for them in his own body upon the tree; and that he was going to
pray for them, and for their sin, that security might be purchased* knowledge
of the truth obtained, and eternal life, the sum of all man's salvation,
assured unto them, and always to be entreated for by him; which being done,
while he was with them in the world, should likewise be done at his abode with
the Father; before whom as with open arms He was continually to interceed for
mercy to the Elect in general, and to his Disciples in particular as Friends,
who could not, who did not part with this their Master, no more then Elisha
would from Elijah: and though with that Servant, they had not the spirit of
their Master duplicated, or doubled upon them; yet greater works then he did,
they do, because He is gone to the Father.

CERTAIN it is, that Peter did convert, and the other Disciples together, at
the feast of Penticost, more hundreds in one day, then for ought we find, Jesus
in all his lifetime to have done: to omit that passage of Peter's shadow,
Acts 5.15. (since it is not told us, who did it, or that ever any was cured by
it, or whether it was done for a good or bad end, whether in fond supperstition
by Christians, or malignity from Jews who might desire to receive benefit
thereby, yet not own the Faith of him, whom Peter taught, I say, to pass this,
we find all the Disciples endowed with a double portion of knowledge and
heavenly joy; He being seen of them go up, who had been with him from the
beginning* when such hot spurs as were offended at his Person and Doctrine,
enjoyed not that blessed sight, nor partaked of his frui^fu^l blessing; from
whom such posters are not many degrees distant, as declines the hearing of his
Gospel now; or if they do, their impatience suffers them not to reach the end
of our Divine service, that the blessing from the mouth, or hands of the
preacher, cannot be raught unto them, their head and ears, being equaly remote
from him: as their Kitchen is from his Pulpit, as if the blessing of the
Sanctuary were to be undervalued, in respect of their trivial, I might say,
sensual convenience

CHRIST is said to be the Rose of Sharon and the Lilly of the valleys: Sha^on
was a pleasant field near to mount Libanus, in the Country of Bashan, where
David's flocks and herds were fed, near unto which, was a valley fruitful both
of Lillys and Roses, growing, without man's care, or hands industry; having
earth for Mother, and heaven for a Father, which Christ also had, who as a Rose
is encompassed by prickly thorns of cares, troubles and persecutions, yet
fragrant to such who places him as beautiful in their breast, heart and
bosom; He was white in casting away his grave-cloaths, and winding sheet and
napkin, the badges and color of infirmity and darkness, so great was his
humility that he became as a Lilly and of the vallie too bending down-ward, to
bear upon his shoulders what the Father was pleased to imposs, even unto death;
but now the darkness of Mortality, being evanished, he became ruddy, clothed
with the purple robs of Majesty and Grandor; stedfasty eyeing heaven, yet still
like the Rose piercing and galling, yea, tearing, as by thorns, or pricks, the
hearts, the consciences, the Souls of such who approach not to handle him in
reverence, and religious deportment, in all parts of worship, as prayer,
praise, Sacraments, vows, or any other ordinance of the Church; He carrying up
to heaven, as may be conjectured, the very scarrs and wounds he received on the
Cross; that beholding them, the ungodly nations may the more despairingly
mourn, and more convincingly bevail their ( it may be) forgotten injuries
toward the Son of Man.

BUT to such, who as Roses delight in the shade, or as Lillys, root themselves
in the valley of humility, that is, rejoices, or affects a Conformity in his
excellent communicative properties, he shall become as an ornament to their
breast, or a pearl of great price in their hand; causing and procuring, the
Fathers acceptance to such works, as tha^ breast shall conceive, wherein he is
fixed, as David about building the Temple, or the Angel of Philadelphia about
his Ministry, Revel. 3.8. God purposing never to exalt any, but in the manner
he magnified his Son, who first drank of the brook of the way afterward he
lifted up his head.

SAINT John is the Apostle that speaks most propheticaly, of our Savior
going to the Father; yet has not one word that Historically he did it so that
the Question here, What and if you see the Son of Man ascend up where he was
before? is not answered by him: for except in the Gospels of S. Mark, and Luke,
the manner, and term of his ASCENCION is not to be found, and not without
reason is it in them, and ommitted here; for S. Luke, having in his Gospel
drawn his Genealogy from Mary, of the house and line^ge of David, making him
thence to be owned for a King, it was needful to commemorate his entrance into
heaven, as into his Kingly palace; and Mark beginning with his Priestly Office.
( viz.) of his preaching the Kingdom of God, it was suitable thereunto, to bear
in record, that he entered heaven* as into his holy Temple to interced for the
tribs of the world. But Matthew and John speaking of him as the Son of God, and
as one that came from God, (besides that each Evangelist as he writ observed
what the other had omitted, or largely handled, and accordingly as one
abridgeth, or enlarges his own history,) Leaves the Faithful to infer the
necessity of his return into heaven, as to his native Country* and of being in
heaven, as the proper seat of God the holy Gospel throughout radicating the
truth of this, and abundantly making good, the inference, all which S. John
saw, he writting his Gospel after his three holy Coleagues had finished, ended,
and published their several Evangels.

BUT if any would have a sight of him ascending, as there are many who does
not; yet eats with us, drinks with us, goes to the Mountain, and Olivet of our
Temple, yet wants that beautiful Spectacle, as did the carnal Jews in the
text, who understanding all things Nichodemicaly, that is carnally, derided
this supposition; but if you would answer this, what and if, with an O that I
might see the Son of Man ascend where he was before, then pursue the
acquisition of such Gifts the Apostles were endued with, before it came to
pass, which were Magnanimity and Courage, Longanimity and Patience, Unity and
Concord The first made them keep together, though their Master and Shepherd had
been smitten, separating but in fits, and starts, as men in distemper, the
second hushed all disturbances, strife and discord; none cheked Peter for his
fall, he blamed none for cowardice, whence flowed Unity and Love; their Masters
last appearance being at their dinner, so to speak, when they were at meat: And
ought not the memory of the ASCENSION to be attended with a religious banquet?
since its last service was ushered in with a Table ready furnished) a little
after whch they see him again no more: and truly if our eating and drinking be
for the glory of God, which shall be, when strength only is expected from them,
his service in our general and particular calling, we need not scruple, but if
two, or three, or one, be in holy discourse, meditation, in soberness, ( I mean
not poor dishes, for there may be prodigality in wooden platters, and gluttony
over the coursest bread) thankfulness, frugality, piety, and unity, it is
impossible to miss the company or want the presence, of Jesus neither ought
there to be a despondency, for the truth of the ASCENSION shall, and will, be
evidenced unto those, with whom these accomplishments are at board.

LET the Zealous, discover faith in his conversion, preserve hope until the
consumation, and a manifest love in his conversation; Bethany, his obedience,
shall so clear the eyes, that this flight from Olivet shall be known in all its
spiritual effects and steps, for the hearts more ravishing, because refined
joy, delight, and satisfaction, making the tongue to cry after him Set me as a
seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy Arm, Cant, 8.6. that is, Lord remember
me now thou art going to thy Kingdom.

IN the year of grace 1608, three Ships called the Ascension, Union, and Good
hope, sailing near the Cape of good hope, had the fate all to perish; the
Union first perished, next Good-hope, last of all the Ascension; that aspiring
minds having great hope, and dangerous ploddings, have perished in their hope
when almost arrived at their wished-for-port, and Cape of their contrived
design, i^ notor, to those who are not strangers in our Coast, yea to our
shame; Strangers best know it; Union we have already lost; in our dangerous
discords, miserably increasing, and ^candalously spreading: Yet we pretend to
Hope, and makes a livelihood from it, for Faction and variance; but having so
often been under water, and it it self dashed and broken to pieces, might be
justly called Conceit, and we Phrygian-like ought to be wise behind hand, and
weather it out no longer, but take harbor, least we lose, that is, forfeit the
benefit of the ASCENSION, having only a fancied presumption, of felicity to
come.

GOD avert the ominous application of ^his instance, and unit us again, by the
Spirit to an holy Union, in which only we can have ^rue hope secured and then
our ASCENSION will be ascertian'd; by which we shall ^e ever with the Lord, in
the Lord, and after a troublesome sea and deluge of a tumultuous ^urly-burly,
the Ark of our Soul, will rest ^o that Arrarat, those mountains of Spices
above, saving the Cargo of a good conscience, by Anchoring in the Indian shore,
of heavens rich and glorious enjoyment.

THE Emperor Sigismund having pro^ed succesfull in several battles against
the ^arks, dignified many of his martial Wor^hies with the Knighthood of the
Dragon, their Device being a Dragon falling headlong.

RESEMBLE a Saints progress toward Jerusalem to a land-journey, through a vast,
wast, and howling Wilderness: comparatively the whole Earth being no other,
yet no Misprision from within, no false Information from without, no Hellish
Combination encompassing, need cause a retreat: for all of those in the D^agon
already cast from Heaven are overcome, Revel. 12. Their attempts against the
Woman and the Remnant of her seed that is, the Church* her Sons and Daughters,
are but wrigglings of that old Serpents tail, since his head was wounded: be
not precipitate, be not afraid, O ye of little Faith, you shall tread upon the
Lion and Adder, the young Lion and the Dragon shall you trampl^ under feet as
speaks the old Testament, Psalm, 91. That is, shortly bruise Satan under your
feet, as prophesies the new, Rom* 16. For Christ must sit* that is, he must
Reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. A worthy saying of that
great Apostle of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 15.

MYSTERIUM PIETATIS, OR THE MYSTERY OF THE DESCENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST,
Unfolded and applied. Pentecost-day-May 22. Tolbooth Church* 1670. Whitsun-May
22. Tolbooth Church* 1670.

JOHN XX.XXII. And when he had said this, he breathed on them and says unto
them, Receive ye the HOLY GHOST.


AMONG other promises given by our LORD unto his Disciples, for their support
in the tidings of his departure, that of the Father is said to be one, which
was their being baptized with the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.4 5. and that from heaven
which had been revealed to Joel, Chap. 2.28. by the Father, and also to the the
world by the Son, who had given the Spirit to his Followers; but the Father
having promised a more ample manifestation, it is peculiarly fixed to him by
the Son who as a preparative thereunto from above, breaths here upon them
beneath, the Spirit being the Soul of the Church, without it, you must imagine
it to be only a Carcass, that Article of the holy Catholic Church being a
depending one, the holiness thereof relying upon her Relation in, and toward
that of the Holy Ghost.

THOUGH as a bride she be betrothed to the Son, yet it is the Spirit makes her
the Lambs wife, as believing she is Baptized unto Christ, yet wanting the
confirmation, unction, or blessing of the Spirit, there is no inward sanctity,
which being ordained to be gradualy given, it is recorded in one place to be
less plentifully, and in another, to be more miraculously infused, as before,
and after, our Lords Ascension, is evident in many places, and particularly in
this: wherefore it is expedient to behold, how the Apostles received here the
Spirit, and how afterward, and how we may be said as Sanctified to receive the
Spirit now, that we may pass from the infancy, and weak condition of merely
in^ant Baptism, and to become adult, in possessing the thing thereby signified;
even the sprinkling by, or baptisms of the, Holy Ghost, as by fire; that as
washed and heated, we may become so enlivened, as the Lord may have pleasure in
our beauty, and delight to dwell in our very bodies, as Temples for himself; His
altar our mind spiritualized, his Sacrifice our good works, the fire devouring
that Sacrifice, being that of Compunction for sin, and zeal for his glory.

THESE two words, Holy Ghost, express the holy Spirit, the third Person of the
Trinity, when together; for if separated, the Father, and the Son, are holy,
and the Father and angels are Spirits, but when united, they respect, a
duplicated operation and double office of the third person, performed upon them
who are chosen vessels unto Glory; in making them holy, and in giveing them
life, breath, or spirit: by which they become living souls, Ghost, or Guest,
being a name synonymous to all Spirits; but ^elly, or holy, to him by way of
excellency, who proceeding from the Father and the Son, as breathed forth, and
being every w^y holy fitteth his name to his nature, the sutablenesse whereof
being eminent, he is denominat in our new style, thought more refined then the
old, the Holy Ghost, receiving other Names, from other properties, as wind,
fire, the finger of God, the comforter, the spirit of Truth* the holy spirit,
which the Apostles are commanded to receive, not as though they had formerly
wanted, him, for they preached, wrought wonders cast out Devils, a power that
flowed from his In-being, and during Christ's abode, but he being upon his
ascending, qualifieth them now this second time, for the work of the Ministry,
in remitting of sin, in binding the obstinat for sin, in inte^preting the
Scripture, for their greater assurance and fuller consolation, because of his
absence about Prophesies and typ^, as the election of Mathias, in the place of
Judas from the mouth of David does famously make evident.

YET it is no great cause of offense to affirm, that here they are breathed
upon to dispose their minds already sanctified for the Spirits reception, in a
more solemn manner in the days of Pentecost.

MOREOVER a religious melancholy, seazing on the vitals of their Spirits* and
belief of their Masters proceeding from, or ascending to the Father, in, and
for, their behalf, the Spirit being a pledge of Salvation, the strength and
life of the Soul, is here given by an apt similitude of a breath (for as the
visi^le body of Christ was not God, so neither is the breath here felt, to be
estimate the spirit) to confirm them, that as the breath came from him, so
should, or so did the Spirit proceed from him likewise: which the Greek Church
to this day denis, affirming his procedure from the Father only, which is seen,
say some, in their punishment, in loo^ing their Imperiable City
Constantinople, their Emperor, Crown and Kingdom, being taken by the Turk
upon this day in the Calendar, An. Dom. 1237. wherein the nature, gifts, and
proceeding of the Holy Ghost, are taught, explained, and truly commemorat, in
the Orthodox, and Latin Church.

MANY good things our Savior had taught, especialy about his Death, and
Resurrection, which the Spirit was appointed to bring to their Remembrance; the
brain of man in it self being naturally dull hereby is cleared, and as his
birth purifieth ours, as his life instructs ours, as his death destroys
ours, as his Resurrection preceedeth ours, and as his Ascension prepares ours,
so his sending down of the Holy Ghost, helps us mightily, in the reflecting
upon these things against all infirmity whatso-ever; oyling the wheels of the
Soul, making that lift up it self, being otherwise bowed down, and by this is
said* Woman or man thou art loosed from thy infirmity, causing them still look
forward, o^ like a religious pulley, still haleing, or pulling the soul
heavenward to a loveing of spiritual things, contrary to the carnal mind
spiritually: hence the Sunday betwixt his Ascension and the Spirits descension,
is called from the entrance of the twenty eight Psalm, Dominica exaudi, as if
from that time the Church of old, and yet now, had been still calling, praying
for, and expecting a fuller portion of the Spirit, this breath being but the
first fruits, until the harvest, a taste only of Canaeans grapes, a warm
breath, a refreshing gale, until the mightier and rushing wind should blow,
when Jesus had been glorified.

THERE are two principal parts of the body ( viz.) head and heart, to which in
the soul corresponds, the understanding and the will, it being led and moved by
these as greater wheels, and God in his Church has to both of these in
resemblance, Christ and the Spirit, the head and heart of his Congregation, for
understanding of, and being guided unto the things concerning life, and by
these we know he loves us and by that knowledge procures in us Love and Joy
by divine illumination toward himself, the Spirit being that Regius, or great
Divinity Professor, teaching from within, the mysteries of God: for what ever
David the Psalmist* Amos the Prophet, Daniel the Prince, Pe^er the fisher,
Samuel the S^er, or any other Priest, Prophet, or Patriarch, taught, were but
lecturs of his composing, words of his frameing, sentences of his drawing up,
directing how to believe, how to live* how to walk, and how to talk, how to
love, and how to adore, how to weep, and how to pray, all with admireable
wisdom, holy zeal and fervent charity.

THE Spirit was here given, about the Resurrection, before the Ascension, after
which the sp^ce of ten days, reckoning from the fortie^h, that is, from the
Passover, for he was given again* so that we are to observe the feast of
Pentecost, when the HOLY GHOST came from heaven, whereby they, as all good men
are, made to look up, before which we must meet and assemble, so receiveing it
in the Word, breathed upon us on Earth, this doubling of the Spirit, being like
the twofold Commandment, of loveing God who is in heaven, and loving man who
abides upon Earth, yet it is but one command, acting on different objects; so
its also one Spirit, given, and acting, for differ^nt things, or, for discovery
of that one great thing the Trinity.

FOR the Son having been visibly known among men, the Father also revealed by
the things that are seen, there remained one thing to enforce the certainty,
and existance of three Persons, that was the appearance of the HOLY GHOST* who
had once come, as unto Noah's ark, like a dove in the evening of the world upon
Christ the Lord, expressing the meekness, peaceablnesse, harmlesnesse, of them
who are as houses inhabited by him, this was at his baptism: the next, as is
thought, was in a cloud, strengthening his constancy glorifying his purity, and
heating his fervency, this was at his transfiguration; A third was by a breath
for animating a perplexed, little flock about the removeal of himself from
them, a few days before his Ascension; A fourth was in fire, in tongues, and
this was after his glorious Session at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
giving them a noonday knowledge, to understand all Scripture, power over all
Devils, wisdom against all Philosophers, Eloquence against all Orators,
Patience against all Torments, Gifts to convert all Nations, Confidence in the
love of God, for subduing of unruly lusts, Grace for persevering in all good
works; Lastly, Joy, in the peace of a good conscience, through Christ and him
crucified, whence it is said, they were al filled with the HOLY GHOST, in
contradistinction, to those portions, or draughts, they had received before, so
diminute that its said, the HOLY GHOST was not yet given, (q. d.) in that ample
and miraculous measure, because Jesus was not glorified, John 7.19.

WHICH when done, they are quasi overcharged, and Speaking, were thought drunk,
that is, intoxicated: which in a trope they were, but not as the Jews ^uppos'd
with wine, but with the new-wine of the Spirit; wherewith the old bottles of
corrup^ed self, could not be brimmed, the Vine, whence it flowed, being above,
the liquor whereof stup^fied not the brain, but transmented the Soul, no^
causing staggering, but confi^ming in faith, and joy, as in the City, by that
River which makes glad the City of God, which they renewed, by wind, fire,
and tongues, were capacitate to drink of, the one blowing away the chaff, the
other heating the Spirit, giving light also to the dark chamber of vain
Imagination, the last promoting to speak refinedly, perswadingly, being
cleansed from carnal sordidness, and earthly selfishness, delighting in no
talk, but of the wonderful works of God.

IT is usual with Expositors, to show the analogy between things themselves*
and that which is represented by those things: In how many ways the Paschall
Lamb and Christ does agree, the Red Sea and baptism, the Cross and the braze^
Serpent, Jesus and Aaron, David and Joseph, is not of our province* but how
aptly does wind represent the operation of the HOLY GHOST in those upon whom he
comes, if you weigh those particular workings, in the conscience, by
proportionating them according to it is quarterly effects.

DOES the South wind ordinarily bring warm showers and rain, by vapors drawn
from the Midle-Sea, heated by the Suns fervency in the Equator for fructifying
the earth? It is as evident that the Spirit shall no sooner convince of sin,
and say to the sinner; Thou art the Man, then rivers of waters will run down my
eyes, said David, because they, that is, my eyes keep not thy Law, Psalm, 119.
136. Mary Magdelen was went further then the skin, and Peter is said to make
furrows in his cheeks. O thou that made me, have mercy upon me; was a form of
prayer, appointed a luxurious wanton, but then a penitent Tha ^s, for procuring
mercy, as not daring to pronounce God; What fruitful showers has the Spirit
made in the valley of an humble and depressed Saint, Making the rain to fill
the pools, causing Grace, even when stocked, to grow as the grass, and seed in
prayer, supplication, intercession, for all Saints the most ob^ur'd weeping so
loud, that the house of Pharaoh, that is, the Court of heaven hears, and are
admitted into that favor, as to be assured of the best fruits of the Land

THE North wind d^rives away rain, Pro. 25.23. And when clouds of fears and
doubts, threaten a spiritual tempest, dark thoughts gathering and the glory of
the Lord (the light, peace, and comfort of the Soul) preparing to remove, the
conscience lying as the ashes of the Sacrifice, on the North side of the altar,
in solitary sadness, digesting its own perplexities, to nourish heart-biting
anguish; How has the Spirit beca^m'd the Air? in his seren breathings,
scattering the portentuous clouds, that had a sound of abundance of rain,
keeping the Soul within the Pale* or enclosure of eternal Election, whereby
the chilling blasts of terren disasters, or spiritual desertions, do but cause
it di^e the deeper, procuring greater evidence, and from vocation concluding,
that neither Death nor life, nor Angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height nor depth nor any other
Creature, were it my self (who at this time is made unwilling to be parted)
shall be able to separat from the love of God, Rom, 8.39. Who says unto Evil,
come not nigh this man's dwelling; David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
Sam. 30.6. And Job at last, was re-installed, and enjoyed more then
Halcyon-like tranquillity, in the field and bosom of his own conscience.

OBSERVE the west-wind, and to herbs and flower^ it is so good, that one of its
name is Favonious, for rendering so many favors, being not so moist as the
South, nor so corroding as the E^st; so is the Spirit influencing the soul, for
exciting to the delectableness of handsomely contrived purposes, causing God
delight in man, and again man to delight in God, the grand scope of its
enlarged acts, that as the Heliotropis to the Sun, so it turns to the spirits
motion; Imprinting upon the man's observer, and Surveyer of his paths, positions
proving his growth in grace; All which emergeth, purely from the virtue of the
Sun of righteousness, not from the ^ullenness of rigid opinion, which is to be
hated, ^qualy to the sordidness of the profligat sinner, both being Spots and
blemishes, in the Church of God, uniting to infester the commendable tract of
virtue; and religious complacency, the one giving it an ill name, the other
contriving its final overthrow.

MARK the strength of the East wind, and you shall find it employed in eminent
services, as in dividing of the Red Sea* Exodus 14.21. For bringing the Locusts
upon Egypt, Exodus 10.13. For breaking the ships of Tarshis, Psalm. 48 7. And
blastin^ of the seven ^ars of Corn in Pharaohs dream, Genesis 41.6. Yet all this
is but the mightiness of a creature: but when men imperiously are advancing
with full sails of profane intentions for executing villainous undertakings,
this Spirit (the Creator of all things) will convince them, arrest them, and
cause them become a Magor missabib, a terror to themselves, because of terror
round about, and blast them in their greatest rankness^, empting them also in
their greatest fulness, and coaling them in their most passionat hea^s: as
Laban, when charged not to do ill, not to speak ill, Genesis 31.29. It shakes the
roots of the st^ff^st, and blows away the sails and cables of the fleshes
highest confidence, making some, to cry out with Saul, Lord, what will thou
have me to do and others with David? It is good for me that I was afflicted,
and may be with Ruben, to roar out, and I, whether shall I go? Gen, 37.30.

HOW again from the intestins of a secure and becalmed conscience, it has
raised Hyrricans of fears; and terrible outcries, came from the jailer, What
shall I do to be saved? Acts, 16.30. And here blew upon the Apostles, that all
stratagems before feared of the Jewish malice, were hushed and gone, for by
this did their throats, as from a Trumpet; give an allarum to all the world, to
separate from an untoward generation, and added so to the Church, that three
thousand were either by beleiving as Adult, or by baptizing as in infants, in
one day, made members of his body, who is all in all; and these abounded so in
good works, that they had all things common, (i. e.) for use, not in property,
Acts* 2. coaling their otherwise angry, and feavorish souls, enflamed against
the doctrine of Christ crucifi^d, they opening their hearts, giving their bodies
to be washed in holy baptism, by both being exceedingly refreshed, eating
their bread with gladness and joy of heart.

THE Prophet got a charge to cry, Come from the four winds: O breath! and
breath upon those slain that they may live, and accordingly (...) their was a
^oice, a shaking and a re-enliv^^ing, Sin has made a Charnel house of each
^tructure, a slaughter house of each Family, having slain all in them, with
the weapon of unbeleif, and O! that the spirit in purifying by grace, in
gracious prayer, in full assurance of faith, were given to each one for
themselves and for the good of all others, to stand in this valley of Earth,
which is but a valley of bones and those dry: and who can tell if they can
live? Though ^hey may cry: Come, (...) Spirit and breath of God, from the East,
that we may see and know our selves to be sinners: renewing and sanctifying by
hope* from the west to understand, that our iniquities have caused a setting of
our Sun of consolation, having lost the beams and rays of Fatherly love, and
dwelling in darkness. From the South that showers of tears, from our eyes
through bitterness of sorrow, for the grosness of our misbehaviour* and from
the North, that we may behold the ruddy countenace of an Angry God, and the bow
which he threatens; Inverted, its true, and unstringed, yet long shall not be
so, if his patience be not answered in our amendment, and fear cause
penitencie, for a voiding so dreadful an arrow, as sentence to eternal
flames, or formidable mischief from so omnipotent ^n arm, who can even clothed
in flesh, make us feel the sting of his displeasure; in first blowing, and then
kindling the very first streams of hell within us, as he did in desparing
Judas, and vagabonding Cain.

IT is true, we pretend much to the Spirit, and braves out reproof, yea censure
upon that score; anticipating in conceit Heavens joy, by the assurances we brag
already to have possessed from especial evidence above, as if the mighty wind
had already blown upon us: whereas we are yet carnal, and sold under sin,
having not that noted nimblenesse, to perform all Religious exercise, clearly
observed to be in them, who answer the Spirits call: for though with the
Publican, we may come down from the tree of some conceited excellencies,
possibly our due and birthright; by washing the Saints feet, visiting the
sick, feeding the hungry, binding up the wounded; yet really we sadly behold,
that through some opinion, or nice punctilio: we adjourn attendance upon God in
express duty, either altogether, or approach with reluctance until with him
in the Gospel, We first bury our father* Matthew. 8.21. which equally with him
makes us unfit for the Kingdom of God* for no sooner did the wind blow, then
the Apostles were inspired immediately; not about the restoring of the Kingdom
to Israel, but of Isreal's enjoyment of the Kingome; the promise (v^z.) of
Heaven, not of the Earth, being to them and to their children, the Spirit
hateing dull delay, wherefore it was also a sudden sound from Heaven, making
them straight heavenly; the sound being before the spirit, for gathering in of
their Spirits, causing intense attendance upon that which was to be revealed;
the sound from Heaven, making them heavenly minded; the sound from Heaven,
coming suddenly, confirms the Doctrine of the spirits averseness from sloth;
the sound from Heaven that came suddenly, was of a rushing mighty wind: the
wind rushing causing spiritual awe, and mighty, to excit their depressed; and
it may be desponding souls, and wind to purge their hearts from filth, and blow
away what in them was lurking, to detard from that employment, which by the
Spirit they were intended for; and for which, like full vessels they were
filled* so as no earthly thing could enter, there wanting room; no temptation*
make them rail, sound, or roar as empty they being filled.

WHICH deliberatly considered, deplorable inferences must be inferred, touching
the sad mistake of too ^oo many; whose opinion only, is the alone significant
thing before others, causing them to be accounted Saints, or some conceit in
themselves, which ground^ only to themselves, the certainty of their future
glory; which error shall be to it is possessors, I might say Admirers; what the
voluptuous life of the Sophist Isaeus was to him, which how delightful soever
at first; yet at last b^moned his being Tantaliz'd, that is, supposed to find
good, and rejoiced in its proximity; yet still went without* and was at last
frustrate of all hopes thereby being, but dreams and shadows; for as all is not
gold that g^^sters, so neither is every thing that ravishes, by and by, to be
termed Divine: Nor wha^ affects, yea comforts the heart, to be presently
surnamed types of Heaven; yet where Dexterity, Agility in the things of God,
are accompanied with Purity, Peace, Joy, and Heavenly mindedness, as in the
Apostles here* its a p^^gnant proof of the in-being of the Spirit, and coming
down of the HOLY GHOST, whence comforts truly, originat and fl^w, etc.

TWO thousand and odd years, had man's Ambition exposed him to infamy,
Lewdness, and Idolatry; by Gods confounding languages at Babel, stopping then
from perfecting that jointly intended Tower, by dividing their speech, which at
this day again, was transferred by plurality of tongues; unto a blessing, the
Spirit diverssifying the Apostles tongues, not to disturb the world, b^t
advance the Church, in propagating Faith the readier; that there needed no
Interpreter, every Preacher being furnished with the gift of every tongue, to
speak to the multitude of the devout, that Jesus was the Christ: Uniting them
again to be of one mind, and one accord, for edifying themselves in love, and
one another in the holy Faith, which is a strong Tower of defense, as the Name
of the LORD, Prove. 18.10. and whose top indeed reaches up to Heaven; each
Convert being as a stone to the building, and united by the Cement of the Blood
of the Eternal Covenant, laid on by the hand of the Spirit, who can as here,
turn ill to good, by drawing good from it, whether for man's profit, or his
Makers honor, as Levi's curse, in being scattered; occasionally through grace,
made the Lord to be his portion, and be sanctified for Priest unto the Tribes,
Numb. 3.12.

CONFOVNDING of Languages made the whole Earth to be peopled, each company
flocking, planting, building, together according to that understanding they had
of their neighbors speech, which now brought great things to pass for the
Almighties praise; all Nations beholding these unlettered men, from Heaven in
an instant, promptly uttering the good things of Peace and Reconciliation, with
Him who first confounded them, and of Reconciliation and Peace, with all who
were confounded with them; all tongues expressing this one thing, Love the
Brethren, 1 Pet 3.8. As Christ has loved you, and given himself for you.

THE tongue, is a purifying, mundifying member, it can lick out viscuous
matter, can suck out putrid and infections corruption from the body, as did
that of the Lady Ellenor, wife to that Prince of Chivalry Edward Prince,
afterward Edward the first, of England, her Lord being eng^g^d, and fortunate
in the Holy war, was almost assassi^nate by a Turk, being wounded with a
poisoned kniffe, with which the Prince slew the Attemper, but Physicians
despairing of his own recovery, the noble Lady (her Lord sleeping) is said, to
suck and draw the venom forth, recovering her Husband, she her self not being
endangered thereby. The tongue, is a tasting member, by i^ we know the white of
an egg, to be unsavory, it is a speaking member, the Hierogliphick of a word
among the Egyptians, was a tongue and by it we bless God, at this day, and
alas, by it also we curse men, setting it on fire as from hell, to reform
which and virtuate the doctrine of the Gospel for drawing forth of the Soul,
the deadly poison of Atheism and Prophannesse by pravity, and exemple thrust
upon us, and put in us, by those watchful lusts, and vigilant adversaries, of
our Lord, and of our souls, because, we would regain that Jerusalem, that Royal
City of pure and Holy peace with God, which has been wrested out of our hands
by Turk-like force Tyrrany and Cunning:

FOR draining us of such putrid filthiness, and the whole world, is the Spirit
represented in that shape, the first fruits whereof, appeared in that first,
and Famous Sermon of S. Peter, whose tongue had been but a few weeks before, so
glib for lying and cursing, now fluently detects the monstrous deformity, of
the Jews bloody Zeal, and bridles their passion, yea, from convinced guilt,
oblidgeth them so fare to renounce there former impietys, against Christ,
honored and blessed of his brethren, as to rejoice in the knowledge of him
Crucified, craving remission of sin thereupon, to the Churches ineffable glory,
the accession of Multitudes to her banner, upon that score dispiriting her
opposers, and creating fear upon every soul, beholding the stupendous wonders,
wrought by the Power, Hands, and Tongues, of such, whom the wise of the world,
though not worthy of veneration.

BEFORE Christ dyed his Apostles feet were washed, John 1^.5. For exact,
circumspect, and clean walking, and after he ascended, he cleanses their
tongue, for Prudent, Holy, and Pure talking, consulting in all their converse,
with truth, verity, and love; That as it is naturaly placed between the heart,
and head, so its motion should be regular by there consent, being seasoned with
salt* Colos. 4.6. That is, gracefullness, and discretion, flowing from mature
deliberation, and wise for-thinking, not hurried to the violation of precepts,
by the winds of passion, but consult, and complete what from duty, and charity,
upon holy and sober inspection, we shall find incumbent for our place and
calling; Not swelling in rancor, but always, remembering the proverb of the
Arabs, being wary, least our tongues cut our throats: For can it be questioned,
but that Dives, was the more tormented in his tongue, that he had scandelously
offended in that member, which walking in uvo, (i. e.) lying in moisture, is
the more prone to glid, and glib fiery in color, edged, as a sword, therefore
by nature sheathed in lips and teeth, quenched with water, God seting more
guards, and closer Centurys, about it, then other parts of the body, arguing
its ferity, and unrulyness;

TONGVES resting upon the first preachers of the Gospel, and probably upon
others also, the contexture of the History, Acts, 1.15. being grounded from the
hundredth and twenty, and not reading how Stephen, Philip, and the other Deacons
received the HOLY GHOST, a more conjecturall time is hardly to be found, then
the Pentecost, I say tongues resting at first upon those Holy Teachers,
indicats how the Spirit tries and designeth, their willing condiscending, to
those generous rules of refined language, and what he says to them, he says
unto all, Take heed unto your ways that ye sin not with your tongue, Psalm,
39.1. The image whereof, as it were growing from, because rooted, in a serpents
tail, with the inscription quo tendis? whether go thou? was of old, an
Emblem, of those unhappy issues, men were brought into, whose tongues were not
poysed, with premeditation, and wise government, which yet must not be thought
identical, with carnal subtilty, or that selfish principle of fawneing
flattering, and caressing any, in unjust practices, for sensual, and proper
advantages, there being a time of, and for speaking, as well as a time of
silence, and restraining of the tongue* which cannot be more pertinently said,
( though more properly) to be set on fire of hell, then when it is employed, by
the Devil or bribed, by his emissarys, to stand mute, and not defend, the truth
under pressure, or to utter words of slander, Calumny, Atheism, and Blasphemy,
lyingly, or wickedly engaging men into Hellish broyls, dangerous garboyls,
glorying in the bravery, and finness of Satanical Rhetoric, boasting because
we have outrail'd, and it may be silenced, our Brother, not convinced, not
converted but heated by our words, as by coals of Juniper, (which kindled once,
burns even some months after) Devil like, leaves off speaking* in not
answering again, for a season, purposeing afterward in fiery rage, to work
revenge even unto blood.

IF the tongue be the glory of a man, how shamefully do some abuse their glory,
and tread there honor in the dust? Let thy talk Reader hereafter, and thy
silence also, be such, as is fit for Saints, and worthy of God, symbolizing
with Crucigerious of the Last age, who spoke often to his Friends, about
Christian Doctrine of the wounderfull preservation of the Church, of
immortality, and the ^ope of glory, which and the like thereto, shall evidence
the Spirit to have sat upon thy head (as the tongues rested on the Apostles,)
ignorance evanishing, and the Mutinees that so often has risen in Societies,
formerly about questions of honor and preferment, of sitting at the right
hand; and who should be the greatest (one great cause of our late calamity)
shall be dashed, quieted, and repented for; all agreeing to talk of the
wonderful works of God! following Jesus our Captain and our Master, whom we
have often mistook, and misinterpreted, but now having a true light, and
purchased a perfect Idea of things Mystical, by ou^ zealous yet sober
behavior, by our holy yet peaceable deportment, clear to the Multitude, that
in truth we have been with Jesus, and received the earnest Spirit.

THE tongues are said to be cloven Acts, 2.3. Not divided, for that were Babel,
but dimidiated as it were, double pointed; since there was Heresies to confute,
sin, to detect, Exhortations to be given; reproofs to be made, reason would
have them to be gifted for this work, and needful it wa^, to show there
invisible endowments, different gifts, inwardly possessed, by this outward and
visible appearance; the multiplicated number whereof, discovering the variety
of those languages which, by the spirit they were to instruct in, whether to
Jew or Gentile, employed in the Mystery, from the dimidiatness of the same
tongues, forkednesse, or clift in them, these two nations, thereby to be
united, and Law, and Gospel, though seemingly different, to be joined into one
root, as proceeding from one cause (viz.) our Lord Jesus Christ.

THIS was known to the multitude of believers out of all nations dwelling at
Jerusalem, much about the time, Christ was expected by the studious Jews
themselves, and by those, now truly gifted brethren, who having the true sense,
or marrow of the law, which is nothing but the pith of the Gospel, could work
the hearts of the observers of either, to know, and embrace both; yea properly
to infer each others duty, and there own requisite practice from what they
heard imposed upon the one, or known formerly revealed to the other, as David's
sepulcher with Peter's Exposition does excellently make offer, and convinceingly
prove.

YET not in this only, but in the circumstance of time, did the Law, and Gospel
harmoniously unit, for these things happned in the days of Pentecost, one of
the three solemn feasts of the Jews, so called, as being the fiftieth day from
the Passover, in which day, the law was given from Mount Sina; in fire, God
speaking out of the cloud; But that law being broke fiftieth days after the
rising of our Savior, at the Passover, who then as a Lamb did take away the
sins of the world, God the HOLY GHOST came down in fire; that is, in fiery
tongues, to imprint a new education of his law in the hearts of the true
Israelite, yet with this excellent, and comfortable difference that as Moses
yields to Christ, so must Sinai, to Sion, here was fire only, their fire and
smoke, there was clouds, darkness, and earthquakes, accompan^'d with fear and
trembling, Sinai it self quaking; But in Sion only a sound, as of a mighty
wind, to prepare the receivers, and cloven tongues, uniting Jew and Gentile,
the boundiary of the wilderness, being pulled up, and variety of tongues
persuaded the scattered abroad, that God had given the Kingdoms of this world,
to his dear Son, that in a spiritual sense, not Israel only, but the Earth
might become the Lords, and the fulness thereof, typified, by that multitude
gathered, and converted by the heat, fireynesse* yet harmlesnesse, of the
Saints, charity and ardor, having received the remission of sin, and that from
heaven, the self same day their Fathers received the law, against which they
had transgressed; for both was at the time o^ Pentecost, as may be demonstrated
in computing the time thus;

THE people came from Egypt on the 14 day of the month, there, therefore
remained 16 days for travel (the Hebrews always reckoning 30 days for a
month) the first day of the third month, they came to Sinai, 30 days of the
second month being accounted, there will with this be found 47 days, then the
Peoples encamping, Moses goeing up to God, his returning again to the people,
for clear calculation, is called one day, which is 48, in which going up again
to the Mount, he is ordered by God, to order the peoples being ready against
the third day, which will make the 50. ^n which God appeared, for reckoni^g
from the peoples want of bread or fall of Mannah, is uncertain and may be
erroneous, this is more clear* and evidenceth the Anology better, betwixt that
fire from God by the Ministry of Angels: and writting his law on tables of
stone, and that by fire in the descending of the Spirit, that came one the 50
day after the slaying of the Passover Christ Jesus, writting his law upon the
tables of the hearts of men, in a fuller, fairer, larger, and more clear
Character, typ, or impression, but note this reckoning is inclusive, the other
not.

THE Persians and some other nations, adored the fire for a god, because of its
excessive power, and force, in resolving matters combustible how great so-ever,
into it is own substance, and being; and usually it is accounted the most noble
among elements, being as the heavens among bodies, the sun among planets, yea
it is purgeing operation made it of old to be the heirogliphick of purity, as if
they had known, the world it self, was to be cleansed thereby: but how has the
fire of the Spirit from Jerusalem enlarged it self? making the frosted heart of
the unbelieving world, even to glow while it talks, of the Cross from heaven,
which is one of the three things, by wise men admired in the earth, looking
upon the Resurrection, and Ascension, far short in comparison of that conquest
the Holy Ghost has made of the Grandees of the Nations, in their honorable
receiving of that doctrine, from the mouths of plain men, so contrary to the
hair of natural inclination; and mark it, where ever the Spirit comes, it
comes ordinarily by the sound of the Gospel, and by it is heat, we are assured of
his reception, a heart touched, a heart pricked, is but a heart heated, a heart
opened; when a man cries what shall I do? with Peter's converts Acts 2.37. or
take away the iniquity of thy Servant, with David 2* Sam. 24.10. surtiship may
be offered that the Spirit hat^ spoken in a saveing way, but if it be a
complaint of the punishment with Cain, or a remove the ^r^gs with Pharaoh, be
not rash in Cauto^ry, this being a Legal, not a Gospel expression, far from
that request of creating a clean heart, which the Jews compares to the Holy of
Holies, to Solomon^ throne, to Moses ^ables, and truly displays, that the
wickedness is done away, by the Spiri^s inhabiting, his resting therein, and
writting thereupon, the doctrine of pardon and remission; provyding the man
separate himself from an untoward generation Acts 2.40.

IT IS said the Spirit sat upon each of them, in which it differs, from that
unclean Spirit, that goes about, compassing the earth to and fro, seeking
rest, but finds none, whereas holiness is pacifique serene, tranquilling,
consolidating, the heart in which he dwells, making it calm in it self, and
causing quietness toward all others, condemning Ambition, Covetousness,
Hatred, Envy, Vanity, and what ever else, tends to the Churches disturbance; in
which the Spirit rests, sitting in it, as upon a Throne purposing to reign, as
on a Tribunal, resolving to judge, as on a Chair purposing to instruct, for all
which, in all ages to come, he represented his undertakeing, on this day,
establishing himself upon the Apostles heads, as by fire, clearing them from
the rust of Error, the filth of Corruption, that as Patterns, as well as
Preachers, they might be ex^mples of Sanctity to their own generation, and give
infallible rules for obtaining happiness unto all posterity for ever.

COMPVNCTION of heart and remission of sin, are both from the Spirit of God,
and is that new wine which shall only be put in the new bottles of a
regenerated soul, whereby they shall do, and speak, as the Spirit shall prompt
them, I had almost said, as the Spirit give them utterance, as here the
Apostles: for we find, the whole house was filled with the rushing wind, the
Majesty of the Holy Ghost, excluding all in-maets, and though each Apostle, had
the sanctified operation of the Spirit, filling every angle and corner of the
soul, as the understanding with Faith, the will with Love; and that sin or
Devil might be exiled, the hands with Promptitude, the feet with Solicitude,
the eyes with Modesty, the tongue with Eloquence, the whole man with Prudence,
the Faculty Concupiscible being filled with good, the Irascible with courage,
the Rational with verity, though they had all gifts and were all filled, yet
they spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, some had five, others had two
talents and S. Paul abounded, and spoke with tongues more then they all:
whereby he who expects the gifts bestowed unto all, ought not to caresse
himself, or hug, and embrace himself in the deceiving hopes of a rich, ample,
and perfect possession of the Spirit here, but rest satisfied with his gift,
and with being one of the eleven, not envying Peter's singularity, (for he is
particularly spoken of) and eminency, since a pinnace, a small yaught, shall
land as well as a great ship, with full sail, under the conduct and flag of the
Admiral.

UPON the coast of the Whit-sea, there is a cap called Pentecost; and somewhat
east of that, there is another called Bonae Fortunae (q d.) good-luck, let this
day be any man's Pentecost, a time of gathering in, that is, of heeding the law,
offering the first fruits of strength unto the Lord (as the Jews did this day
of their corn) it shall, as Godliness, ( has the promise) enrich both for
heaven, and earth, doing good to him, and not evil all the days of his life,
by (pardon the alteration of the coast and similitude) giving him a trade wind
for the port of his desired rest.

IN this last age, we are not to look for miracles, by a sensible feeling of
the rite, or significant ceremony here used, yet still Christ breaths on the
Elect, enlargeing to that degree their bowels of Love, that they show him
always their faces, being averse neither to his Doctrine, nor to his Cross,
yet forget not, that he ascended before the mighty strong wind blew in upon
them; and that there may be no mistake, there are some upon whom the Spirit
comes never, being ^eft in the ignorance of nature, coldness of the Earth,
rawnesse of the flesh; there are others upon whom he comes, but abides not,
^lowing only upon them, and no more, heats them indeed, but as warm water, they
are ^older soon after: he washes them, yet afterward they go to the puddle,
and are offensive ^s before; to others he comes, and abides ^itteth upon
them, lives in them, fills them outwardly, with heavenly ardor, celestial
^eat, and by fire from above, causes them seem ^peaking Seraphims, and inwardly
with wis^ome, understanding, knowledge in the ^eepnesse whereof, they may be
styled Che^ubims, yea gods in the liknesse of men, and those fiery ones too,
this was for the Apostles.

BUT alas we see not those signs to pass ^he fiery tongues of too many in this
age at^nded with smoke and brimstone, the known fuel of Hell flames, it is but
one of a City and two of a Trib, in whom we see the love of God ( an evidence
of the Spirit) which is known chiefly by the loveing of man, who being ready
for good works to both, and patient in suffering and enduring evil from both,
and making progress from one degree of virtue to another, not falling back
into perdition, in the sight of either, this is for us unto whom the Disciples
are as lights, after they received the promise of the Father, as a gift from
Jesus in his triumphant chariot, the right hand of the Father, the Captain of
our Salvation having led Captivity captive, giveing gifts to men, to those
then, to us now, more dureable treasures, then those offered by the Roman
conquerors of old, as Sanctity in fire, Purity in wind, Eloqution in tongues
that a Hebrew man might in Roman Oratory, and with Attick Eloquence, publish
Salvation to the respective people, and even persuade and reason them by the
Spirit into everlasting bless.

I say by the Spirit, for unless he signify unto the heart, the preaching in
the Air will little avail, neither shall ever he be Oraly instructed, for laying
aside the weight that so easily besets, whose mind by the Spirit is not
perfectly anointed, for discovering the reward designed for observers of the
Law, he being the principale Master, Clearing the memory, Refining the Reason,
Inclining the will: by the first, always minding us of God; by the second,
directing how to apply him for our good, and because to him that knows his
Masters will, and does it not, there are appointed double strips: by the third
he sweetly, willingly, and powerfully, draws us to the practice of the good we
know, for our souls sake, and by the mercy of Jesus, and by the fellowship of
the Spirit, and this always, for tongues being the organ of expressing words,
manifests the perpetuity of the things heard, which as by fire, are to be
engraven, and melted into their head and heart, for their subsistence in them
who are sanctified, as is published, in the Multitude of converts; their joy,
their union, their increase, though under persecution.

AFTER the Disciples return from Olivet we find them enter into an upper room,
continuing in prayer, by some learned, thought to be the place where our
Savior instituted the blessed Sacrament of his body, confirmed Thomas in the
faith of the Resurrection, and where the HOLY GHOST came down in fire upon this
day; And was ( as antiquity records) the Church and Synod-house of the
Apostles, in Jerusalem, called Coenaculum Sion, being first hallowed by our
Lords supper, and consecrate by other appearances for holy use, and service, a
Church being builded thereupon, called the Church of Sion, on the top of the
mount whereof, there yet remains some relics, confirming the History* and
Tradition. In this place, the multitude of believers, about an hundredth and
twenty; some of them possibly of our Saviors own kindred, converts, and
acquaintance in Jerusalem, met and prayed for the Election of Mathias: at
which time surely God loved the gates of Sion more then all the dwellings in
Jerusalem, his foundation being in this Holy mount, 87. Psalm. 1.2. Here was
Mary the Mother of Jesus, and it may be Martha, Mary and Lazarus; who ever they
were they continued in one accord, in prayer, Acts, 1.14. for if men give bread
when their Children importunatly ask from them, and afectionatly being at peace
among themselves; How much more shall our heavenly Father, give the Spirit to
such who call for him? especially if in sound faith, upright heart, chaste
bosoms, holy groanings, innocent thinkings, with unwearied solicitings? Which
unweariedness, is intimated in the words they continued, the fire of the
Spirit, burning up the stinging, withered Nettles of contention, the Thorns of
worldly cares, the Heath or Heather of ^^ars and dejectments, opening the
ground of soul and Spirit, for the seed of the good husband man, that they
might be enriched with, and bring forth fruit meet for repentance and ^mendment
of life; blowing away, as with wind, the sandy van^ty of self-conceit and
opinion, hindering growth in grace and knowledge, and all trivial trash,
sordidness, being either burned, or scattered, while the world is Sataniz'd by
lust, continuing in Gluttony, Drunkenness, Excess, Wantoness and Pride, these
continue in prayer, peace, and expecting the promise, in high and ^ervent love;
for the Spirit came down, and filled the house where they were sitting, that
is, in quietness together, iniquity, passionatness, talkativenesse, itch of
disputing about words, which gender strif, contention and debate, the HOLY
GHOST purposeng eternaly to be estranged from.

THAT being known to them, and of us to be heeded, the Spirit expresses more
then once, after the Ascension, that the multitude met together in one accord,
sueing for the acomplishment of the promise, which in few days, that is ten,
they received, having asked with the mouth, for they prayed; with the heart,
for being heavenly endowed, they wen^ no more a fishing, but about the
fullfilling of the Scripture, Judas being gone to his own place.

THEY were in Jerusalem likewise, which is by interpretation a City of Peace,
being commanded not to depart thence until they received the promise of the
Father, Acts 1.4. Christ purposing to glorify his Ascension, yea all his
actings, with the greater splendor; for there was his greatest humiliation,
the greatest pouring forth of his blood, the lowest bowing down of his Head,
there at the Pasover, in sight of the Nations, did his Soul fly upward into
Paradise, leaving a naked body in the hands of the Soldiers: and there again
was his greatest exaltation, pouring forth his Spirit at the Feast of
Pentecost, upon his despised Associats, the firstlings of whose conversion by
his power, whom the Rulers had slain, but fifty days before in that same City,
not only reviveing his memory, proveing his innocence, but convincing their
Auditors, the inhabitants of bloodinesse and sinfulness; they thereby
becoming adorers of the Cross, manageing the virtue and merits thereof, in
gratifying the Father, that is, glorifying and pleasing God, by rejoicing
because of, and in, the same, and of its extension unto all the world, the Jew
rejoicing in his own pardon, for crucifying the Lord of glory; the Gentile
being glad, in partaking of that Salvation which was from the Jews, Ioh. 4.22.
both now understanding the Prophet in his Out of Zion shall go forth the Law,
Isa. 2.3. and whence can it come fitter? since its a Law making peace, then
from Jerusalem, a vision of peace, where Christ the Prince of peace, said once,
peace be unto you, and again, peace be unto you, Joh. 20.21. that is, as I have
found you in peace, I leave you in peace; and abiding in peace, the spirit of
peace shall abide with you: for which, receive ye the HOLY GHOST.

THE Trumpets of the Temple sounded every morning at the opening of the Gates,
for assembling the devout unto Divine service; the Spirit being breathed upon
the Apostles here, keep'd them together, until the sound of a mighty wind
alar^m'd them, and prepared them for more ample manifestation of his
appearance; And surely what the Trumpet did, our Bells does now, each ting and
toll, saying, Gather your selves together, Joel 2.2. and though gathering by
many be not regarded, and by several reasoned and printed against; yet our
falling from the shadow of Religious deportment, in shutting our ears against
such solemn invitations to our Churches, has not had among us, such alluring
mercies, such beamings of heavens acceptance, such self-denying, and
sin-subduing characters, such warm breathings of Ghostly consolations, nor
such examples, impulses, to purity and good works; but that yet we should go up
to the house of the Lord, and call upon his Name with the remnant that are left.

OUR Fiery tongues against Assemblies, and the Masters thereof, being indeed
such, that is, fiery, rather then like as fire; God by them being dishonored,
and the multitude of the Nations enforced to conclude there from, that
mystically we be drunk with the wine of astonishment and spirit of giddiness,
having a knack of cursing, what ever we see contrary to our intentions, though
urgently sought by us, or wishedly endeavored; for what ever Providence does
with us, though, it may be, in the main conform to our prayers and fasts* yet
in the end we pray and fast, yea curse and ly against it, since it is so well
known, the Gall which now imbitters our lives, even to separation; is no other
then that same Gall* that has disrelished our former enjoyments: Our disquiet
proceeding not so much from this or that object, as from our heeding the devil,
who is come down, yea invited down amongst us, having great wrath; so that in
some meetings, there is, it may be, a mighty rushing wind, and the sound of
that throughout the land; but our sitting, that is, our abideing in that
harmonious concord, peace, and love, attested as a badge of the Spirits future
coming, not being seen* its fallacious to infer the possession of Holiness,
though they should speak with Tongues and prophecy.

OFTEN did the HOLY GHOST appear* but never in the shape of a ravening beast, or
bird of prey; Oil is soft, a Dove is not invective, and the fire that came
down at Pentecost, was without smoke; for that hurts the eyes, and likewise
without natural heat, for it sindged not a hair of the head, neither did the
smell of fire pass on the Apostles; it being but like fire, an Element in
which God had often appeared, as to Moses, to Elias; the nature of it being adapt
to signify the operation of the Spirit within these men for their own good,
and benefiteing of others: which ardently they pursued, prudently instructing,
and by Grace infusing in others, their own acqui^'d, and infused perfections,
as by fire, melting the hard heart, inlightning the ignorant, cleansing as from
rust the idle and sluggish Soul, heating all through the love of ascending
toward Heaven; which love as oil, keeps always aloft, and without mixing it
self with the affecting of things here below, they being cast out, as by a sink
and not to be heeded, that is, beloved, for nauseating the Soul, which by the
pledge, or troth here received as by a Ring, has betrothed it self purely unto
God.

HENCE, we may pronounce their piety, but formality, and shall be more
confounding, then flat Atheism, who obtruds upon the world, their rough hands,
enflamed cheeks, tearing nails, their pilfring humor, their slandering tongue
to be constituent parts of those multiplicated gifts, effused and shed abroad
upon their heart by that Spirit which descended in these days; the pernicity
whereof to discover, would long detain us from our Port; but that of our
Savior, detects the insolence, by their fruits ye shall know them, Matthew.
^.16. Rapaciousness, and blood-thirstinesse, being equally remote from the soul
of Him in whom the HOLY GHOST dwells, as are the contentions and blasphemies of
Hell, and the joys, concord and peace in the highest Heavens.

SVCH who expect visits from great men, fits their houses for reception,
possibly by perfuming pots; the Disciples prepared for the Spirit by Union,
Prayer and Love: embrace the Pattern, imitate the Copy with repeated acts of
incense-like mortification of lust, prejudice, animositie, or whatsoever
savours of such nastinesse; Using in opposition to these, the strowings with
the sweet herbs of Brotherly kindness, meekness, patience, charity, and love
to God: the house ( I should say the Soul) thus scented, is disposed for his
admission; he loving purity, and religious cleanliness, being the only
delectable property, he pursues and expects.

THE Church is said to have Doves eyes, Cant. 4.1. and the Dove is both a
sociable and harmless creature, refusing to nest in that cote where
rottenness, or stench, breeds annoyance; being delighted with that house most
which is furnished with glasses, the bird delighting in her own shadow, and
rejoicing to behold it, even in water: The Doves eyes indeed, properly unsolds
the chastity of the Church, looking only upon her beloved as a true Turtle, and
her not following strange lovers; but the other known properties of that foul,
countercharms the witchcraft-like enchantments that are in this age, men
caressing, that is, hugging themselves in a whimsical solitude; not desiring to
have a discovery of themselves, unto themselves, least they should relinquish
their imbibed opinions, falsely called a principle, and say, O! who shall
deliver us? flying from contrived-for-disturbance, or tenets of separation, as
from filth and ordure, in which alone the unclean spirit keeps, because there
only he finds rest.

WHEN the World was sou^ed, or (so to speak) under the pickle of the deluge;
the Dove alone gave intelligence of the waters abatement, not by a Bramble, but
by an Olive branch: So until the waters of Contrition flow for our former
defilements, unchristian-like temperaments, (which as raw blood putrifies yet
the body of our Kingdoms,) it is not to be expected, the Comforter from the
FATHER and the SON shall intimate unto us, that our sins are forgiven, or that
in Christ we have got the Victory: testifying the truth thereof, by the Olive
branch of refreshing comforts, antedateing heavens felicity in the
infallibility and certainty of its possession, peace with God, being certainly
deduceible therefrom: Whereas contrairily by our tearing and devouring one
another, its easy to prognosticate what the result of our lives shall be, and
whereunto the issues of our Death shall tend, if we persevere in discord, the
Horoscope of the litigious, discovering his being born in Satan; the scheme
manifests his rest (pardon the irony,) shall be with him; which even his spirit
attests in the pangs of a tortured, and disturbed breast, so that within us, we
have either way a witness of our bless or misery, whereby our condemnation is
the more intolerable; if we do not our own business and study to be quiet,
living in love and peace, that the God and Spirit of peace and love may be with
us.

HOW often in the History of the Ascension and of the HOLY GHOSTS descension, (to
harp once more upon this string) have we these words, they met with one accord?
and no where besides; showing, that in opposition to that quarrelsome life, to
those frequent disputeings among the Apostles and Disciples and censurings one
of another, they formerly had offended in; Now they unanimously agree in a
Brotherly harmony, being united though numerous, as one body by the Cement of
the Spirit through the Gospel; there being no intimation in the sacred History
of any reflection of the Disciples to the Converts, or of the Converts to them,
or of any one toward another, about any miscarriage, whereof aforetime they
might be, or had really been guilty of, their life answering the Law; for it
was the Pentecost in ordinary fifty days from the Pasch, that these things
were done, and the fiftieth year also; and so the year of Jubilee, a time of
releasment for servants, lands, debts, of rest, and proclaimed with great joy,
Levit. 25. figuring that delight Christianity has obtained under the full
deliverance Christ has purchased for his people; freeing them not only from
the pedantry of the Law, and burdensome rites thereof, but restored them to
their former privileges with God; the exceedingness whereof is figured in
this, that there passed twenty nine Jubilees betwixt Joshua and Christ, the
Gospel abridging the Laws authority, and hastening the acceptable time, the year
of great deliverance, Luke 4.18.

THE Pasch by Christ's death is antiquated and outdated, it was expedient also,
to abolish both Pentecost and Jubilee; for having procured a plenary remission
from sin, we as freed from its bondage, are now to rejoice in the LORD always,
the Jubilee being proclaimed upon the day of Expiation which was a day of
sadness, grief and sorrow for the offenses of the whole year, that in the
midst of trouble they might remember joy; and we having liberty by the
Resurrection, who before were sold; and gifts by his Ascension, who before were
poor, presenting himself as the first fruits, ( being first born from the dead)
before the Father, for obtaining a blessing on the crop, or race of mankind
(which the Jews did at Pentecost) therefore let us pray, for fulfilling of the
Pentecost feast, in having sin remitted, the curse from the Earth removed, and
the Iubilee rite also, in having the liberty of the Sons of God, the legal
ceremonies evanishing, a clearer manifestation of things, and mysteries are
under Evangelical dispensation, sprinkling with water, being now repentance;
washing with water, baptizeing with the HOLY GHOST, and sacrificing of
bullocks, goats, and lambs; for expiating sin is that superlative sacrifice of
Jesus death, an offering for the sins of the whole world; He being that Lamb of
God which takes them away, by whose strips it is healed, and by whose blood it
is made white; which the very garments of the Neophti, or new Converts of old,
upon this day worn, emblematically discovered, being clothed in whit,
insinuating sanctity, purity, harmlesnesse and pe^ceablenesse: whence the day
is called Whit-sunday, or with the Saxon, wied (i. e.) that is sacred, or holy
Sunday.

LET this Generation pretend to what degree of Sanctity it please, to fear God,
to eschew evil, to honor all men, to do violence to no man, to do good; and in
all these to persevere, is the alone mean to be clothed in White, the proper
habit of that Citizen, which is of Jerusalem above: unto which all his acts
must quadrat of what kind soeever, least the Spirit be blasphemed through his
impertinencies.

FOLLOWING that Hero, Peter King of Aragon, who gave a Glob, representing the
Earth, a Crown surmounting that, signifying Soveraignity, that overlaid by a
Scepter, typifying the application of Law according to merit, over all a Dove
in a glory emblemating the HOLY GHOST, circumscribed with this device, TE
GUBERNATORE,, ( i e.) by thy Direction: all things being done within the Empire
of the Christians jurisdiction thus; Religion shall not be used as Talque (
shining over glass cases,) to hide the rottenness, worm-eating, and
mothinesse in the frame of many men's conversation; neither shall their talk so
amuse the Vulgar and undescerning, as to cause a sigh, a long prayer, the
nameing of God, and conscience, cover the ^ickednesse of practices, as to let
it pass without abhorrence of their Hypocrisies, or censuring their
(^ick-nam'd holy) profession, as too frequently they do to the defaming of that
which our devout Ancestors, called Zeal, Piety and Religion; accounting honesty
in the second Table, one genuine Character, clearing men's observance of the
first, wanting the brazen-fore head, now boasted of in some Professors, where
holiness is divorced from peace; no sacrifice Sermons, or Prayer so pure as
those which are mingled with the blood of men, who gainsay the principles of a
few; by blood, is not barely to be understood, that physical thing so called;
but the curses, lies, untrue reports, slanders, calumnies, with which the
services of Formalists, and Pretenders, are maliciously, sinfully,
scandalously, and madly interwoven.

THAT French King, Henry the third, having been upon this day, by the Diet of
Poland elected their King, did in memory ^hereof institute an Order, called
Knights ^f the HOLY GHOST, their Habit ha^ing many black and white ornaments
therein; and in a golden Collar, within the center of ^ Cross was the effigies
of a Dove, umbrage^ng that blessed Spirit: It is lawful to attempt, ^ea
honorable to design high Atcheifmen^s, if within the verge of our Capacity,
power, or calling: and to whet my weapon at this Philistines forge, how
strenuously has the Ancient Saints endeavored to cause the days, and places,
whereon and wherein they have been honored with mercies, blessings or visions
to be remarked, as Abraham in Beersheba, Genesis 21.33. or Jacob in Bethel, and
Mordecai at Purim? This has been a day of glad tidings, wherein by Tongues,
the organ of Eloquence, utterance and acclamation, GOD has testified man's
endowment with the gifts of holiness, and given instances of gracious
acceptance for humble Penitents, possitively deduced without much scruple, from
the Apostles teaching, and the Murderers repenting, sorrowing, believing,
rejoicing: Whence it is consequential, that if we reflect upon the blackness
of our tongues, in our clamours, bawlings against Christ, his Word, his
Instituts, his Servants as if they were not worthy to be, or fit to live;
walking in Godlike or Dove-like innocence, invested with the white Robe of love
and meekness, adequat and cut out for the Elect of GOD, Col. 3.12. We shall
have the honor of all GODS Saints, being elected Kings, to reign over lusts,
hell and Death, by being from this day forward filled as was Stephen with the
holy Spirit, filled with all knowledge, evidenced when with the Romans we are
full of all goodness, Romans 15.14.

Glory be to the FATHER, and to the SON, and to the HOLY GHOST. FINIS.
Errata ^ie Corrige.
The China Printers having by their Art, Exim'd themselves only from
Possibility of Error; the best in Europe, yet pleads guilty of mistakes: Here
are some Capital ones marked, others being Remitted to the Readers Charity and
Correction.

Page 6. l. 7. Read holding, p. 37. l. 6. r. be in time p. 40. l. 12. r.
Inflame to p. 64. l. 25. r. That, by that, p. 69. l. 22. r. not gratified p.
70. l. 22. r. Quadrat. p. 86. l. 24. r. leaning. p. 89. l. 12. is not, p. 204.
l. 20. r. ends, p. 213. l. 12. r. moulting, p. 240. l. 19. r. viants.

Mr. Will. Annand His Mysterium Pietatis.


