ANIMADVERSIONS ON Capt. Wilkinson's INFORMATION. Being highly conducive to the
better informing and disabusing the Minds of Men, and tending to the public
Peace and Safety.

He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his neighbor comes and
searches him out, Prove. 18.17. LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis, 1682.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON Capt. Wilkinson's INFORMATION.
SINCE I saw this Information, I have been big with Expectation of some notable
Skirmishes with it. But finding none so hardy, as to encounter the Captain, I
have adventured to enter the Lists, and take up the Gantlet against him.

To the Reader, p. 1. he gives some account of his adventures and sufferings.

1. His Adventures, he had served his late Majesty of blessed Memory, and his
most glorious Majesty King Charles the Second; and that particularly in being
instrumental in his Restoration: And

2. His Sufferings, for (with many others in the same Service) he had the
misfortune to be much impoverished.

Where we will observe that the Captain pleads Poverty, and makes the cause of
it to be His Majesty's Service. And yet in the very same Page, Parag. 3. he
owns that since His Majesty's Return, he has been a great Projector, and for
the most part lost by his Projects: And has likewise spent above one thousand
pounds in assisting one Mr. Castillian Morris.

Now if the Captain's Estate had ever been considerable, I doubt not but we
should have had an account of it, that we might withal have seen the greatness
of his Sufferings. But whatever that was, his Poverty could not be great, since
he could afford, ever since His Majesty's Restoration, to be a continual loser
by Projects of his own, and spend above a thousand pounds upon his Friend; and
after all, be in a capacity of leaving his Country honorably, p. 9. As for the
Debts that make him a Prisoner, they were contracted by his keeping a Ship, his
Family, and above thirty Servants idle on the River from April till August,
together with his engagements for other men, and Actions brought upon him by
Passengers, who several of them Arrested him for damages in being so long
delayed, and together threw him into the Counter in Woodstreet, to whom
notwithstanding all, he was still capable of offering fair and reasonable
satisfaction; which being not accepted, he removed himself to the Prison of the
King's Bench, Sept. 17. Page 3. to the end.

How then was the Captain impoverished by His Majesty's Service? A loser he
might be, impoverished he was not: It is an ease to some men to nick their
private losses on the public score. Hereby they hope at least to wipe off from
themselves all reproach of extravagancy, and ill management of their affairs.
And men of more designing heads, as the Captain seems to be, think by such
little Arts, to fix themselves the faster in popular esteem, who reckon that
hope and revenge equally conspire to make them true to that interest they have
now espoused; and therefore do not fear their return to their Master, who, they
tell them, has cut off, not like Darius, their Lips, Nose and Ears; but their
Houses, Lands, and Credit in the World.

But in case this had been true, which yet himself evidently overthrows, what
need was there of that Parenthesis, viz. (with many others in the same
Service?) unless to upbraid the King with ingratitude; or to hint, that
miseries are the usual attendants on that Service; and by both to affright
others from their duties in the like nature. Surely Soldiers might be content
to lose their Arrears, when all honest Subjects were hurled into a common
ruin, while the King himself did lose, one his Life? The other his Crowns? The
Parliament Army might have fared as bad, had not the Commons, whose they were,
paid them by Theft and Sacrilege. Whereas had the King overcame, themselves
had been the losers, while His Majesty's Forces had been well, and more
honestly paid too. But yet to the Reader, Page 1. he grants that it was
impossible for His Majesty to gratify all that wanted his Royal bounty.
Therefore as his own Poverty is falsely placed on the account of his Service; so
the Poverty of others in the same Service is mentioned, either to no purpose,
or to an ill end.

In the Information, Page 2. 3. he acknowledges he had formerly desired to Farm
something of His Majesty's Revenues, which, it seems, he could not attain to,
and doubtless for that reason was resolved not to come at the Court, as he once
and again declares, Nor would trust any Courtier he knew for a Groat, p. 3. And
lest he should not sufficiently spit his venom, he bespatters the whole
Pamphlet with expressions of an ill nature that way, as Page 4. that he would
not trust the Promises of Courtiers. And Page 8. that he could freely draw his
Sword against them.

From which things together we may see the Man's Complexion, viz. that he was
an Old Cavalier, but having by fond Projects wasted his Estate, and missed
expected rewards, he is now grown sullen, has espoused another interest, and
in a pet removes from Yorkshire to London, and here falls in with the concerns
of Carolina.

Now all this while the Captain has been industriously laying a twofold
design, As

1. To build a little Porch to the Fabric of his following Discourse, and by
the specious pretexts of Loyalty, and the boasts of former Services,
precariously to introduce a belief of the matter of his Information: And

2. To satisfy the People that he is totally fallen off from the Court-Party,
as some love to speak, and which, in vulgar acceptance, is the King, Ministers
of State, and their Adherents, viz. those who faithfully retain the Principles
of Honesty and Allegiance.

Under which shade the People do herd and hug themselves in the thoughts of a
Proselyte, who forsooth must be believed in all he is pleased to say; though
for no other Reason, but because he was once a loyal Subject, or an honest man.

But a man's former Loyalty and Service, if once he becomes a Malcontent,
cannot in reason be allowed to derive Reputation to his present Discontents,
but must rather be judged an occasion of heightning the same, and of hurrying
him the faster into desperate Resolves: Because when high thoughts of former
Merits, and the sense of present Neglects, have drawn a man off to another
Party, he there is carried on not only by Interest, as before, but also by the
accession of Revenge. Thus when Pride, Covetousness, and desperate Fortunes,
had made Heretics in the Church, and evil Members in the State, they were ever
observed to have been worser Enemies, than those who were born and bred amongst
the Hetorodox in Faith and Loyalty: Of which, perhaps our own Times may afford
some Instances.

And truly this seems to be the Captain's Case, as may be conjectured from
several parts of his Papers, and particularly from page 8. where he says, that
he told the King -- he knew his duty to his Majesty, and would not draw a Sword
against him, (a great Favor indeed) but could freely do it against some of the
Court -- which is just the language of those very men, whom the Captain glories
he had served the King against in the late Civil War: For that Rebellion
pretended only the Honor and Safety of the King, and to take away evil
Counselors from before him, that his Throne might be established. And is the
Captain indeed reconciled to these Pleas? Is it now uncharitable to suspect him
a Friend to a true Protestant Association, which pretends the Safety of the
King, and that in a way of levying War against him? It is most apparent, that
those men who might fall by the Captain's Hand, died innocently, whose blood
therefore himself must answer for; or else that himself is traveling the Road
to the same Deserts. Or suppose he never proceed any farther than words, yet
what man of any Face or Conscience, of any Love and Tenderness to his King,
Country, and Religion, can make use of those very Pleas, that have led to so
many Murders, to such Devastations and Ruins, as by such means have fallen
upon this Church and Nation? But it seems he is become a new man, by having
entered upon the old way of Sin.

He fastens his Charge at Court particularly upon my Lord Hallifax, and my Lord
Hyde, and afterward on my Lord Chancellor; Personages justly admired both for
their Performances, and steady Loyalty: In which he jumps exactly with the most
open and barefaced Enemies of our Peace and Government. And indeed the sad
Memorials of the late Earl of Strafford and Archbishop Land, do remind us, that
those who would pull down the Crown, begin at the best Supporters of it. Indeed
he excuses the King Inform. page 3. saying, He is assured his Majesty did not
put them on the Endeavors to corrupt him: And page 7. If I had been exhorted
by the best Divine in England, he could not have said more than his Majesty.
But yet he wounds him in his Ministers of State; which is the old way of
wounding the King in and through them. This is the method of that most daring
Answer to his Majesty's most gracious Declaration, the two parts of the No
Protestant Plot, which it self has a Plot in it, viz. to prostitute all
Authority and present Establishments to vulgar Rapes and Violence, and of most
other Libels exposed to sale. And indeed it may well be of ancient and modern
Practice; for we find a plain Example for it in Scripture, which the good
People, as the Association calls them, choose to follow rather than Precept;
for Judas betrays while he cries Master, and kisses him.

Now the thing he seems to reflect on my Lord of Hallifax, and my Lord Hyde, is
of a very high Nature, viz. a design of making him an Evidence against the Lord
Shaftsbury: For page 4. They, viz. Booth and Bains, told me, I might be assured
of what I would desire from my Lord Hallifax, and my Lord Hyde. And a few lines
after, Mr. Booth told me, -- I was intended 500 l. per an. or 10000 l. in Money.

Though all wise and observing men well know, that their Lordships want no Pen
to vindicate their Truth and Honor, which, like the Moon, keeps her course,
and wonted brightness, though here sorry Curs may be bawling at her. For could
any Imputation have been fastened upon them, it is well known that wiser Heads
than the Captain's would not long since have done it; when it was the joy of
good men, that his Majesty had such Ministers, whom some would have had
removed, but could give no Reason for it: Whence we conjectured, that the
Causes of their Offense was indeed these Personages Commendation. Yet however
we shall consider some few things in and appertaining to this Matter. As,

1. The Captain does not pretend, that they ever said they came with these
Proposals by their Lordships Order or Knowledge; nay himself makes so blind a
business of it, that page 3. parag. 2. he says, By whom Mr. Booth was put upon
this method, God knows; he is assured it was not his Majesty, but on whom to
fix it, he cannot tell: Here then is a Scandalum Magnatum, without any pretext
of Reason. Suppose they had used these Names and Authorities, but yet so, that
the Captain could gain no certain knowledge from thence, even Christian Charity
would have obliged him, had they been his Equals, not to have mentioned the
Persons, had it been needful to have declared the thing. Therefore this rash
Procedure speaks it a clear design in him to serve the popular Humor and
Interest, and to help the driving on that Design against King and Kingdom,
which has hitherto found these Personages such Rubs in its way.

I will here premise some few things: As,

1. That they might know the Captain privy to some Designs, as Mr. Booth has
sworn. Or,

2. That they might at least conjecture, that if there were any Designs from
dissenting Parties, that in all reason they were not wholly hid from the
Captain; which Presumption we shall show sufficient Reason for anon. And,

3. That they knew the Captain to be poor and covetous, and resolved to make
his best Markets of what he knew. From which things we argue thus: Suppose
(because Suppositions grant nothing) that this Booth and Bains might, unknown
to these Lords, use their Lordships Names in such sort only, as to let the
Captain understand, that he need not question but that his Services would be
considered, that his own Pardon and Rewards would be certain. I can see no evil
in all this, nor can any censure it, but they must withal condemn the
Proceedings and Methods used toward Papists, in order to some discovery there.
They were promised Pardons; and what greater gift there can be to a man than
his Life, I do not know. They had a prospect of Gain from their Narratives; of
Guards and Pentions, which the suspicious and restless minds of Dissenters made
necessary; and even the House of Commons moved His Majesty about Dr. Oats his
Allowance, even while there were Persons to be Tried, whom the same Oats was
kept an Evidence against. Which things were as apt in their own natures to
sway, and corrupt the mind, as the Arts, if true, which the Captain here
complains of. Of which nature we shall touch on some other things as they lie
in our way, whereby we shall discover the unequal minds of Dissenters, who will
not endure the same methods in one matter, which they applaud in another,
though the matters are both of the same nature; therefore I cannot imagine what
other reason can be assigned, but their own Interest and Preservation.

But I shall at present make out that it cannot in any reason be believed, that
there were any such offers as these really made: For,

1. The Captain did offer Page 4. for two thousand Guineys to make a Discovery:
Therefore would never have stood out, had there been offered five hundred
pounds per annum, or ten thousand pounds in Money for the same Service;
especially if to this there had been added, as he speaks Page 5. five hundred
pounds per annum more out of an Estate in Ireland. But you will object that the
Captain offered this as a wheedle to discover the bottom of the design.
Therefore we proceed,

2. There could be no such design in it, because the Libel it self does show,
that his Work and Rewards were both made known at the first offer, before he
proposed any terms himself. But you will find a most palpable and vile
incongruity in this very particular; for Page 2. Parag. 3. he says, that on
Tuesday October. 11. 1681. Mr. Booth told him, he might have five hundred pounds
per annum settled upon himself and Heirs, or ten thousand pounds in Money for
the Service. And yet Page 3, 4. he tells you that on Wednesday October. 12. 1681.
himself did offer for two thousand Guineys to discover. Now let any man in
reason judge, whether it is in the least probable, that if he might have had
the greater sum for doing this thing on the Tuesday, that he would offer,
though in design only to do it for the lesser sum on Wednesday: This is a
strange way of bargaining, and takes away all Faith and Credit of the Relation.
He tells us Page 3. that his Friend kept a daily account of all that passed in
this affair, and here he puts not only in Figures the day of the Month, but at
large the day of the Week too, as Tuesday and Wednesday, therefore it could not
be a mistake, that might happen in a true relation, but an oversight in a
wicked Forgery; by such little means it sometimes pleases God to discover great
Impostors.

3. Notice being given above, that the Captain declared himself willing for
such a sum to make a Discovery, Mr. Graham is sent to him to understand whether
he had said any such thing, he answers yes, and that for so much Money in hand
he would do it. But when Mr. Graham said he had no order from the Lords to make
a bargain, nor would any such thing be done, by reason a promise would destroy
his Evidence, the Captain presses so earnestly after the Money, that he
cunningly finds an evasion, pleading that it should be given, not for the sake
of his Discovery, but toward his former losses. But finding no Money would
come that way, and perhaps finding better encouragements another, he falls
back, and will say not a word. These things Mr. Graham a Gentleman of
Cliffords-Inn, and a Person of a good Fortune and unspotted Reputation, is
ready to depose upon Oath, when lawfully called; but there is so little need of
that, that the thing appears plain from diverse of the Captain's own
expressions, as Page 4. he requires two thousand Guineys toward his losses,
which is his very Plea to Mr. Graham, and then, says he, I will discover. And
in the fifth Line after -- I told him, When I had that Money and a general
Pardon, I would then do any Service I could. He resolves to have the Money, and
will not depend on kindness, the want of which was the reason of his silence,
and afterward denial. The same Mr. Graham does declare, that he is verily
persuaded, had he made a bargain, the Captain would have discovered a Plot, if
any he knew of, or made one, if none.

4. If any had had such a design upon the Captain, it is not in reason to be
thought, that they would employ Mr. Graham, a man of undoubted Reputation, as
any inquirer will find him to be, until the good people shall please to make
him Beast and Devil, as they do all that oppose them. Because such a person is
no fit instrument in such a work, nor any way suited to Booth and Bains, if
they were such as the Captain represents them.

5. Could it be supposed that any had such a design on the Captain and the Lord
Sh -- yet it cannot in reason be imagined that they would, after so many
repulses, follow him with so frequent and importunate addresses as he there
relates: And after all, force him by a Warrant to an Examination, that being
the most improbable way of corrupting an old sullen Soldier, and the readiest
course to give a discontented Fellow, that had now embarked in another bottom,
an opportunity of exposing them to the common Odium of all Mankind: And of
reeking his malice, which runs out at every part of his discourse to the utmost
upon them. Therefore if we will act by any measures of reason, we must
conclude, that in case the Captain had not given a very great suspicion that he
knew something of these matters, he never had been examined about it. Therefore
let himself be guilty of such designs or not guilty, privy to them or not, it
is not to be questioned amongst reasonable men, but that the Captain in this
affair, has played the Fool and Knave at once, and did cunningly press after an
opportunity of making his Markets, which he has done to so much advantage,
that he is now released from Prison, walks the Exchange, and takes his Lodgings
in the City: And also, when the Justice of the Council and Government would not
do what we may presume others have, to spit his venom to the utmost on the
Court and Government at once.

Now let us sum up these things together: That

1. The Captain is needy, and resolves to have Money on the one hand or the
other.

2. That he offered for two thousand Guineys to discover a Plot against the
King and Government.

3. When he is told the making a bargain will spoil his Evidence, he finds out
a way to salve that Objection, viz. the Money shall be given toward the losses
he sustained, and not on condition of his Discovery.

4. When all would not do, he turns Cat in Pan, complies with those People he
would before have delivered to the Laws, and pretends 10000 l. were promised
him to make such a discovery against King and Government: But, as providence
will have it, makes the Story utterly incredible, by making the 10000 l. to be
offered him one day, and himself to propose the thing on condition of 2000
Guineys the very next day; for it can never be believed, that he should offer
to do it for a much less Sum, if the very day before he had been urged to do it
for a much greater Sum.

5. That after this Service done to the good People, he is forthwith released
from Prison, and made a Gentleman.

And I leave it to any honest man to tell me, whether he is not persuaded in
his own Mind and Reason, that so much Confession, so much utter Improbability
in his Stories, so much Gain and Enlargement upon the Service done, so much
Evidence from Mr. Graham and Mr. Booth, who against Papists would be received
as the best Witness in the World, would not persuade any true Protestant Jury,
to hang up Papists to the number of themselves.

There is a second part of a No Protestant Plot; surely there is something
sticks, where they keep such rubbing: The man, I suppose, would not have
Antichristian Names put upon Christian Practices; Plots and Treasons are the
Works of Papists; the good People have nothing unless Solemn Leagues and
Covenants, and Associations. The Creature, page 9. would persuade the Lord H.
and the Earl of H. to fall upon Mr. Booth, for using their Lordships Names in
the matter and manner, as this Informer Wilkinson does relate, or else to lie
under the supposed Guilt of what this Libel taxes them with; the reasonableness
of which let any man judge by our Observations upon it. Doubtless there is in
this very thing a Plot to bring Ruin upon the King's Evidence; and if they
could by such Artifices do it in this Instance, we doubt not but that they
would soon send out another Information to do the like in another Instance; by
which means the King should have no Evidence, but what would soon have the
Penalties of the Association inflicted upon him, that is, he should be pursued
to destruction. The Argument is a two-horn'd thing called a Dilemma: They have
got, it seems, such Creatures amongst them; and seems resolved to have its end
either this way or that, viz. the King's Evidence must be ruined, or the King's
Friends blasted in their Honor, and made as incapable as may be, of doing his
Majesty and the Kingdom service.

But at length the Cloud is extended, and made to eclipse his R. Highness, out
of whose Estate in Ireland, the Captain says, he should have had the addition
of 500 l. per an. page 5. What is argued to show the vanity and falsehood of the
man in reference to the Lords, is apt to do so here, and that with some
advantage too, because it is still more improbable that he should be offered
1000 l. per an. for that which he himself by his own confession was earnest to
do for 2000 Guineys. But however if he had missed this Point, he had done but
little; for if we do not kill the Heir, the Inheritance cannot be ours.

But you will say, If there was not something of this nature in it, how comes
the Captain to be so pressed upon in this Affair? To which I answer, The Reason
might be from his own Offer for such a Sum to make a discovery; which Offer
himself, you see, confesses. And that this was not done merely to humor the
Matter, as he speaks, but in all likelihood was the first Proposal made, we
have argued to be very probable, from the Time and the Sums which the Captain
mentions; for it is utterly mad and irrational to believe, that they should
offer him 10000 l. for such a Service one day, and that himself should offer
the same Service for 2000 Guineys the next day. Therefore, it may be, himself
gave the occasion of all this Stir.

But moreover, the Lord Shaftsbury and others stood then accused of a Design
upon the King and Government, from which his Lordship is since acquit, but it
was then in suspense: And in case there had been such a Design, it was most
highly probable that this Captain might be privy to it. For,

1. The said Captain was often with the E. of Sh -- as appears from his
Information.

2. The said Captain had from the Earl always a very kind Reception. To the
Reader, page 2.

3. The Captain yields, That he rode with Sword and Pistols out of Town with
the Lord Sh -- when he went to Oxford, page 6. which Oxford was the Place
where, and this the Time when, this Attempt on the Person of the King was said
should have been made.

4. They were both in no great Charity with the Court. And,

5. The Captain was a Military man, sunk in the World, and newly come to Town
to put himself into some new way of Life, and therefore a very likely
Instrument for such an Undertaking, if any such Design had been, which was then
in question.

All which things were known: Whence it was most reasonable to conjecture, that
if there was such a Design, it must in all probability be known to this man;
upon which Presumption, it was most fit he should be examined: For it is part
of the business and end of Government, to discover evil Members in the Body
politic, to stop the Gangrene, and preserve the sounder parts in their
Soundness. All which was no more, than what was ordinarily done for the
discovery of a Popish Plot; for many were aspersed, imprisoned, examined and
tried for their Lives, upon whom no such Evil could be found.

All this time these People commended this for Vigilance, and a Christian Zeal,
and never found fault, till it comes to touch their own Parties. It is
therefore Partiality, and not any injustice in the thing it self, that makes
them complain.

Well, in this Negotiation, the Captain, we have seen, page 4. offers for 2000
Guineys to discover what he knew, implying thereby, that he knew something.
Which is declared to the Council: Whereupon Mr. Graham is sent to discourse
him, to whom the Captain owns that Proposal, and makes the same again to him;
but because no Money was coming, as before, his mouth shuts in silence: Which
is very plain from some other Expressions, not quoted before; as page 3. I told
him, I would say nothing, nor appear at the Court, till I was considered for my
Sufferings. Page 4. I told him, viz. Mr. Booth, When I had that Money, and a
general Pardon, I would then do any service I could, -- but I would not trust
the Promises of Courtiers; but when he saw he must trust, he will not traffic.
And I am persuaded these things had never been put into his Information, had
not the same, with some Additions, been made known to Mr. Graham, whose Credit
he could not blast so easily as the others.

But the Council will not be so put off, but bring him by Warrant to
examination, a most undoubted Evidence of the integrity, and uprightness of
their intentions and proceedings; and truly both King and Council might very
reasonably be put by the Captains offer, upon expectation of some considerable
discovery he could make; and likewise upon his unexpected departure from what
he had proposed, his Examination might well be strict and pressing; he having
by the said offer given just cause of suspicion that there was some wickedness
at bottom, which he was loath to discover. Which things, if done for the finding
out a Popish Intrigue, would have been applauded for Zeal and Integrity, by
that very Party that now condemns them for Wickedness and Subornation.

Now if there was no such design for alteration of Government, or suppose there
was, but the Captain knew not of it, himself may be much mistaken in thinking
these methods, which were used to find out a truth, which he was supposed to be
privy to, were really intended to oblige him to the witnessing a falsehood.

To suppose there was such a design, and that known to the Captain too, it was
very easy for him, by offering to discover for 2000 Guineys, to draw on
Discourses, it may be somewhat farther than might be convenient for them to
know, who were not acquainted with the whole Intrigue, and all its
circumstances, and yet the persons transacting the affair, still remain free
from all evil designs: And then to turn all to the palliateing the same
Treasons, and to the farther carrying them on against the Government, by
charging such evil practices upon it. Which indeed would mightily tickle a
revengeful Spirit, which the Captain all along discovers against the Court, by
which is vulgarly understood, as was before noted, King and Government.

But now to excuse his offer of discovering, he has a poor Salvo, Page 4. But
I still told them I knew nothing by my Lord Shaftsbury: Now observe the subject
of their discourse was, whether he knew any such thing by the said Lord? He
answers, For 2000 Guineys I will discover what I know, which is a plain
concession that he knew something; and yet says he at the same time, I told
them I knew nothing. Here is an Opposition in the very terms, they are plainly
things that cannot possibly be reconciled or stand together: He knows; for I
will discover what I know, and yet I know nothing. He will discover, and yet
has nothing to discover; which is to say and unsay, and in plain English, to
demand 2000 Guineys for just nothing, which is such a monstrous thing, that no
man in his wits can believe it. This is worse than buying a Pig in a Poke, for
it is supposed there is a Pig, though not known what an one: but here your
Chapman tells you there is a Pig, then in the next words says he, there is no
Pig: And yet at the same time asks a vast rate for the Pig. Certainly such an
one would bring himself in danger of being either begged for a Fool, or taken
up for Bedlam: And in each instance the buyer might go as a fit Companion with
the seller, nor is he more wise or sober than either, that can believe so fond
a Story. But would we put any sense upon this, which has plainly no sense in
it? the best we can say is, that the Captain does equivocate and falsify, in
either bringing suspicion on the Innocent, or in acquitting the Guilty.

Now because we have before shown, that there were many reasons that might
induce a persuasion that the Captain might be privy to such a design, if any
such had been; we will now observe what answer he returns to all those things,
and let us suppose his Innocence, yet the Pleas he makes, do not at all clear,
but seem rather to derive a much greater suspicion upon him. For

1. He owns the Lord S -- kindness toward him; but says Inform. Page 2. that
the reason of his Lordships respects was, because I had served His Majesty,
Parag. 1.

To which I shall answer only this, that he is very happy in his Lordships
favors, which come to him founded on such a bottom, and I wish there were many
more such instances. But

2. He pleads Inform. Page 2. Parag. 3. That none will believe, I should be
made privy to such a design, (if such a thing was) being I had served His
Majesty --

Which is truly no reason at all, unless the Captain can prove of Loyalty, as
some hold of saving grace, that it can never be lost. I pray how many instances
confuse him, if we have recourse back to the last Rebellion, in which some were
in Arms against the late King, who were once taken to be his most loyal
Subjects, and had performed him most acceptable Services? Nor do we in these
very times want some that may boast of former Services, and have been lately
very dear to His Majesty; who yet, because their ambition was not answered, or
interest served, are fallen off, and become as deeply malcontents as others.
And indeed, where men have discontentedly forsaken an interest, they are the
most likely, as is once already observed, to become its worst Enemies where
opportunity serves, because such so engaged are moved both by interest and
revenge. Therefore his former Services are so far from taking away all belief
of his Privacy to such designs, if any such had been, that his present
discontents, so notoriously discovered thoughout the whole Pamphlet, render him
the more suspicious.

3. He pleads Page 2. to the Reader, that he never had with his Lordship, viz.
the E. of Sh -- any other discourse than was occasional in relation to my
intended Voyage.

Which seems most improbable, because he was often with his Lordship, and
particularly with Sir Thomas Armstrong the night before his Lordships
Apprehension, Inform. Page 3. and went with his Lordship toward Oxford, Page
6. Now if there was no such discourse as this, nor any such design to found
such discourse upon, can we in reason think, that Sir Thomas his ears must be
entertained with nothing but Carolina, who was a stranger to that affair! So
that in all his Visits, and on the Road toward Oxford, their mouths must be
filled with nothing but Carolina, Carolina! This cannot in any reason be
supposed, and therefore the Captain has made this band too strait to hold. So
if he means by [occasional] any other thing that this Subject might lead them
to, or to which they might pass from this of Carolina, which might be this, or
that, or any thing, then he has professed this thing to no purpose or
advantage to himself.

We shall pursue this Argument, viz. the insufficiency of his Answers, to clear
his innocence under the next Head, which is the Captain's Examination, when
brought by Warrant to White Hall. Which is contained in P. 8, 9. Where the
Captain is charged as an Associate in that supposed Conspiracy, which charge
was founded on several reasons, that carried a very fair probability that way.
As

1. An Information upon Oath, that in this Conspiracy the said Captain was to
have a Troop of Horse, which Oath was made by Mr. Booth, who also deposed that
himself was entered a Soldier under the said Captain.

Now of this Booth the Captain does own;

1. That he had known him above twenty years in the North of England.

2. That he was under a very ill repute, therefore the more likely to associate
in an ill Design. And,

3. That notwithstanding his ill repute, he was joined with the Captain in his
intended or pretended Voyage to Carolina, Page 3. Parag. 2. to the Reader. And
therefore likely to have been a Companion with the Captain in this Design, if
any such had been.

2. The Captain's offer to make a discovery for 2000 Guineys.

3. His going armed with the E. of Sh -- who is since acquit; and therefore we
hold him acquit, but was then under the same Accusation.

4. To Oxford the place, where, and

5. Against the Session of Parliament, the time when, this attempt was said
intended to have been made.

Moreover it was sworn in Colledge's Trial, page 25. That the said College,
who suffered at Oxford, did say there were several Captains, some of whom he
there names, with abundance more, that would be ready for this Design upon the
King and Government, of whom about forty were there at the time the said
College spoke these things. Now from all these, and perhaps some other Causes
and Reasons, it might well be suspected that one Captain Will -- might be in the
number.

To which he answers two things, viz.

1. I could do no less than wait upon him, viz. the E. of S -- who had been so
kind -- page 6.

Where observe that his answer gives a reason of his Attendance, but not of his
Arms: Therefore it may be replied, what need was there of his going armed? no
more, I suppose, than of Colleges doing so. His respects were shown in his
personal attendance, not in his weapons.

2. He answers page 9. That he could not be supposed confederate in such a
design, if any such was: for at the same time he, viz. Mr. Booth, said this was
to be, which was when the Parliament was to be last at Oxford, I had taken a
Ship for Carolina.

Now that Parliament was dissolved March. 28. and at that time, says he, that
that Parliament was to sit, I had taken a Ship, ergo could not be supposed to
be in a design then at Oxford. This is a main Plea, and which he seems to
triumph in: and yet to the Reader page 2. he tells you quite another story,
viz. that he hired this Ship in the Month of April: and page 3. adds further,
that the Ship lay upon his charge from April to August: ergo was not hired till
April, which was after the dissolution of that Parliament, and the return of
all Parties to their homes.

Now suppose this Ship had been hired in March, it does not prove, but that the
Captain might notwithstanding be in a Plot at the same time, men may drive on a
public and private Design at once; and truly the probability is still the
greater, since it is given upon Oath, that the Captain designed not to go as
yet to Carolina in his own person, but at present to send his Son, as appears
in the Hearing at the Old-Bailey. But here is a most manifest Contradiction,
whereby he brings himself under a greater suspicion, than if he had said
nothing; for that cannot be Truth, that needs a Lie.

But you will say, Perhaps the Captain in the Preface mistook April for March.
To which I answer, There is no [perhaps] in the Case; but contrariwise it is
very plain and certain, that in the Information he put March for April. Because,

1. In the Information he says but once that it was in March, but to the
Reader he says twice that it was in April.

2. To the Reader, the Captain sets himself to give you an account,

1. Of his Preparations for his Voyage, and also of all Particulars about the
Ship, page 2. as the time he hired her, which was the Month of April; her Name,
the Abigail of Colchester; her Burden, about 130 Tuns; and the Master's Name,
Thomas Wood. And,

2. Of his Losses in this Project, page 3. As particularly his having this Ship
so long upon his charge, viz. from the Month of April till August following.
And certainly where he sets himself to give you an account of his Misfortunes
and Charges, which he loves to do to all advantage, it is not in reason to be
supposed, that he would cut off one Months Charge from the Account, which yet
he must have done, in case the said Ship was hired at the Session of the
Parliament at Oxford, which was in March. Now here he purposely gives you an
account of all the little Circumstances about the Ship, and the losses he
sustained: Therefore there being no other Matter at that instant before him,
here was a free recollection of his thoughts, and therefore no danger of a
mistake in so plain and easy a Matter; and yet in each place he says, April
was the time he hired the Ship, and the time her Charges took date upon him.
Whereas in the Information there was very complex Matter before him, and he
spoke of March incidently, and in transitu, to some other Matter, therefore
might more easily mistake than in the other; if you will be so merciful as to
suppose a mistake, which you cannot do without the forfeiture of your Reason.
Because,

3. To the Reader, he could have no design in naming the circumstance of Time;
whereas in the Information he had a very great one, in saying it was in March;
for hereby he would wipe off all Suspicions of his being in a Plot then.

Whence it is ten thousand times more likely that he should falsify in the
Information, than mistake to the Reader; and consequently in all reason the
former Account was true, viz. that the Ship was hired in April, after all was
over, and possibly to carry him off from danger. I would not judge the Captain,
but truly this Shift has a wicked Aspect, and such an evil Influence on the
repute of his Loyalty, that it will not easily be recovered.

Now after all this, who can wonder that there was expectation above of some
great Discovery; that his Examination was so strict and pressing; and that my
Lord Chancellor was so close upon him; when beside Oath made against him, even
himself had given so just an occasion of such strictness in the several
Particulars before mentioned, and now at last by putting off the Charge from
himself by a very Lie? Had the Captain been in some Places, far less occasion
would have brought him to Examination by Rack or Limbo; therefore he might well
be content, as he is pleased to word it, page 8. to run the Gantlet from one
Place to another. We see many times that in a Cause of so narrow a Sphere, as
not to reach any farther than a private Concern, Witnesses are examined,
cross-examin'd, and run this, that, and every way, by close and subtle Queries;
are now affrighted, and then dandled in their own humors, and Matters applied
in the most likely way to sift truth out of them; that I have seen the man
sweat, and almost at his wits end; and having spoke truth at first, though
others were not well satisfied he did so, has as much cause to suspect and
complain that the Court would have frighted, or persuaded him to Perjury, as
the Captain has to reflect all that dishonor upon these Personages, whose
Parts and Integrity are, under his Majesty, the Glory of our Court and Age, the
Security of our Peace, Properties and Religion, and who therefore are honored
by good men, feared and hated by the evil, and admired by all.

And truly sometimes Truth is not discoverable without diligent Search, strict
and various Methods, and repeated Examinations: Therefore Fitzharris, and many
others of the Popish way, had very frequent Examinations, Promises,
Threatenings, and all imaginable Methods practiced to draw truth from them. Yet
these People will not endure any Suspicions of such Designs from them, who are
said thus to examine others themselves, as the Captain would persuade were by
like means upon himself. Sound places will not matter such rubbing, when sore
parts shrink from the hand that touches them.

Well, we have here some of the most satisfactory Evidences, both of the vanity
of men's Minds, and the corruption of their Manners; and that particularly in
their having espoused a Cause and a Party, and their being resolved right or
wrong, or however that Party act in all the ways of wickness, yet still to hold
on that side, and bring all the Fig Leaves they can, to cover its shame and
nakedness. That

1. They so readily receive the Information of an indigent cast Commander, who
stands corrupt in his Principles, and whose Loyalty is turned to revenge; or
any other wretched Pamphlet stuffed full with Lies, and most palpable
contradictions, and all this against the King and chief Ministers of State;
against the Government and Justice of the Nation: Notwithstanding these very
Practices of blackning the King, viz. in his Person, Ministers and Government,
was the beginner and inlet of that Rebellion, which cost so many thousand
Lives, and has brought so much reproach upon all Religion. And that it is the
daily business of separate Congregations by the same cause to produce the same
effect. The plainness of such Designs and Practices, should make all honest
men, that are not willing to encourage, and therefore partake in those most
damning sins of Rebellion, Murders, Theft, and all manner of Villainies that
Rebellion leads to, not to judge their Judges, not to revile the Gods, not to
receive an Accusation, or true Protestant Stories and Intelligences, because it
is from that foul corner, that all vile Accusations, fulsom Reports, black
Representations of all present Establishments, and every Accusation of the
Brethren, which is the work of the Devil, does come.

I shall give you only one instance of the falsehood of these Intelligences, and
that is in Langly Curtis, who says, Numb. 93. that the Association which is
printed by His Majesty's Command in the Lord Sh -- Hearing at the Old Bailey, is
only an Association for the Preservation of the King and Protestant Religion,
and was proposed in the House of Commons. We will consider the thing in some
Particulars: As

It ingages for the defense of the King, but how?

1. By Disbanding his Forces. And

2. By excluding the King, the Lords, and those Commons that will not associate
from the Government, or to follow the associating Party exclusive of the rest,
which is directly to set up another Rump-Parliament.

3. It directly sets up Arbitrary Power and Government. For

1. It ingages to follow the Orders of the associating Lords and Commons, while
they Sit, when prorogued, or after Dissolution; whatever those Orders be, or
however contrary to all Fundamental Laws of the Land. And

2. To pursue to destruction all that oppose it, which the King and every
honest Subject must do.

3. For the effecting all which, they engage to obey the Orders and Officers
which this supposed Rump of a Parliament shall set over them, in the several
Countries, Cities, etc. -- all which is to be done while the King lives, for it
adds, if any fail in the Prosecution hereof, viz, of the Association, they
shall be -- prosecuted, and suppressed -- as Enemies to God, the King, etc. Ergo,
this must be put in Execution while the King does live.

Therefore this is just such a defense of the King, as the late Rebellion,
which pretended His Majesty's Honor and Safety; but we see in the end, that
men fought for King and Parliament, till they brought the King to Destruction,
as this Association ingages to do.

And yet, says Langly Curtis, this was proposed in the late Parliament, I hope
the next Parliament will give him no thanks for reporting them to associate in
a Rebellion, and consult matters of High Treason, as the thrusting the King
from the Government, and bringing His Majesty, and all Loyal Subjects to
destruction, under the notion of Popish Adherents, and Opposers of this
Association. Whether this does not tend to the fastening some Reports upon the
House, let any judge.

Therefore I presume, that as the Lord Shaftsbury does not approve these
things, so the House will prove the True Protestant to be a Lying Mercury.
These are Religious Wheedles, made to reconcile ignorant minds to the blackest
Villainies, and to throw Samuel's Mantle over the Devil of Rebellion.

A man should not be more careful of his Pocket when a Cheat is at his Elbow,
than he should of his Ear, when a true Protestant whisper salutes it, or a
Libel approaches. A doing so would argue an honest wary mind, that stands upon
its watch against the sly Insinuations and Devices of the evil one. Whereas a
receiving such, because true Protestant Stories, that is in plain English,
Religious Lies, is the giving up your selves to Delusions, and a Reprobate
sense.

2. That men will believe the surmises, whispers, and inventions of a Jesuited
Protestant, rather than what all men see, and know, viz. the most candid
proceedings of Authority, and equal administration of Laws without partiality,
unless it be on their own side, and by their own means. Such are our
Governors, such are our Circumstances, that any Nation in the World (was it
not for the mischiefs our selves do make) would say of us, Happy are the people
that are in such a case! For we have such a settled Religion, that no reformed
Church in the world will offer to condemn: Such security of our Persons and
Estates, that nothing can be greater: such increase of Shipping, Merchants, and
Trade, that we shame, not only Complaints, and Petitions, that would be
fastening some fault upon the the Government, but even all. Ages before us. We
have no fears, but what are either of our own making, or at a distance from us,
which the happiest and best governed Society in the World is exposed to. What
greater Argument is there of a reprobate mind, a mind abandoned to all folly
and mischief that can complain in such a Golden Age! That can wish to run out
of Gods Blessing into the warm Sun! from such an happy State, and Government
into Confusion, Plunders, Oppressions, and Arbitrary Government; and all this
out of hopes of a fine Chimaera of our own making! This is exactly to play the
part of a wilful Israel, who would have left Moses and Aaron, and have made
themselves Captains of their own, and have returned to their Fleshpots in
Egypt!

What greater Argument that God has given up men to be their own shame and
Executioners, than this, that they are so willing to follow those men, who by
lies, perjuries, and every evil method, have destroyed the Government, and
themselves once already; and are again taking the same measures, and think
nothing unlawful that serves to the same end. Was there not a lying Spirit gone
forth into the mouths of the Prophets to persuade this People to go up, and
fall at Ramoth-Gilead? Was it not the Souls of a Martyred Sovereign, and of
loyal Subjects murdered in his service, that cries under the Altar, for
vengeance upon them? Was it not from a Decree of Heaven, that all the righteous
blood shed amongst us should come upon this Generation; certainly such folly
and wickedness could never be.

3. That no Information can be received against one that is a True Protestant,
as Protestant Recusants call themselves, while any Charge shall stand good
against another: That the same Witnesses are in one case unquestionable, but in
another must necessarily be perjured Rogues and Villains! On the one hand,
every thing is huff'd off with a Sham: on the other, every whining Story and
Conventicle Lie is judged infallible, as if it was impossible for Truth to be
on this side, or Falsehood on that: and because men judge before they know the
cause, they are, however the censure fall, but unjust Judges.

To believe a Fitz-harris, when all hopes of life were taken from him, and
therefore no room left for the World to offer him a Temptation is heresy and
damnation: but not to believe a Captain Wilkinson on his bare and easy word,
when he was poor and likely to live to enjoy the rewards of sin, is so too!

Now that Fitz-harris should falsify for nothing, and that in so high a nature,
and at his death too; or if in hope he had done so, yet that so great a service
should receive no reward, neither in his Person nor Family, is the wonder of
reason. But that the Captain might falsify, who was an hopeless Prisoner, set a
price on his own services, and upon his Information, is discharged of his
Debts, released from a Prison, and keeps his Lodgings in Town, is a thing very
suspicious. Yet to believe the former in any thing, or not to believe the
latter in all things, is the greatest Villainy in the world.

And while you object what you please against Fitz-harris, I pray withal
consider how credible a Person the Captain is: And that you may see him in his
Colors, I shall repeat some things, together with a few new Remarks on his
Information. As,

1. In the Preface he tells you, That had he had the liberty others did enjoy,
he would have made his Information known to his Majesty, before he had
published it to the World; where he makes the Reason to be want of Power, not
of Will; which is so notoriously false, that it can admit of no Palliation: For
by his own Story, he knew all the Design upon him, before he was brought to
Whitehall, where he might have discovered the Matter to his Majesty, who was
pleased to see him, had he been so minded. Indeed his Information was not then
writ; perhaps he had not yet advised upon it, or wanted some Notes from his
sober and sensible Friend: But had this been all, no man doubts, but that he
might have sent his Information to Court, or in that Juncture, might have had
the liberty of going himself, had he desired it. This is so bald a pretense,
that, like a Winter Cuckoo, it has no Feathers to hide its Scabs and Nakedness.

2. To the Reader, page 1. he tells you, His Majesty's Service did impoverish
him; and yet parag. 2. and 8. he takes a great deal of pains to prove himself a
Liar: And that by showing he had undone himself by many foolish Projects, by
fond Engagements for other men, by spending above one thousand pounds upon his
Friend, and by keeping a Ship, Family, and above thirty Servants, several
months idle on the River, and by Suits, which Passengers brought upon him, by
being all that time hindered by him in their Voyages.

3. Information, page 2. he says, That October. 11. he might have had 500 l. per
an. to himself and Heirs, or 10000 l. in money, for discovering what he knew;
-- and yet page 3, and 4. he confesses, that the next day he did himself offer
to discover for 2000 Guineys; which low Demands this day give the Lie to his
pretended Offers the day before.

4. In all his Examination, and the heavy Charge he complains of at Court,
before his Majesty, Lord Chancellor, Lord Hallifax, Lord Hyde, the two
Secretaries, and Lord Chief Justice -- page 8. Mr. Booth and Mr. Bains present;
though he found his Examination the stricter, because of his own Talk and
Offers, yet he never told any why he had made such Offers, or that any
Endeavors were used to corrupt him; which certainly any man would have done,
had any such thing been; especially the Captain, who in the Preface pretends an
inclination and willingness to have made the Matter of his Information known to
his Majesty. The Design, it seems, was not yet ripe, nor the Beast licked into
the shape, it now appears, and affrights the World in.

5. Mr. Booth does charge him to his face, that he was once again to ride
Captain, page 9. but the Captain does not tax the said Booth with this Villainy,
which, if true, and then made known, might have brought himself off with the
more ease and credit; therefore he must have a large Swallow, that can let such
a Gudgeon down. If any can persuade me that an honest man shall be assaulted by
a Thief, and by the same Thief shall be brought before a Magistrate, and there
be charged with capital Crimes, and yet all this while that this honest man
shall not discover to the Magistrate the others Rogueries, then I will believe
the Captain's Story.

6. He tells you, to the Reader, twice over, that he hired the Ship in April;
and yet Infor. page 9. to help himself at a dead lift, he says, he hired her
in March.

Truly the man is a mere Hocus pocus, an Hiccius, doctius; he is here, and
there, and every where, and yet no where at all. For,

7. He tells you, page 4. that he knows something, and yet knows nothing; that
he will discover, and yet has nothing to discover; and yet still asks a great
deal of money for discovery of what he knows.

8. He adds, page 9. That when he was about ready for his Voyage, he was like a
man bewitched, and could neither budge nor stir, -- that my self and Wife
concluded there was a divine Hand in it. So that here a kind of Witchery, or a
divine Hand, neither himself nor learned Wife could tell whether, but some
unaccountable Cause it must be that hindered him. Which indeed takes mainly
with the Rabble, who mightily gaze after Signs in Heaven, or on the Earth; and
hence conclude, that this is a Gentleman designed by Providence to be a kind of
Savior to them. But yet to the Reader, page 3. he tells you, That Mr. Booth,
and other Freightors failing, together with some Difficulties which I met with,
-- hindered him. Before it was either Witchery, or a divine Hand, a strange
Amuse and Confusion; but here it was no such matter, but Passengers, and other
Business, that hindered. Whence truly I am easily persuaded he was at least
like one bewitched, if not really so, else he had never troubled the World with
such a pack of Nonsense and Contradictions.

Now this is your True-man, a true Protestant, I warrant you; one that can no
more tell a Lie, than Fitz-harris can Truth.

But I do not so much press the reception of his Declaration, nor the rejection
of the other's Information, as show from hence the giddy Humors, the biased
Affections, and unequal Censures of men, who measure all good and evil, Truth
and Falsehood, by this and the other Side or Party; that no dram of Truth and
Honesty can be allowed on one side, nor any scruple of Knavery on the other.
Men are now perfect Saints or perfect Devils, and must be saved or damned
according to the Side they speak for. Now all Religion consists in being of a
Party, and they are Names, not Crimes, that hang or save. Passion and Interest
has swallowed up all Honesty and Religion; and good Nature is overborn by
wicked Resolutions. We are fallen into an Age of Miracles, but such as Moses
and the Prophets, such as Christ and his Apostles, or any Apostolic man, never
wrought. For now the Hand alters the nature of the Action: Rebellion and
Murder is such in a Papist-Subject, but in a true Protestant they are
Arguments of Grace. The sin of butchering Kings lies not in the Act, but in the
manner of Execution, whether it be by Sword, Pistol, Poison, which are Popish
things, or by a true Protestant-Hatchet, which is the Honor and Privilege of
the Saints.

But you will say the Captain proves all by two little Informations annexed to
his own; the one by Jarvis James, the other by his Wife.

1. Jarvis James, how stands he qualified for an Evidence?

Why thus.

1. Jarvis James, Gent.

2. Jarvis James, fellow-Prisoner with the Captain.

3. Jarvis James, One of the good People, as it is said, that carried on the
Work of the Lord against the Lord's Anointed: Birds of a feather flock
together; if you may guess a man by his Familiar, you may see which Side the
Captain stands on.

4. He is a very sensible Person. Whether does he mean, sensible of his own
former Miscarriages, or of the Captain's present Knavery, or both? But however
you understand it, what does this Gentleman say? Why even all this, viz. that
he had the Captain's Information by piecemeal from his own mouth. Very good;
but wherein the Captain might prevaricate, this sensible Gentleman cannot tell,
but must pass with an Ignoramus.

2. Here is the Captain's Wife turned Informer, who comes with Twins in her
Womb: She brings forth her firstborn on Wednesday, October. 12. and her second
on Friday, October. 14. and both in the same year. Certainly if the Captain's
Wife be so fruitful, the King will never want Soldiers. But what is it the
Woman says? Not that Mr. Booth pressed her Husband to Perjury, but to witness
-- that is, to swear what things it was supposed he might be privy to. A main
Matter truly, and no more than what others have done in other Cases, without
any Slanders cast upon them; but in the Good Old Cause every Goose must be a
Swan: Parturiunt montes, nescetur ridiculus mus! But you will say, Her Husband
was promised Rewards to swear; and perhaps now others will say, He has saved
his pains, and got his Rewards too. Truly I do not know one Popish Evidence but
what had his Rewards, and some of them Promises antecedent, and as inducements
to a Discovery: And since the Captain was poor and covetous, and declares
himself an Enemy to the Court for want of Rewards, I do not understand the evil
of making some shows of Rewards by way of Search and Experiment, whether his
Prejudices were removable, and the man capable of being brought to himself, and
Truth together. We see that both He and She-Evidence can follow the way of
Balaam: There is a Lip-adultery, and a Miss can be kept for the service of her
Tongue, as well as of other Parts. Therefore whether the Captain knew any thing
really, or in pretense only, yet if he lay to make an advantage, and was
looking after the Calves of Bethel, whether it might not be both prudent and
honest to make show of some bait, to stay him till he had time to consider
matter of duty, as well as interest only, I leave any that are no paries as
being concerned in the Cause, to judge. But that it is very unreasonable to
believe there were any rewards proposed, appears,

1. From the particulars urged in that behalf.

2. From the Captains many falsifications, and incongruities, which render the
whole obnoxious to the just suspicions of a vile imposture.

3. From the want of proof; for it is unreasonable to take up a report,
especially in weighty concerns, as these are, without sufficient warrant for so
doing; but here is no warrant at all: for as Booth and Bains are parties on the
one hand, who deny it; so the Captain and his Wife, who affirm it, are parties
on the other hand. For in any cause gain does make any persons parties; and now
whether the Captain and his Wife were not gainers in this matter, I leave to
the reasons of any men to judge from the sole consideration of their immediate
release hereupon from prison, and advance to the state of a Gentleman.

4. A Wife is a good Witness against an Husband, because in such a case she
speaks against her self; but her testimony is not so valid for him, by reason
his Cause and Interest is her own; this is therefore but little better than to
ask my fellow if I am a thief; to try an Highway man by his own Gang, or any
Prisoner by them of his own way. But in the most divided interest she is but
one, and I hope an Ignoramus may as well pass against a single testimony, as
against eight; especially if the good men and true come fore-arm'd with a
resolution not to believe the Evidence.

FINIS.

