An Account of the Most Remarkable Fights and Skirmishes Between His Majesty's
Forces, And the Late REBELS In the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
WITH What other material Passages happened, from the first Landing of the late
Earl of ARGYLE, to his utter Rout and Defeat. Together with the Manner of
taking the said Late Earl, Rumbold the Maulster, Ayloff, and others the Rebels.
As likewise the Execution of the said late Earl, and Rumbold.
ARchibald Campbell, the late Earl of Argyle, Sir John Cochrain, and diverse
other Rebels, having made Provision of Shipping, Arms and Ammunition in
Holland, Loosed from Vlye on the 2d of May, 1685. in three small Vessels; with
which, on the 5th of May, he appeared before Orkney, sending his Secretary and
Chyrurgeon on Shore, to understand how the People stood affected; who were
presently seized, and carried before His Majesty's Privy Council: And from
thence, sailing to the West of Scotland, he met two other Ships on the Coast,
and Landed with his Company, in an Hostile Manner, on Ila, a place in the West
of the aforesaid Kingdom, having with him about 500 Men, publishing a
Traiterous Declaration in his own Name, and another in the Name of those in
Arms with him, to incite the People to Rebellion, requiring the Bailiff of Ila
to Rise with him; but he told him, he was sworn to be true and faithful to His
Majesty, and could not comply with his Desire, taking his Opportunity soon
after to withdraw himself, as did diverse others, who fled by Sea to Dunluce in
Ireland, who there reported that Argyle threatened to fire the Bayliff's House,
and hang up all those that would not Rise with him, carrying the Fire across
(an usual Signal in that Country, to incite the People to take up Arms.)

The King having notice of these Hostile Proceedings, briefly communicated
them, in the Close of His Most Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament, on
the 22d of May; who addressed His Majesty with their Humble Thanks, and a
Resolution to stand by Him with their Lives and Fortunes, against Archibald
Campbel, his Adherents, and all other Traitors and Rebels. Whereupon, Expresses
were dispatched to His Majesty's Council in the Kingdom of Scotland, and all
necessary Care taken for the Suppression of the Rebels, who used their utmost
diligence to keep themselves aloof from the Royal Army, by this time drawn up
to oppose them, under the Command of the Marquis of Athol, the Lord Dumbarton,
etc. The Rebels Plundering and Foraging the Country, diverse petty Skirmishes
passing between them and the Royal Parties, when, on the 3d of June, the
Marquis of Athol, having notice that Charles Campbel, Son to Argile, lay with a
Party of 120 Foot and 12 Horse at Glendarowel, he marched thither to seize
them; but they having timely notice, fled to their Boats, leaving only two
Persons behind them, one of which was killed in the Pursuit, and the other
taken Prisoner, when on the 4th, the late Earl of Argyle sent Sir John Cochrain
and one Polwart with a Detachment of 100 Men and 2 Ships to Greenock, where the
Militia-Troops, under the Command of the Lord Cochrain, opposed their Landing;
but the Cannon playing from the Ships, gave them Opportunity, although nothing
was wanting in the Royal Party that might contribute to a hindrance. The Rebels
being on Shore, entered the Town, and seized on such Provisions as they found
there: but finding their Number not to increase, they returned to their Ships,
which conveyed them to Boot.

Argyle not finding the People so prone to Rebellion as he imagined, although
he used both Threats and Entreats, finding by this time that Captain Hamilton
was arrived with 3 or 4 of His Majesty's Men of War, designing to seize or fire
his Vessels, he caused them to be brought under the Castle of Elangreg, and on
the 8th of June drew up his Company, making show as if he intended to engage
the Marquess of Athole; but finding himself too weak, and knowing what danger
his Ships were in, upon which he mostly relied, he altered his Resolution, and
caused his Ships and Boats to be manned, in order to their sailing for Lochfin;
but were detained by contrary Winds, till such time as His Majesty's Ships, the
King-Fisher, and Falcon, came up to the entrance of Lochrowan: which so
discouraged the Rebels, that altogether abandoning their purpose of sailing
into Lochfin, they, on the 10th of June, began to fortify the Castle of
Ellengreg, as also a Rock in a little Isle adjacent, for the more security of
their Ships. After which, the late Earl of Argile marched away toward the Head
of Lochfin, leaving only 150 men for the Guard of his Ships, as likewise his
Cannon, Arms and Ammunition in the Castle.

Upon the 11th of June, a Party of His Majesty's Forces, under the Command of
the Marquess of Athol, consisting of 300 Foot, encountered a Party of 400 of
the Rebels Foot, and 80 Horse, entirely defeating them, killing diverse upon the
place, wounding others, and taking many Prisoners, Horse and Arms; which
brought such a terror upon their main strength which was advancing, that Argyle
thought fit to march back to Ellengreg, where he continued till the 15th of
June.

Marching from Ellengreg, the Rebels passed Lochlong, and continued their march
toward Lenox, in the Shire of Dumbarton: Upon which, the King's Ships came up
to the Castle to batter it, but, upon the first Firing, two Men came off with a
White Flag, and being brought on Board one of His Majesty's Ships, they
informed the Captain, That the Rebels were fled, whom the late Earl of Argyle
had left behind, and that the Castle was at their Service: Whereupon diverse
Boats being manned, and sent on shore, found the Report to be true, when as
they took possession of the Castle, and those Ships they found there without
the least opposition; as likewise of a considerable quantity of Arms and
Ammunition, with diverse pieces of Cannon and Culverin, the Arms there found,
not being less than 5000 together, with 500 Barrels of Powder, with Bullet and
other materials proportionable. The Cannon being partly mounted, and partly
sunk; the Rebels, as it was afterward discovered, Designing to blow up the
Powder, but by the sudden approach of the Men of War, were prevented.

On the 16th of June, the Rebels Marched by the Head of Gariloch, toward the
Foards of Levin, between Lechlemon and the Town of Dumbarton: When to oppose
them, the Earl of Dumbarton sent a Detachment of 3 Troops of Horse and
Dragoons, Commanded by the Lord Charles Murray his Lieutenant Colonel, whilst
the Earl himself with the gross of the Royal Army marched from Glasgow, to give
them Battle, if they could be drawn to it; and so speedy was his march, that he
came within 12 miles of them, before they had notice of his setting forward: so
that they were in a manner blocked up, having the River Clyde on the right
hand, guarded by the aforementioned Dragoons, and the Troops of that Country,
the Duke of Gourdon on their left, and the Marquess of Athole in their Rear;
which distress caused diverse to desert, not only through fear, but extremely of
hunger, their chiefest stores being spent, and the Country secured against
them, diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen daily resorting to the Royal Army, insomuch
that diverse were sent back their attendance being judged unnecessary, which
made them repine to be deprived of the Honor to serve His Majesty on this
occasion.

The Rebels having passed the River Levin, taking their way to Sterling, the
Earl of Dumbarton overtook them in the Parish of Killern, where the Horse and
Dragoons opposed their passage, till the Foot arrived; which they perceiving,
posted themselves in a strong Ground, and endeavored to fortify themselves,
at what time it being late in the Evening, the Earl thought not fit to attack
them, but commanded the Army to stand in Battalia all night, with Orders to
fall upon them as soon as day appeared: But, under the shelter of the darkness,
the Rebels marched away with great silence to the River Clyd, which they swam
with their Horses, carrying over their Foot in Boats, taking the River near a
Village called Kilpatrick, and, without much resistance, entered Renfrew.

The Kings Army in the Morning, perceiving the Rebels had quitted their Station
marched with all Diligence to Glascow, but had scarcely rested two Hours,
before the Earl of Dumbarton, with the Horse and Dragoons, marched after the
Rebels, the Foot following with all convenient Speed.

The Rebels, on the 17th of June, having passed the Clyde, their Number was
much lessened by those that deserted; which put the rest into such a
Consternation, that their greatest Care was, how they might escape. Whereupon
Sir John Cochrain undertook to provide Guides to carry them safe into Galloway;
but they mistaking the Way, carried them into a Miry Bogg, where the Horse and
Baggage were so far lost, that they could not get them off, which caused their
Foot to disperse into small Parties; upon notice of which, the Earl of
Dumbarton divided his Forces to pursue them, which caused Argyle to return
toward Clyde, on Horseback, without any Retinue; but being met by two of
Greinock's Servants, they called to him to surrender himself, which he
refusing, and firing at them, they charged upon him with great fury, giving him
a Wound in the Head, which so dozed him, that he was obliged to quit his Horse,
and betake himself to a Neighboring Pond, when, upon the noise of the Action,
a Countryman came out, and ran into the Water after him, bidding him Yield;
but instead of Yielding, he presented his Pistol, which mis-served; upon which,
the Countryman gave him a Wound on the Head which stunned him, when in his
Fall, he cried out, Oh Unfortunate Argyle! And thereupon, being taken, he was
carried to the Commander.

The late Earl of Argyle thus taken, a Party of 40 Horse, commanded by the Lord
Ross, with the like number of Dragoons, commanded by Captain Cleland, fell upon
a Party of the most resolute Rebels, commanded by Sir John Cochrain, who had
taken the way to the Sea; but before the Attacked had time to Post themselves
within a small Enclosure, within a Coverture, or Breast-work, notwithstanding
the Lord Ross, with much Resolution and Bravery, charged them; but the Ground
being too strong for the Horse, the Capt. of the Dragoons was killed, the Lord
Ross slightly wounded, Sir Adam Blare shot through the Neck, and Sir William
Wallack in the Side. Before the Dragoons had time to come up on foot, the
Rebels, leaving their Post, got into a Wood behind them, where most of them
were afterward taken, when Rumbold the Malster, flying, was taken together
with his Man, by five of the Earl of Arran's Militia of Cledsdale, though not
without Resistance, killing one Militia-man upon the place, Rumbold being much
wounded.

Soon after this Defeat, Colonel Ayloff and about 200 more were taken and
brought Prisoners to Glasgow, where Ayloff, in a desperate Mood, ripped up his
Belly with a Penknife, but it proved not mortal.

The late Earl of Argyle taken as aforesaid, being a while detained a Prisoner
at Glasgow, was conveyed to Edenburg by the Watergate, passing through a Guard
of His Majesty's Soldiers, bare-headed, his Hands tied behind him, and the
Hangman going before him to the Castle; and soon after, News came that Sir
John Cochrain and his second Son were taken.

His Majesty, upon notice that Rumbold was taken, was graciously pleased to
order the Reward promised in His Late Majesty's Proclamation, to be distributed
amongst the Soldiers of the Earl of Arran's Militia, who took him; and that if
any of the said Soldiers were killed, or since dead of their Wounds, their
Share to be given to their Wives and Children; or in case of Defect, to their
nearest Relation.

On the 26th of June, Rumbold being brought to his Trial at Edenburg, for
coming over with the late Earl of Argyle, and making a Rebellion in the Kingdom
of Scotland, and found Guilty thereof, Sentence passed upon him as in case of
High Treason; and accordingly, on the same Day, he was drawn on a Hurdle to the
Cross, and there Hanged and Quartered.

On the 30th of June, the late Earl of Argyle was carried to the Cross, near to
which he was Beheaded, upon a Scaffold for that purpose erected, his Head
affixed on the Tolbooth, and his Body buried in St. Magdalens Chapel, in the
Cow-Gate, his Execution being in pursuance of his former Conviction. A Paper he
left with the Dean of Edenburg, who, together with Mr. Charteres, delivered it
to the Lord Chancellor, the late Earl declaring he had delivered no other Paper
to any Person whatsoever. And since his Execution, the Rebels have been taken,
killed and dispersed to that degree, that that Kingdom is entirely in Peace and
Tranquillity.

FINIS.
This may be printed,

R. L S.
July 23. 1685.
LONDON, Printed for W.C. 1685.


