Memoirs OF THE Right Honorable ARTHUR Earl of ANGLESEY, LATE Lord Privy Seal.
Intermixed, With Moral, Political and Historical Observations, by way of
Discourse in a Letter. To which is prefixed a Letter Written by his Lordship
during his Retirement from Court, in the Year 1683.

Published by Sir Peter Pett Knight, Advocate General for the Kingdom of
Ireland.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in the Poultry, 1693.

This may be Printed.

June 30th. 1693. Edward Cook.

To the Right Honorable the Lord ALTHAM.
My Lord,
HAving taken occasion to present the following Papers of your Noble and
Learned Father to the World, I held my self obliged to make a particular
Dedication of 'em to your self, in whom so much of the Acuteness of his Wit,
and of his incomparable Modesty, and of his Loyalty to his Prince, and
Conformity to the Church, Fidelity in Friendship, and Candor of Disposition
and Manners, is Conspicuous to the World: And by which latter Qualification
your Conversation is perfectly charming to all who have the Honor of it.

His Lordships great value of these generous qualities in you, was often
signified to me by him in my more than twenty five years frequent Conversation
with him in the latter part of his Life; and wherein you gave him so much just
Cause to presage, that your Lordship would be both a Propp and an Ornament to
his Family.

And I doubt not but those Great and Manly efforts of his Reason, Religion and
Learning that I here lay before your thoughts, will be further Inducements to
you to make a Natural use of his great Example, and to spend as much of your
Life, as you can spare from the Service of your Country, in the most vigorous
pursuits after Knowledge, and in the investigation of Truth; and for your doing
which, you have in the Course of Nature so fair a prospect of a long race of
Life before you.

His Lordship used often to quote occasionally that saying of my Lord Bacon's,
Actio est Conversatio cum Stultis, lectio autem cum Sapientibus: The thought
whereof induced him to spend so much of his time in his Library; and where he
usually loc'kd himself up so close, that in stead of fortifying his Interest at
Court, as great Men do, by frequent giving of Visits to one another he very
much avoided the receiving them.

And therefore he having so vast a Collection of Choice Books both in the
Ancient and Modern Languages, and especially of Divinity, Common Law, Civil
Law, Canon Law, and History; and laying the Scene of his Life so much among
them* and living to a good Old Age, the World might well expect that what he
should leave behind him of his own Composing, should be worthy of himself, and
it: And such your Lordship will find this Volume to be.

The first Work of your Fathers, that I shall Entertain your Lordship and the
World with, is that of his Letter to my self, of July the 18 th. 1683, Writ on
the occasion of my minding him of his yearly Custom of sending Venison to Sir
George Ent; and which Letter is variously instructful to the Age. I placed
before his large Discourse by way of Letter to me in Answer of Mine to him of
that Nature, because the Order of time required it.

He had my entire Discourse by him in his Study, Printed and bound up long
before he dyed. And his Lordship telling me, that he intended his by way of
return to it, and to be Printed in Folio to be bound up with mine; mine thereby
happened not to be Published in his Life time.

It was afterward Published with the Title of the Happy Future State of
England, and since by a new Title, viz, A Discourse of the growth of England,
in populousness and trade since the Reformation, etc. Printed for William
Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleet Street.

And as all great Writers (and especially of such Subjects that refer to
various kinds of Learning) have Customarily employed several persons in
gathering Quotations for them, and abstracting them (and as for this purpose, I
have some where Cited the Lord Secretary Falkland, for saying of Cardinal
Peron, that Baronius and Bellarmine were but fit to gather Quotations for him)
so your Father was pleased to Crave the Aid of Quotations from his Learned
Friend Bishop Barlow, in two or three Points relating to Theology and the Canon
Law, and which were sent to him in Letters. I scarce know any one Man who is so
absolute a Master of all the various kinds of Learning referred to in your
Fathers large following Discourse, as to have commanded the proper use thereof,
without applying to the Labor of some other Friend in this kind. Nor have any
of the most Learned of the Jesuits presumed to Publish the most Famous and
Elaborate of their Volumes, either Historical or Mathematical, without owing a
beholdingness to others for Quotations.

And as any one here, who entertains a great Prince in a Splendid manner, holds
himself obliged not to confine himself to his own Ground for all the Materials
of his Treat, so he who invites to his Entertainment no meaner a Guest than the
World by his Writings, ought not to Disdain the use of the Heads or Hands of
others in finding out the most Curious Provision for it, and especially in so
Critical an Age as this.

But even herein was your Fathers great Modesty so Signal, as to show that he
designed not the Appropriating wholly to himself the Honor of all the Bishops
Learned and Judicious Quotations (and which yet by the Custom of other great
Writers, he might have justifiably done) that he is pleased to notify to the
World in p. 21. his having applied to the Bishop on that account, and what
Communications he had from him by Letters, and his desire of their Publication.

Another great instance of his Exuberant Modesty, I shall here Entertain your
Lordship with, is the great Complement he was pleased to put on me, when not
very long before his last Sickness, he delivered to me his large Discourse as
fairly Writ out by his Amanuenses, and variously altered by his own Hand (and
the which after the Printers have made use of, I intend to offer to your
Lordships Cabinet) and desired me, that I would take the same Freedom in
putting out, or Deleting any thing I thought Superfluous or proper to be
expunged, as he told me, Mr. Boil had desired me to do when I Published his
Excellent Book of The Style of the Scriptures. Mr. Boil in a Letter to me
Printed before that Book, Addressed it to me with the Initial Letters of Mr. P.P.
A.G. F.I. (by which he meant to refer to me as Advocate General for Ireland,
and giving a Friendly Reason for not more openly naming me.) And he is there
pleased to say, I have been obliged, that I might obey you, not only to
Dismember, but to Mangle the Treatise you perused, cutting out here a whole
side, and there half, and in another place perhaps a quarter of one.

And if it had so pleased God, that your Father had lived any considerable time
longer, I would have humbly offered it to his Consideration, to have some
Passages there omitted, and particularly that wherein he gives his thoughts of
somewhat in p. 70. of my Discourse, and likewise those wherein his Lordship is
pleased to signify his over-valuing of my poor Sixth-rate Talents, and my
performance in my Work. But since he lived not long enough for my having an
opportunity to satisfy him with my Reasons, for the leaving out any passages,
as I did the incomparable Mr. Boil, I presumed not to delete any thing
therein, worth the speaking of. But as I took great Care to watch the Press in
my Publication of that Noble Work of Mr. Boyles, to prevent the Printers
Errata, so I have in this of your Fathers.

The Author of the Athenae Oxonienses having among the Lives of the Oxford
Writers, Writ that of your Father, is there pleased to mention, that in the
beginning of the year 1686. He began to be admitted into the Favor of King
James the II. But he was admitted into his Majesty's Favor before; and Mr.
Ryley after your Fathers Death, showed me this in his Lordships Diary, viz. On
March 8.85. Spent most at home in Business; and Duty (i. e. Prayer) In the
Evening was private with the Lord Sunderland, my good Friend; and then was with
the King a full hour at Mr. Chiffinches; who was very kind, free, and open in
Discourse: Said, he would not be Priest-ridden; Read a Letter of the Late King,
said I should be welcome to him. I refer to this, to show likewise on what
Terms he stood in the Royal Favor (and which was so great to him, that his
Friends supposed, that had he lived a Month longer, he would have been Lord
Chancellor) and that his zeal for his Religion, suffered no Diminution
thereby, and which sufficiently appeared by the Picture of his mind drawn by
himself in the following Discourse, and to which he was then applying his
finishing Touches.

And hence the Reader may guess, that his private Belief of his Prince not
designing the unsettlement of our Religion, Encouraged him in his thoughts of
Loyalty, and in his Inculcating the Moral Offices of it so much throughout the
following Discourse.

And indeed his Advices then about it, were but Eccho's to the Pulpits of the
Divines of the Church of England in general, that rang with it till the time of
the setting up the Ecclesiastical High Commisssion, and by virtue of which,
they had apprehensions of their being removeable out of their Church-Freeholds
in two or three days time: And whereupon they had (as I may say, in the
School Divinity Terms) the motus primo primi, to think that the Affirmative
precepts of Preaching up Loyalty in their Sermons as before, did not bind
Semper and ad Semper. But your Father was in his Grave, before the Birth of
that Commission, and it was several Months after in that year 1686. before the
Commissioners opened their Commission, and which they did on Tuesday the 3 d.
of August that year.

However it may be said that no Revolutions time can cause, can make
persuasives to Loyalty wholly useless, or it cease to be a Virtue, or to want
the Support of any Government, and which must be supported by it.

But your Fathers growth in his Habitual Loyalty, when he was so near his End,
needs no Apology. And according to the observation I have met with from some of
our Practical Divines that God watches when his Child is at the best, and his
Graces ripest, and then takes him, thus was it with your Noble Father.

And as no thought can be more obvious to a prudent Statesman* who was for a
time Employed by his Prince in a Provincial Kingdom under his Viceroy, and was
preparing to return to his King, and to be under his Eye, than that it is his
great concern to part fairly with the Viceroy, and not to be conscious of
having Dishonored, or of having rendered him uneasy in the discharge of his
Office; so neither can it be unthought of by any Pious Minister of Kings (who
are Gods Vicegerents) that it highly imports him after his splendid Sojourning
here, to have the Testimonials of a good Conscience, ready to carry to Heaven
with him, that he here Honored the great King of Heaven and Earth, in the
persons of such Vicegerents, and did not by stirring up any popular ferments,
trouble their Administration and frustrate their Counsels.

Had your Father lived to have come to the Helm of State, as a primier
Ministre, I believe his influence would have prevented many inconveniences that
happened by the Bigotry, Pedantry, and blind zeal of some particular papists.
For tho I have owned to the World in print, the excellent Tempers and Justice
and prudence of some Great Roman Catholics then, yet I have often been
diverted by the impotent passion of some certain Popish Bigots, who, because I
in my Book which I designed as persuasive against the Exclusion, and the growth
of the popular fears of Papists and Popery, and wrote in the turbid interval of
the Kingdom, the interval of panic Fears, and when the Air of Men's fancies was
generally infected, and the Kingdom was in a Chaos-like condition, thought it
necessary to Demonstrate, that I was a Non-Papist, and not to dilate in
invectives against the Belief of any popish Plot whatsoever, and against all
the Witnesses in particular, were pleased in common talk, to shoot the bolts of
their Censures against me and my Works. And the truth is, for any writer for
the aforesaid purposes, to have then appeared in such a Dress, as they would
have had him, would have showed as strangely, as when it once happened, that
one being to Act Theseus in Hercules furens coming out of Hell, he could not
for a long time be persuaded to wear some old sooty Clothes, but would needs
come out of Hell in a white Satin Doublet.

Your Fathers Learned Book may in various places, teach such Censorious bigots
common sense. And his Lordship justly coming under the Character of (...), I
may account his single acknowledgment of my performance, to outweigh Myriads
of such Ignorant Censurers, and be very well content with my having escaped the
Scandal of their praise.

But here I must needs say, that as I have sufficiently shown in print, the
aversion of my Humor from courting the popular praise of any party (as having
judged that the medicament of Notions I applied to each, would be necessarily
helped in the working by the ungratefulness of the Taste) so by my having so
long delayed the publication of this excellent Volume of your Father, I have
shown some uneasiness or backwardness in receiving the various Honor he was
pleased in his short Letter prefixed, and following large one, to do to that
Work of mine, which in obedience to his Commands, and for the doing him Justice
I wrote.

And I believe, had not a Learned and Prudent Friend of mine of the Church of
England told me, that my being thus accessory to the publishing of your Fathers
Laudatory Acknowledgments of my performance, was as much consistent with the
Laws of Modesty as is many grave and wise Authors prefixing Commendatory Verses
or Prose-testimonials from others before their works (and for which purpose, he
told me of Mr. Hobbes having before a philosophical and political Work of his,
printed some excellent verses of Dr. Bathurst; and of Dr. Templer having
printed some of another before his admirable Confutation of Leviathan) and
withal represented it to me, that I was in Conscience bound to the supporting
the Honor of our Church, by the publishing the New Matter contained in your
Fathers Book against popery, and likewise to the supporting the Justice of our
Compassion, for the sufferings of our Brethren in France by the Bigottry of the
French Clergy, upon the account of their not owning the Faith of the Council of
Trent, (your Fathers Book beyond all other Writings published, so clearly
showing it out of the most Authentic Histories, that that Council was never
published and received in France) I should have been inclined to have
Transmitted this incomparable Discourse of his Lordship, to have lived only in
the Archives of the Oxford-Library. And so chiefly by the weight of this latter
Consideration, I have held my self obliged to make it public: And I doubt not
but all protestants, and especially our Divines of the Church of England, will
bid it welcome to the World.

But My Lord, I am to crave your Lordships Pardon, for thus long detaining your
thoughts from the Great and Noble ones of your Fathers in the following
Discourse; and will no longer offend therein, than by Subscribing my self,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and most Humble Servant, P. Pett.
July 17. 1693.
From my Tusculanum, Totteridge, July 18. 1683.
Sir Peter Pett.
I Obeyed your Commands in giving the great Sr. George Ent a taste of my villa
fare. I hope you seasoned it with your wonted good discourse; I envy you
nothing of your Happiness, but that I had not a part in it; for I delight in
nothing more than such Company from whom I ever part the better and the wiser.
I acknowledge the favor in the two Sheets you sent me, which were so far from
satisfying me, that they served but to whet my appetite to desire, that you
would after so long an expectation given, ultimam manum ponere to that work,
wherein you do pingere aeternitati; and from which it is pity the public
should be withheld longer.

I remember after Cicero's incomparable parts and learning had advanced him in
Rome to the highest Honors and Offices of that famous Common wealth, that by
Caesar's Usurpations upon the public, there was no longer place either in the
Senate or Hall of Justice, for the Romanum Eloquium he had made so much his
Study, and wherein he had before Caesar himself showed how much he excelled, he
betook himself wholly to the common consolation of wise Men in distress, the use
and practice of Philosophy, and therein with an industry and style answerable
to the diviness of the purpose, undertook for the benefit of all Ages, the most
Religious and Sacred part of Philosophy, the Nature of the Godhead, wherein
amidst a cloud of various and opposite errors, and the thick darkness of a
benighted ignorance, he acquitted himself to admiration, insomuch, that I may
account him as some great Authors have done, the Divine Philosopher as well as
Seneca.

And if I had reason to doubt what his opinion might be concerning a Deity, or
whether his works evince not the true Deity and Religion, yet I am sure they
tend strongly to the overthrowing the False: Which the very worshippers of
those ignoti Dei were so sensible of, that they conspired the Destruction of
this work of his, insomuch that in the Reign of Dioclesian that great Bigott
(as I may call him) of the Heathenish Idolatry, and the Enemy of the Christian
Religion, these three Books De natura Deorum, and his other two of Divination,
were publicly burnt in company with the writings of the Christians, Anno
Christi 302. as most famous Chronologers and others have recorded. In
particular Arnobius sharply (tho then no Christian) inveighs against the
burners of these Books of Cicero, in these words, viz. But before all others,
Tully the most Eloquent of the Romans, not fearing the imputation of Impiety,
with great Ingenuity, Freedom and Exactness shows what his thoughts were, and
yet (says he) I hear of some, that are much transported against these Books of
his, and give out, that the Senate ought to Decree the abolishing of them, as
bringing countenance to the Christian Religion, and impairing the Authority of
Antiquity: rather (said he) if you believe you have ought certain to deliver,
as to your Deities, convince Cicero of Error, confute and explode his evil
Doctrine. For to destroy Writings, or go about to hinder the common Reading of
them, is not to defend the Gods; but to be afraid of the Testimony of Truth.
Thus far Arnobius. And I could not leave Cicero and his Books in a more
illustrious place than amidst those bright flames, wherein the Divine writings
were consumed* For what greater Honor than for him to be joined with Christ,
in the same cause and punishment? I should not have so far advanced the pattern
of Cicero in a Christian Kingdom, but that we are so far degenerated from the
primitive ones, that Tullyes Morality if not Divinity, goes beyond us. When the
Age is Receptive of better examples (though you need them not) I should
willingly insinuate them to others.

Now if by the beginnings of Persecution in France and other parts, and the
dangerous Divisions and Circumstances at home, we seem to be hurrying to the
like sad times, you may guess what makes me embrace so much a Country life as
Cicero did, and that from the Noise and Contrivances of a crowd in the City, I
am retired to the sweet quiet of a Tusculanum, and to converse with the dead
qui non mordent: and if I declare I should be glad (among the Tombs) of such
company as you and other my good friends that perhaps in kindness to me think
me wanting there, you will believe me no ill chooser for my self, and I hope
squander away some time upon a friend. You see I give a beginning to our
intercourse, wherein you were not wont to flinch; and when you write to Bugden,
pray let the Learned and good Bishop know, I am as much his as ever, tho the
whole Body of Papists seem now to be confuting his before Judged irrefragable
Book, and bring in the protestants by Head and Shoulders, to what he evinced
were their Maxims and practice; so that now Mutato nomine de nobis fabula
narratur. But the God of truth, in the thing wherein they deal proudly and
falsely will show himself above them; to him I commit you, and in him I am

Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. ANGLESEY.

Memoirs Of the Late Earl of Anglesey, etc.
SIR,
I Have not that time I wish; to thank you particularly enough for your
Discourse in a Letter to me, and writ to me when I was Lord Privy Seal, on the
Occasion mentioned in your Preface.

I am so much a lover of my Country, that I would be content to have all the
Dirt and Shamm again thrown on me by any such Infamous Witness as He was, if it
might Occasion the Enriching it with the Treasure of such an other Discourse. I
did not account it a Solamen, that not only the Earl of Peterburgh; but his
Majesty were participants with me in the Calumnious Affidavit Published against
me; but was sorry and ashamed for the Effrontery of the Infamous Swearer,
extending it self so far; and likewise glad, that after I was sufficiently
vindicated by your Pen* you took the pains so Learnedly to State the Notion of
Infamous Witnesses, for Illuminating the Age therein.

I know that in the Hot times of the Martyrocracy (as you call it) it would not
have been for the Advantage of my self or others, so unworthily then treated by
it, for you to have then used Personal Invectives to have rendered any Witness
more odious; and when likewise it would have proved more dangerous to you, than
Scandalum Magnatum. You having mentioned what Authority of Testimony, or real
Weight and Worth there should be to Convict a person of such Authority, and
that Diamonds are not to be Cut, but with the dust of Diamonds, and that it is
not for nothing, that the Scripture Cautions the not receiving an Accusation
against an Elder, but by two or three Witnesses; and how the Canon Law requires
72 Witnesses to Convict a Cardinal Bishop, accused of any Crime but Heresy,
and 26 to Convict a Cardinal Deacon, and 7 to Convict any Clerk; did afterward
very justly commend our Judges, for having at a known Trial, acquainted the
Jury that they are carefully to weigh the Credibility of Witnesses Pardoned for
Perjury, and did learnedly show out of the Canonists and Schoolmen, that the
Pope himself with the plenitude of his pretended Monarchical Power, cannot by
his Pardon, wash away the infamia facti, and thereby did sufficiently rescue my
self and other Honest Men from the foul Hands of Infamous Witnesses. And that
one Notion of yours, though softly insinuated, and with the Gentleness of a
Philosopher, that a Man Pardoned for Infamy, is to be allowed as a Credible
Witness only, after it has been found that he has acquired anhabit of Virtue
by the Series of many Actions in the following part of his Life, ( no Man being
supposed able in a desultory way, to leap out of a rooted habit of Vice, into
an Heroical Habit of Virtue; and so e contra) was in effect a Thunderclap
against the Testimony of the Infamous Person, who Slandered me by his
Affidavit, and which too might serve to Deter all Infamous Persons in that
Conjuncture, from daring to try to run Men of probity down with the noise of
Shamme: And your afterward rendering such Persons capable of being Accusers in
the point of Treason (and even as Heretics are allowable by the Canonists, to
accuse a Pope of Heresy) was enough pleasing to me: As were likewise the
Curious and Soft strokes of your Rhetoric and Reason in the following Page,
when on the grounds of the dark Colors of such Persons in general, who cheated
their Countrymen by Retail and who had long acted only Devils parts on the
Stage of the World, and been Malefactors, you lay the bright ones of saving
their Country by Wholesale, and being Benefactors etc. and whereby (as I may
say) you have in effect, gilded the Pillory for them, and have added to the
number of the Spectators of their shame; and by those soft strokes provided for
the Deletion of that Government of the Witnesses, better than the most bold
touches could then have done.

That Empire of theirs which you then weighed has been since naturally
destroyed: And your having mentioned such, having long acted the Parts of
Devils, brings into my mind, what I somewhere met with Cited out of Melchior
Adam's Liv^s of the German Divines, (and with which I shall here Divert you, as
you have me with some apposit pleasant passages in your Letter) Namely that
Bucholeer said by way of Counsel to one of his Friends going to live at Court,
Fidem Diabolorum tibi commendo, etc. and take heed how you believe Men's
promises there, otherwise than warily and with fear.

Your weighty Notion of the Incredibility of any things sworn, being to be much
regarded in the Depositions of the most Credible Persons, inclined me to a
necessary Caution and Fear, as to the Truth of those Oaths assertory, when both
Incredible Persons Swearing, and Incredible things Sworn, were in the Case.

I was therefore without any fear, (as I may say) an Athanasius against the
World of our three Estates, when I did (as you mention) publicly give my Vote,
that there was no such IRISH PLOT, as was Sworn by the Witnesses: And what my
Sense was of any Irish or English Papists PLOT, I shall not here take occasion
to express; but yet as to some persons Convicted of the Popish Plot in England,
upon the Oaths of Witnesses, who appeared in the Eye of the Law then, probi and
legales homines, I was so fearful of the Defects of some Witnesses, and their
sayings, that I being then Lord Privy Seal, interceded as earnestly as I could
with the King my Master, to grant his Pardon particularly in the Case of Mr.
Langhorne and the Titular Archbishop Plunkett; and was as Active as any in the
House of Lords, in Exploding the Infamous Accusation of the most Virtuous then
Queen Consort. And though in the unfortunate Lord Staffords Case, I going
Secundum allegata and probata, I gave my Judgment as I did, yet his late
Majesty did publicly acknowledge that I was an Importunate Solicitor with him
for his Lordships Pardon, as well as for the Pardon of Langhorne and Plunkett
above mentioned.

And you have done me but Justice, in mentioning that I interceded with his
late Majesty, for the Releasing of all Lay and Clerical Papists whatsoever out
of the Prisons, who were not charged with the Popish Plot; And which I moved to
his Majesty, in the warmest time of the late Hot Conjuncture. I was always of
your Mind in what you mention, that it is easier to give our Account to God for
Mercy, than Justice; and do more thank you for the Representing my Habitual and
Natural Inclination, to do all the good I can to all Mankind; and to make every
miserable Man I know, and cannot help, yet sure of my Compassion; than for your
having ventured by your kind Opinion, to Multiply or Magnify any intellectual
Talents in me.

I easily foresaw at that time, that my then showing the Humanity of a Man, the
Frankness of a Gentleman, and Charity and Compassion of a Christian, to the
Persons of many Papists and others, and doing as I did in the late Conjuncture,
would occasion designing Papists, and some perverse Nominal Protestants (as you
call them) to make a Papist of me, and did therefore esteem it in you, (whom I
never had opportunity to oblige) a Favor to do me Justice therein, as you have
in the former part of your Discourse; and of which (I think) the Sheets were
sent me printed within a Month or two's time after the old Date they bear. But
a long fit of Sickness afterward seizing you, and you then signifying to me,
that you resolved that the same should not be published, till you added the
following part; wherein for the Encouragement of so many Protestants, who were
so much Dispirited with imaginations of Popery's coming to be the paramount
Religion, and of Protestancy's being Extirpated, you endeavored to show the
impossibility of the same ( Humanly speaking) and till you had likewise
finished your Casuistical Discourse of the Obligatoriness of our Oaths as to
the King, his Heirs and Successors: I was easily satisfied, with your taking
your own time for the Publishing the whole, as knowing that the Torrent of
Shamm, and Calumny by which the Reputations of many Loyal Persons were born
down, was too violent to be of any long continuance; and considering likewise,
that your incorporating the Character of my Life, into a Work so full of
various exquisite Learning of all sorts (and particularly of that now so much
in request, Namely, the reducing Political Matters by Calculation ad firmam (as
you call it) that by the Course of Nature, must be immortal, and probably pass
Christendom in some Language more general than the English) would in time
Render me a sufficient gainer by the false Affidavit which an angry House of
Commons, so unwarily dispersed with their Votes throughout this Kingdom.

The truth is, you having been the first Person who took the pains to find out
by the Records of the Pole Bills, and the Bishops survey, the Number of the
People of England, have highly Merited the thanks of your Country thereby, as
having necessarily rendered its Figure and Alliances in the World the more
considerable. And it was the more proper to be done, by reason of De Leti
having Published it, that that Learned Person, and my Worthy Friend Monsieur
Van Beuninghen, had Judged the People here to be but two Millions; and because
as you have Cited it out of Dr. Vessius his Book of various Observations,
Dedicated by him to his late Majesty, that the Doctor there has Estimated the
People in England, Scotland and Ireland, to be but two Millions.

I remember not in all the Books I have read, to have found so much, and so
various Political Calculation, as in this your Discourse: And because you
intend a Review thereof, I think it will be in any who have the Custody of
Records that may be of use to you; a kindness to the public, to be
communicative of them to you.

Though I need not observe to any Reader of your Discourse, the height of your
Eloquence and great unaffected Wit, and the Nervous way of Argumentation
appearing therein, yet I am obliged to acquaint you, that in some particular
passages therein, my Observations of Men and Things, have been different from
yours: But all of which I hold my self likewise obliged, not to trouble the
World or you with at this time; for your having mentioned your intended Review,
to be Published in a Volum by it self: I who have received so much kindness
from you, am to do you the Justice to stay a while in expecting your Second
thoughts, and without boding ill of your being any way partial therein; yet
shall here at present acquaint you, that as I am a Member of the Church of
England, as now by Law Established, I will not Recede a Jot from its Doctrine,
by Judging the Papacy not to be Antichrist, or by judging the Worshipping the
Host, not to be formal Idolatry, as my Honored Friends, Dr. Hammond and Bishop
Tailor (as you say) have done: And shall here observe to you, that though Bishop
Tailor in his Liberty of Prophesying, pronounced Worshipping the Host, to be not
FORMAL Idolatry, yet afterward upon more Mature thoughts, he in his Disswasive
against Popery, did make it FORMAL Idolatry.

I shall likewise tell you, that Bishop Sanderson, whom you so often quote, and
whose Judgment you so deservedly Celebrate, does amongst his Sermons printed
Anno 1657. in the fifth Sermon, Ad Populum p. 287. in plain Terms call the Pope
the Man of Sin; the Text of the Sermon is 1 Timothy 4.4. The Bishop there
represents the Church of Rome as injurious to our Christian Liberty, whom St.
Paul in this passage (says he) has branded with an indelible note of Infamy;
in as much as those very Doctrines, wherein he gives an instance, as Doctrines
of Devils, are the received Tenets and Conclusions of that Church, not to
insist on other prejudices done to Christian Liberty by the intolerable
Usurpation of the Man of Sin: where he refers in his Margent to 2 Th. 2, 3. who
exercises a Spiritual Tyranny over Men's Consciences, as opposite to
Evangelical Liberty, as Antichrist is to Christ. Let us a little see how she
has fulfilled St. Paul's Prediction, in teaching Lying and Divelish Doctrines,
and that with seared Consciences and in Hypocrisy, in the two Specialties
mentioned in the next verse, viz. Forbidding to Marry; and commanding to
abstain from Meats. And then the Bishop says, Marriage, the Holy Ordinance of
God, is yet by this purple Strumpet forbidden, and that Sub Mortali to Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, etc. and he there for that Appellation of purple Strumpet,
refers in his Margent to, Rev. 17.13.

And as I have here cited this great B. for this purpose; so I may likewise
refer you to the work of our B. of Lincoln called Brutum Fulmen, as proving the
Pope to be Antichrist, contrary to the Assertions of Grotius and Dr. Hammond
and others: I never think of this Bishop, and of his Incomparable Knowledge,
both in Theology and Church History, and in the Ecclesiastical Law, without
applying to him in my Thoughts, the Character that Cicero gave Crassus, viz.
Vir non unus e multis, sed unus inter omnes, prope singularis: And I desire
here to own my beholdingness to his communicative Disposition, for assisting me
with quotations and his Judgment when I have occasion to Crave his Aid therein,
as you know I have lately done; and shall be glad that the learning in such
Letters as I have received from him, wherein there are many excellent Notions,
which I had no occasion to quote, may sometime see the light.

But I am in the next place with Justice, to acknowledge it to you, that you
have in your Reflections on the Usurpations of the late times, acquainted the
World with several things useful to be inserted in the History of that Age, and
could wish that such a Writer as your self, would undertake the writing of it.

Nor can I forbear to observe, that your occasional propping up the great
Characters of many of his Majesty's Ministers in your Discourse, in very warm
Conjuncture, when a Factious Multitude was so busy in Demolishing their
Reputations, was worthy your great thoughts and generosity: And your particular
painting the Character of the late Earl of Clarendon in such Noble Colors (and
with Somewhat as bold strokes too of your Fancy and Judgment, as Aerodius
showed in his penne's Nulling the Laws made above a thousand years ago, against
the Heroical Men you have mentioned) was in you an adventurous piece of
Justice. The course of Mortality has carried several persons off the Stage,
whom you mentioned as then living, and particularly the late Duke of Norfolk,
of whom in p. 174. of your Discourse you speak as one of the three Earls then
Living, who went from the Church of England, to the Roman Catholic Communion;
and whom you since told me, you there introduced only with his Title of Earl (a
Title that was due to him as Earl of Norwich, Arundell and Surry) making bold
to Level him with the Title of the other two, ( viz.) the late Earl of
Bristoll, and the late Earl of Inchiqueen, as intending thereby, that if he had
lived to have read your Discourse, (of which you told me, you communicated
several parts to him) he might by that little Obscurity, see the Reverence you
had paid to that picture of your known great Friend, by your drawing a Curtain
before it.

The Earl of Radnor, and the late Lord Keeper North, whose Characters you have
so greatly painted to Eternity, left the World, without seeing the right that
you had so generously done them in Defiance of the vulgar Clamor.

I am moreover here to own my thanks to you, for giving me occasion by your so
frequent quoting of D' Ossat, to renew my Conversation in my Library, with that
great Author.

His Excellent Letters were formerly fresh enough in my Memory; and time was
heretofore, when not to be well versed in him, was a Reproach to a Man employed
in Affairs of the State, as you will see by my Lord Falkeland the Secretary of
State's printed Letter, in answer to Mr. Walter Montagues Letter, where
speaking of D' Ossat, he adds, viz. An Author which, I know, Mr. Montague has
read; because whosoever has but considered State Matters, must be as well
skilled in him, as any Priest in his breviary.

You very well in p. 38. observed how one Priest, that in his Book considered
State Matters and quoting D' Ossat about the same, was not so well skilled in
him, as in his Breviary; I mean, Mr. Brown the Franciscan, who in his ADVOCATE
of Conscience Liberty, Cited D' OSSATS Letter, to show that the
Gunpowder-Treason was contrived by CECIL.

But it was the ill fate of that Cardinal, on the account of his great Fame for
the Politics, to be falsely Cited, and even as to the point of the
Gunpowder-Treason, by several who never read him, and particularly by Mr.
Osborne, in his works bound together, p. 487. among the Memoirs of King James,
where he says; And here I cannot omit, that after this happy Discovery, his
Catholic Majesty sent an Agent, on purpose to Congratulate King James his
great preservation from the Gunpowder-Treason, a flattery so palpable, as the
Pope could not forbear Laughing in the face of Cardinal D' Ossat, when he first
told it him: Nor he forbear to imform his King of it, as may be found in his
printed Letters.

You have truly shown it out of the Cardinals Epitaph, printed in the Edition
of his Letters in Folio, that he dyed in the year 1604.

I am very glad, that for the Honor of the Reformation, you have with so much
Candor, and likewise with Substantial Calculation, Confuted an Unjust
insinuation against it, made by the Author of the Compendium, who there in p.
77. says, can it be said that the Monarchy of England has gotten by the
Reformation (and what desperate Enemies that has created, us may be easily
imagined) that nothing but Popery, or at least its Principles, can make it
again emerge or lasting.

It was fit that the clearing of the truth in that matter, should be undertaken
by some one or other of our Church; and it has been by you very Satisfactorily
performed: And your thus Confuting that Author, without naming him or his Book
in that part of your Discourse, where you were doing it, was the more Congruous
to the measures of Charity and Candor; and the more for the advantage of your
undertaking.

It was likewise fit, that the minds of so many People, whose Humor in the
late Fermentation was desperare de Republica, should be fortified with Reason:
And that the popular Nuisance of FEARS AND IEALOVSIES should be removed, and
which you have so much ex professo (I think) beyond any of our late Writers
done.

And while the vulgus of Writers were entailing Fears and Iealousies upon us;
your predicting, from Natural Causes, the Happy Future STATE of your Country;
and that the Fermentation would be perfective to it, (as your words are) was an
Attempt of a great Genius.

And I cannot but in Justice say to you, that your thoughts in p. 194, 195. of
the Folly and Madness of any Republican Modellers here, are new and great.

Moreover, as I always had a Just and High value and Honor for the Endowments
of his Present Majesty, that were in him Conspicuous to the World, when Duke of
York; and was as much ashamed of the opprobrious Calumnies, that his great
Character was then exposed to, as any Man whatsoever; (and was likewise more
concerned for the ill usage he had, than for my own, when my poor Name was in
the printed Affidavit, enforced to March round the Kingdom with his Great and
Illustrious one;) so I was glad that in the late Conjuncture, I found by some
printed Sheets of your Discourse then sent me, your papers Representation of
his Character made him amends for the Sanbenito of the Affidavit.

And the Strictures of your great Fancy and Judgment, with which you so
apparently refer to his Character in p. 122.176.211.271. and others in your
Casuistical Discussion, though they were but short, and seemingly en passant, yet
they were like the slanting of Lightning, and like glances, whose quick
Movements, might probably Create much more powerful Passions of Love and
Admiration in a Reader; than if you had penned his Character in Set formal
Panegyricks, whose Honey soon cloys, and leaves no sting or Impression in the
Mind.

But that which I may parallel, with any Coup de Maitre in your, or perhaps any
Discourse, and Writ with such great Advantage for his present Majesty's
Service; and wherein the Mixtures of your great Colors is so Admirable, and
wherein you have painted according to the height of a pittore, that the Italians
say, must paint con diligenza and con amore and con fortuna, is what I find in
your page 217, and 218. For it is there, that in your great picture of His Late
Majesty as an Agonist, and laying the Crown of Righteousness before him, eo
nomine, and as Contending for the Succession; You have interweaved the picture
of your own Loyalty and Contention for it, with such bold Touches, as I shall
not name; but refer the Reader to them, which it was pity but your Index had
done, with a hand in the Margent.

There is no doubt; but the very Curiosity of the Calculations in your
Discourse, would have brought it into the late Kings Cabinet, and to his
perusal, had he lived till its Publication; and your great Majestic
Insinuations of persuasive Arguemnt, there brought apparently with a Design to
fortify his great Mind against any possible further Batteries from Members of
any of the three Estates, to occasion his consenting to the Exclusion, must
necessarily have been soon perceived by so quick an Apprehension as his
Majesty's; and could not but have made deep impressions on him, for the
continuance in his former purpose. And I will hereupon say, that if any Loyal
Roman Catholic would not on the Account of what you have said in those two
pages, absolve you from his severe Censuring of the warmest passages against
Popery, in your whole Discourse, he would injure his own Judgment. And the
Truth is, Archbishop Hutton's minding Queen Elizabeth so boldly from the
Pulpit, though yet with a Salvo to the Rules of Modesty, and Decorum, of what
in Justice concerned her as to K. James's Succession; which you have mentioned,
and which was by her so well taken, was not a harder Task to be performed, than
what you presented to the consideration of his Late Majesty from the Press, in
the Affair of his preserving the Lineal Succession of his present Majesty.

As it is natural to Men, on the sight of any Combatants or Wrestlers, whom
they had never before seen, to wish better to the one, than the other; and to
have their Fancy's by the Current of Nature constantly carried along, to favor
the Fortunes of this or that Contender, whom yet they never saw, so I have
during the course of our long acquaintance, observed in you on all occasions, a
natural and constant tenderness in your Wishes of Happiness, and good Success
to his present Majesty, when Duke of York. And had not you on grounds of
Nature, and so like a Philosopher expressed the same, and from the Knowledge of
things in particular, founded your Conjectural measures of Englands future
Happy State, if under his Government, but had only presaged well of his Reign
in general; one might have thought that your natural Affection and Honor for
his Person, might have biased you that way, as a praedicter, rather than the
natural knowledge of things; especially considering what you have well hinted,
that the very praediction of things, is often a Natural cause, in some degree,
of Men's being Animated to bring them to effect.

And indeed, I receiving many of your printed Sheets, during our late
Fermentation, when so many Writers seemed Associated in the praediction of the
worst of Events, under a Popish Successor, was the more pleased to find one Man
that was not like a dead fish carried down with the stream of the Times, as to
the point of ill boding to the public; and the strength of whose fancy mixed
with his great Reason and Judgment, might be able to help to turn that stream.

And God be thanked, that by his Majesty's coming to inherit the Throne of his
Ancestors, with almost as equal Peace and Joy of the People, as his Royal
Brother was Restored to the same, (and for your Description of the Figure I
made in which latter, or to speak more properly of my Duty I discharged
therein, I return you my Just Acknowledgments) and by his so early and
voluntary Gracious Declaration, of his defending the C. of E. and the Civil
Government, as by Law Established; and so publicly owning the Loyalty of the
Principles of that Church, and by his continuance of the prosperity of that
Church, and the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom, while the whole Creation
(as I may say) groans under the pressure of some of our Protestant Brethren
abroad, you have hitherto appeared so much a True Praedicter as you have.

I am likewise glad hereby, that another Learned Person of our Church, I mean
Dr. Thomas Sprat, the Lord Bishop of Rochester, taking his view of the Future
State of England, in his History of the Royal Society, and there saying, as you
have Cited it, that we may safely conclude, that what ever vicissitude shall
happen about Religion in our time, it will probably be neither to the advantage
of implicit Faith, nor of Enthusiasm, has hitherto appeared so fortunate in
that praediction.

God be thanked that such as in the late Conjuncture, troubled us with the
being Lachrymists in another, and the imagined nubecula est, etc. as to
persecution, have had some cause to be ashamed of their Fears: And that you
have hitherto had no more cause to be ashamed of praedicting Englands future
pacifick State, though yet we have had a Monmouths.
Rebellion since. But as to that, it may be properly said, that, that
persecution against the Throne, nubecula fuit, and transivit.

We have had presently after the Kings coming to the Throne, a little Cloud of
Calumny cast on the Reputations of four of the most Eminent Divines of our
Metropolis, by some of their fellow Subjects, supposed Roman Catholics; but it
soon passed off: And God brought forth their Righteousness as the Light, and
their Judgment as the Noonday: And the thing scarce deserves to be remembered,
that after they had thus misrepresented four such Protestant Divines with so
much falsehood, some others of those published a Book, called The Papist
Misrepresented, and Represented, and which is lately answered with that Candor
and Strength of Reason, that ought to be in Theological Writings; and wherein
as the Lord Falkeland who was then Secretary, was wont to say, it was as absurd
to mingle angry reviling expressions, as to do so in a Love-Letter. There was a
despicable Childish Pamphlet (and Writ with too much petulant insolence)
called, An Address from the Church of England, to both Houses of Parliament;
and which was by many of the Fathers of that Church, held not worth the taking
notice of.

And because it is very Ridiculous for any now to think to Re-Baptize the
present Church of England, with the Name of ROMAN Catholic: I have here
thought fit, in pursuance of what you mentioned in p. 70. to let you and others
have a Copy of the Rescript or Judgment of the University of Oxford, to Henry
the 8 th. whereby the Bishop of Rome was pronounced to have no more power here
by the Word of God, than any other Foreign Bishop. I Judge that that Old Book
of Dr. James's you refer to, is called A Manuduction or Introduction unto
Divinity, containing a Confutation of Papists by Papists, etc. by Tho. James,
Doctor of Divinity, late fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, and Sub Dean of the
Cathedral Church of Wells, printed at Oxford. 1625.

The Book is full of great Learning, and Dedicated to the then Lord Keeper,
Bishop of Lincoln: And there under his third proposition, (viz.) the King is
not Subject to any Foreign Jurisdiction, he tells us in p. 40. that K. Henry
the 8th. being at Variance with the Pope, a Parliament was called within two
years, and a Motion was made therein, that the King should be declared Head of
the Church. But his Majesty refused, till he had Advised with his Universities,
of that point. And whilst the Parliament Sat, (God, in whose Hand the Hearts
of Princes are, so disposing it) the King reflecting belike on Wickliffs former
Articles, directing his Letters to the University of Ox. about Electing the Bp.
of Lincoln, into the Chancellorship of the University of Oxford, in the room of
Archbishop Warham lately Deceased; After the Accomplishment whereof ( says
the King) our Pleasure and Commandment is, that ye, as shall beseem Men of
Virtue and profound literature, diligently entreating, examining, and
discussing a certain question sent from us to you, concerning the Power and
Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, send again to us in writing, under your common
Seal, with convenient Speed and Celerity, your mind, Sentence, and assertion of
the Question, according to the mere and sincere Truth of the same, willing you
to give Credence to our Trusty and Well-beloved, this bringer, your Commissary;
As well touching our further pleasure in the premises, as for other matters,
etc. Given under our Signet, at our Manor of Greenwich, the 18 th Day of May.
It Is there said in the Margent, Ex Registro Act. in archivis Academiae Oxon. Ad
Ann. Dom. 1534. p. 127, etc.

The Doctor then thus goes on; Upon the Receipt of these Letters, the
University (at that time for ought we know, consisting all of Papists) being
assembled in Convocation, Decreed as follows; That for the Examination,
Determination and Decision of this question, sent unto them to be Discussed
from the Kings Majesty; whether the Bishop of Rome had any greater Jurisdiction
Collated upon him from God in the Holy Scripture, than any other Foraign
Bishop; that there should be Deputed thirty Divines, Doctors and Batchelors of
Divinity to whose Sentence, Assertion or Determination, or the greater part of
them, the Common Seal of the University, in the Name thereof should be annexed:
And then sent up to his Majesty. And the 27 th. of June, in the year of our
Savior 1534. this Instrument following, was made and sent up Sealed with the
Common Seal of the University. The Instrument it self is in Latin; but is in
English thus: To all the Sons of our Mother the Church, to whom these present
Letters shall come, John, by the Grace of God, Chancellor of the Famous
University of Oxon, and the whole Assembly of Doctors and Masters, Regents, and
not Regents in the same, greeting. Whereas our most Noble and Mighty Prince and
Lord, Hen. the 8 th. by the Grace of God, of England and France, King, Defender
of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, upon the continual Requests and Complaints
of his Subjects, Exhibited unto him in Parliament, against the intolerable
exactions of Foreign Jurisdictions, and upon diverse Controversies had, and
moved about the Jurisdiction and Power of the Bishop of Rome; and for other
diverse and urgent Causes against the said Bishop then and there expounded and
declared; was sent unto, and humbly desired, that he would provide in time some
fit Remedy, and satisfy the Complaint of his dear Subjects: He, as a most
prudent Solomon, minding the good of his Subjects, over whom God has placed
him; and deeply pondering with himself, how he might make good and wholesome Laws
for the Government of his Commonwealth; and above all things, taking care that
nothing be there resolved upon against the Holy Scriptures; (which he is, and
ever will be ready to Defend with Hazard of his Dearest Blood) out of his deep
Wisdom, and after great pains taken hereabouts, has Transmitted, and sent unto
his University of Oxon, a certain question to be Disputed, viz. whether the
Bishop of Rome has any greater Jurisdiction granted to him from God in the
Holy Scriptures, to be exercised and used in this Kingdom, than any other
Foraign Bishop; and has commanded us, that disputing the question, after a
diligent and mature Deliberation and Examination of the premises, we should
certify his Majesty, under the Common Seal of our University, what is the true
meaning of the Scriptures in that behalf, according to our Judgments and
Apprehensions. We therefore the Chancellor, Doctors and Masters above Recited,
daily and often remembering, and altogether weighing with our selves how good
and godly a thing it is, and Congrous to our Profession, befitting our
Submissions, Obediences and Charities, to foreshew the way of Truth and
Righteousness, to as many as desire to tread in her steps; and with a good,
sure and quiet Conscience, to Anchor themselves upon Gods Word: We could not
but endeavor our selves, with all the possible care that we could devise, to
satisfy so Just and Reasonable a Request of so great a Prince (who next under
God, is our most Happy and Supreme Moderator and Governor.) Taking therefore
the said question into our Considerations, with all Humble Devotion, and due
Reverence (as becomes us) and Assembling our Divines together from all parts,
taking time enough, and many days space to Deliberate thereof diligently,
religiously, and in the fear of God, with zealous and upright Minds; first
searching, and searching again the Book of God, and the best Interpreters
thereupon disputing the said questions, Solemnly and Publicly in our Schools,
have in the end, unanimously, and with joint consent, resolved upon the
Conclusion; that is to say, That the Bishop of Rome has no greater
Jurisdiction given unto him in Scripture, than any other Bishop, in this
Kingdom of England: Which our Assertion, Sentence, or Determination, so upon
deliberation maturely and thoroughly discussed; and according to the Tenor of
the Statutes and Ordinances of this our University concluded upon publicly, in
the Name of the whole University; we do pronounce and testify to be sure,
certain and consonant to the Holy Scripture. In witness whereof, we have caused
these our Letters to be written, Sealed, and ratified by the Seal of our
University. Given in our Assembly House the 27 th. of the Month of June, in the
year of Christ, 1534.

I took care formerly to satisfy the Curious, by my taking a Copy of this
Rescript out of the Records, in the Registry of the University of Oxford; and
which I not being able at present to find among my Papers, have sent you this
English Translation of it, as Printed in that Book of Dr. James's.

That Book of his, any one may see in the Catalogue of the Bodleian Library,
and of which Library, he was the Head-keeper, And in that Office, very Diligent
and Careful, and was a Person of great Learning and Probity.

The Knowledge of this Rescript of that University, and likewise of the other
of Cambridge, is necessary to all who will be Masters of the Knowledge of the
History of those times. For the Author of a Book in Quarto, Printed in Oxford,
in the year 1645. called, the Parliaments power in Laws for Religion, having
there in p. 4. said that the third and Final Act for the Popes Ejection, was an
Act of Parliament, 28. H. 8th. c. 10. entitled, an Act extinguishing the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome: Says, it was ushered in by the Determination
first; and after by the practice of all the Clergy; for in the Year 1534. which
was two years before the passing of this Act, the King had sent this
Proposition to be agitated in both Universities, and in the greatest and most
famous Monastery's of the Kingdom, That is to say, An aliquid authoritatis in
hoc Regno Angliae Pontifici Romano de Jure competat plusquam alii cuicunque
Episcopo extero? By whom it was Determined Negatively, that the Bishop of Rome
had no more power of Right in the Kingdom of England, than any other Foraign
Bishop; which being Testified, and returned under their Hands and Seals
respectively, ( the Originals whereof, are still remaining in the Library of
Sir Robert Cotton) was a good preamble to the Bishops, and the rest of the
Clergy Assembled in their Convocation to conclude the like. And so accordingly
they did, and made an Instrument thereof Subscribed by the Hands of all the
Bishops and others of the Clergy; and who afterward confirmed the same by their
Corporal Oaths: The Copies of which Oaths and Instruments, you shall find in
Foxes Acts and Monuments, vol. 2. fol. 1203. and 1211. of the Edition of John
Day, An. 1570. And this was semblably the ground of a following Statute. 35. H.
8. c. 1. Wherein another Oath was devised and ratified, to be imposed upon the
Subject; for the more clear asserting of the Kings Supremacy, and the utter
exclusion of the Popes for ever: Which Statutes, though they were all Repealed
by one Act of Parliament, 1st. and 2d. of Phillip and Mary C. 8. Yet they were
brought in force again, 1 Eliz* c. 1.

My Lord Herbert, in his History of Henry the 8 th. under the year 1534. and
the 26 th. year of his Reign, p. 408. telling us, that it was Enacted, that the
King by his Heirs and Successors Kings of England, should be Accepted and
Reputed the Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of Eng. called Ecclesia
Anglicana, etc. says that, that Act, though much for the manutention of the
Regal Authority, seemed not yet to be suddenly approved by our King, nor before
he had consulted with his Counsel, etc. and with his Bishops; who having
discussed the point in their Convocations, declared, that the Pope had no
Jurisdiction warranted to him by Gods Word in this Kingdom; which also was
seconded by the Universities, and by the Subscriptions of the several
Colleges, and Religious Houses, etc.

Most certainly Hen. the 8 th's. gaining this point, that the Bp. of Rome has
no more power here by Gods Word, than any other Foraign Bishop, was of great
and necessary use, in order to the effectual withstanding the Papal
Usurpations; and was re vera, the gaining of a Pass; and for which end, he made
use of intellectual Detachments from his Universities.

And suitably to the Wisdom of our Ancestors here, in Henry 8 ths. time, any
Popish Prince abroad, who intends effectually to Combat the Papal Usurpations,
must first gain that Pass: For the effect of the common sayings in Natural
Philosophy, that, Natura non conjungit extrema nisi per media, and that Natura
non facit Saltum, must likewise obtain in Politics, when the Nature of things
is operating there toward a Reformation of Church or State.

And this weighty Rescript of the University of Oxford, not being Printed in
Dr. Burnets excellent Historical Books of the Reformation, nor yet in Fox his
Martyrology; and now Published here, as set down in English, by Dr. James, may
perhaps serve usefully to illuminate the World abroad, about the way of its
Transitus from Popery.

But here I shall observe, that though I find, in Mr. Fox his Acts and
Monuments Printed in 3 Volumes in London, for the Company of Stationers, An.
1641. the Judgment of the University of Cambridge is there set down, in p. 338.
and relates to the same year with the Oxford Rescript, namely the year 1534.
yet it does not there appear to be a Rescript to King Henry 8 th. by way of
return to a Letter from his Majesty; and it begins thus: Vniversis sanctae
Matris Ecclesiae filijs, ad quos praesentes literae perventurae sunt; Caetus
omnis Regentium and non Regentium Academiae Cantabrigiensis, salutem in omnium
Salvatore Jesus Christo. Cum de Romani Pontificis potestate, etc. And then
follows the Translation of the whole in English; and which makes about half of
that page 338, and wherein the same Judgment for substance is given, with that
of the Oxford Rescripts: That the Bishop of Rome has no more State Authority
and Jurisdiction given him of God in the Scriptures over this Realm of England,
than any other extern Bishop has. That Instrument has not there the Date of
any Month to it, as the Oxford Rescript has: But in the Body of the Instrument
it is mentioned, that the Judgment of that University was therein required,
though not by whom; and toward the Conclusion of it, it is Styled an Answer, in
the Name of that University; and it is probable, that the Judgment of that
University might have been required by some of the Ministers of King Henry 8
th. and by his Order; whereas the Oxford Rescript, mentioned his Majesty's
having himself required the Judgment of that University in that point.

What I have here mentioned of the Judgment of our two Universities, gives me
occasion to take notice of an Oversight of my Lord Herbert, in this place of
his History, by me Cited; For he in this p. 408. makes the Universities
Determining, that the Pope had no Jurisdiction warranted to him by Gods Word in
this Kingdom; whereas he should have Represented their Sense of his not having
more here, than any other Foraign Bishop. And thus you truly express the Sense
of their Judgment in this Case, when you say p. 70 th. of your Book, that the
Popes Cards were, by the Clergy that played his Game, thrown up, as to all claim
of more power here by the Word of God, than every other Foraign Bishop had: And
both our Universities sent their Judgments about the same thing to the K.
which, methinks, might make our Papists approach a little nearer to us, without
any fear of Infection. For we allow the Bishop of Rome to have as much power by
the Word of God here, as any other Foraign Bishop; and it is pity but that the
Judgment of our Universities, were shown the World in Print, and sent to the
French King; and particularly the Judgment or Rescript of the University of
Oxford, as not being any where in Print as I know of; But in an Old Book of Dr.
James's, against Popery.

But as to your thought of having that Rescript of the University of Oxford,
sent to the French King; I for my part, am disinclined to it. The printing of
it here, may probably bring it to the notice of his Ministers, and so perhaps
to his. I have heard how the French Ambassador, not long ago applied to a
Learned Friend of ours, of the long Robe, and of the Church of England; and one
who is a great Antiquary, and desired him to furnish him with Copies of Records
not printed in Dr. Burnets Works, that related to Henry 8 th's* withstanding
the Papal Usurpation; and no doubt but the Copy of this Oxford Rescript, would
have been as welcome to him, and as necessary to Complete his Collection, as any
could have been; and the publication of it, may perhaps be of use in some
places of the Roman Catholic World abroad: But I fear, that the present French
King, will never without some strange unexpected provocation, received from the
Papacy, advance so far toward the confines of Reformation, as Henry 8 th. did.
I know it was but Congruous to Worldly Politics (however contrary to Justice)
for French Kings formerly to use very high Severities to their Protestant
Subjects, in the Conjunctures of their quarrelling with the Pope; and this you
well observe in p. 329. out of the Book called, the Policy of the Clergy of
France; Namely, that the French Kings never made any Assaults on the Papal
Power; but what cost their Protestant Subjects very dear. And of the like
Nature, were the Political Measures of Henry the 8 th* here, who at the same
time, burned his Protestant Subjects, for what he called Heresy, that he hanged
some of his Popish ones, for what he called Treason, in abetting the Papal
Supremacy.

I know we should not presume to limit the most Holy God, as to what
Instruments he shall, or shall not use in the Melioration of the Affairs of
Church or State: But the French King is one, I never think of without Horror.
Nor do I entertain any idea, of Gods making any right Lines in the World, by so
crooked an Instrument. If David must not be allowed by the Course of
Providence, to build the Temple; because his Administration of the Government,
had been so much dipped in Blood; what good to Religion can we presage from
such a Monarch, as has made all Christendom almost one great Aceldama? The
great God will, I believe, take his time to make this Monarch share in the
usual fate of Persecutors, how prosperous soever he may be at present,
according to what is commonly observed out of the Heathen Moralist: That the
Divine Wheels are grinding, and will grind to powder, though they are slow in
Motion. Nor did God think fit to use our Henry 8 th. as an Instrument to
contribute toward the building his House here, further than by removing the
Rubbish of the Papal Usurpations, and by so Signally Acting therein, by
compassing the Popes power, to be here reduced to the level of that of every
other Foraign Bishop. This was a Momentous thing, and worthy the Sagacity and
Politics of King Henry, and his Ministers, and it must however be for his
Honor acknowledged in our English Story.

The truth is, that it having been so Customary for the Bishops of Rome, when
they met with a weak King here, or one whose Affairs were Embarrassed, to
interlope in their Temporal Concerns; and to presume to dispose of their Crowns
and Regalities; it was but Natural, for such a Magnanimous Monarch as Henry the
8 th. was, to Stake down the Popes Spiritual power, to that short tedder he did
out of the Scriptures, and to allow it to go no further there, than any other
Foraign Bishop's. And thus I for my part would never prefer any Divine to be my
Spiritual Pastor, who claimed my Temporal Estate: And, as I think, no Lords of
Manors, who had the right of Advowson, would present any one to a Living in
their gift, who without Sense or Reason, did set up a title to the Manor.

But the very thought of waters not rising higher than their Springs, might
well serve to mind Henry 8 th. and some of our former Roman Catholic Princes,
that the Power of the Bishop of Rome in Temporals, however Claimed by Popes,
was not allowed to rise higher than St. Peter's, nor St. Peter's higher than
his, who said his Kingdom was not of this World, and that St. Peter's
Successor, is not like Tamberlain, to tread on the Heads of Christians, nor
like Alexander the Third* to Tread on the Neck of an Emperor and Burlesquing
one of King David's Psalms; Super aspidem and basiliscum ambulabis, conculcabis
l^onem and Draconem; when it may be said, that the Holy Jesus did tread so
gently in his passage through the World, that if he had trod on a bruised Reed,
he would not have broke it, or if on smoking Flax, he would not have quenched
it.

A Man cannot thoroughly Write of the Old Papal Usurpations here, without being
as voluminous as Mr. Prynne; and our Statute-Book does sufficiently instruct us
out of Hen. 8 th's Reign, and former ones in the Fact of the Papal Arrogance,
and in the Fact and Right of their being withstood. But I need not tell you of
the common Observation, that those Statutes in Henry 8 th's time, that were
most warm against the Papal Usurpations, were but Declarative of our old Laws
and Customs; and as for example, the dernier Ressort, that the Cannon Law gives
the Pope, of Appeals from our Ecclesiastical Courts, was an Usurpation, long
before the Statute of Henry the 8 th's. time for prohibiting all Appeals out of
England, to the Court of Rome: And thus the Constitutions at Clarendon, plainly
speak out, how our Old Laws and Customs were to be observed in this point, viz.
That all Appeals must proceed regularly from the Arch Deacon to the Bishop,
from the Bishop, to the Archbishop; and if the Archbishop failed to do
Justice, the last Complaint must be to the King, to give Order for Redress ( i
e.) by proper delegates: and Matthew Paris, A. 1164. thus tells us, that in the
Reign of Henry the Second, the Custom then about Appeals was, viz. Si
emerserint ab Archidiacono, debet procedi ad Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad
Archiepiscopum and si Archiepiscopus defuerit in justitia exhibenda, ad Dominum
Regem perveniendum est postremo, ipsius in Curia Archiepiscopi controversia
terminetur, ita quod non debet ultra procedi absque assensu Domini Regis.

But as to the Ridiculousness of the Papal Usurpations by the Canon Law, giving
the Pope a power to receive Appeals from the Dominions of Sovereign Princes and
States, Mastertius in his Book de justitia Legum Romanarum in the Summaries of
his 20 th. Chapter, sets it down, That, 1. Ridetur Pontifex ab ipsa Romana
Curia. 2. Credentes Constitutioni Pontificis, a Regibus, liberisque populis
laesae Majestatis damnantur. 3. Iterum dissentit a Pontifice Romana Curia. 4.
Mira pontificis caecitas notatur: 5. Intellectus L. a proconsulibus 19. Cod de
appellat. 6. Ius Canonicum male damnat in expensas tantum appellantem perperam.


Under which he says, Infelix fuit Romanus Praesul in Cap. 7. Cap. de priore.
31. Cap. Ad audientiam, 34. Cap. dilecti. 52. -- Ext. de appellat. quibus
constituit adversus L. Imper. in princip. D. de appellat. licere pulsatae
parti, relictis medijs, pontificalem cognitionem invocare, nam ipsa Romana
Curia id Iuris, tanquam omnem bonum ordinem invertens and ex mera dissentiendi
libidine promanans, explosit; neque procedit Canonistarum glossema, quo videtur
id constituisse pontifex, ob specialem suae sedis praerogativam qua fidelium
omnium competens est Iudex, Cap. si duobus. 7. and ibi D. D. ext. de appellat.
Council. Trident. sess. 24. Cap. 20. de reformat. Nam cum id falsum sit, totius
Christiani Orbis Reges liberique populi, laesae Majestatis reos agunt, qui vel
immediate, vel ab ipsorum sententia ad pontificem praesumunt appellare.

Eodem candore defert appellationi rei minimae, iterum reluctante Romana Curia
and requirente ut litis aestimatio sit ut minimum coronatorum december. Praesec.
in praxi Episcop. p. 2. Cap. 4. Art. 15. N. 8. Mechlinensi 50. Flor. D. Zypaeus
de Iure Pontif. novo. tit. de appellat N. 8. Mihi videtur quod pontifex de
industria se voluerit risui propinare, nam hic defert appellationi rei minimae,
supra relictis mediis implorationi Pontificialis auditorij, evocando Belgam aut
Anglum in Causa aliquorum obolorum, ad urbem Romanam experiundi sui Iuris
gratia.

But there is another use we may now well make of the publication of this
Rescript of the University of Oxon; and that is to observe how awkwardly and
unseasonably the Author of The Papist Misrepresented, and Represented, has
thought fit to Represent the Pope as now deducing a Claim to a Higher Power
here by the Word of God, than what our Roman Catholic Universities allowed him
in Henry the 8 th's time. For in his 18 th. Chapter, he tells us, That the
Papist believes, that there is a Pastor, Governor, and Head of Christ's Church
under Christ, to wit the Pope, or Bishop of Rome, who is the Successor of St.
Peter, to whom Christ committed the Care of his Flock, etc. and now believing
the Pope to enjoy his Dignity, he looks on himself obliged to show him the
Respect, Submission and Obedience which is due to his place. And afterward, in
this manner is he ready to behave himself toward his CHIEF PASTOR, with all
Reverence and Submission, never scrupling to receive his Decrees and
Definitions, such as are issued forth by his Authority, with all their due
Circumstances, and according to Law, in the concern of the whole Flock,

His Answerer does well reply to him in that point, and with a Candor suitable
to the Pacifick State of the Realm you have predicted, under any Prince of the
Roman Catholic Communion; say, viz. How does it appear that Christ ever made
St. Peter Head of the Church, or committed his Flock to him, in
contradistinction to the Rest of the Apostles? This is so far from being
evident by Scripture, that the Learned Men of their Church, are ashamed of the
places commonly produced for it, etc. And afterward says, 'We need not insist
on the Proof of this, since the late mentioned Authors of the Roman Communion,
have taken so great pains not only to prove the Popes Supremacy to be an
Encroachment and Usurpation in the Church; but that the laying it aside, is
necessary to the Peace and Unity of it. And until the Divine Institution of the
Papal Supremacy be proved, it is to no purpose to debate what manner of
Assistance is promised to the Pope in his Decrees.

It was (I think) an undertaking, that none but a very Sanguine Man, could
suppose fesable to engage us to believe in this Age, that the Pope was by
Divine Right, Head of our Church under Christ. I say in this Age, so generally
Learned, and when a Layman furnished but with an ordinary Library, can show
that the Churches of the British Islands, England, Scotland and Ireland (as my
Lord Primate Bramhal shows in Chap. 5. of his Just Vindication of the Church of
England,) by the Constitution of the Apostles, and by the Solemn Sentence of
the Catholic Church, are exempted from all Foreign Jurisdiction, and that if
it be objected, that the Bishop of Rome was ever our Patriarch, that all
Patriarchal Jurisdiction is of Human Institution; and by the Statute of 35 C.
1. it was declared, that the Holy Church of England, was founded in the State
of PRELACY (not of Papacy) within the Realm of Eng. (not without it) by the
Kings and Peers thereof (not by the Popes) and when in the time of our late
Civil Wars, the Presbyterian and Independent Divines had by their Claims of Ius
Divinum for their Models of Church Government, so much exercised the
understanding of the People in general, that at the time of his late Majesty's
Restoration, restoring to our Church the best Constituted Government in the
World, many of our Virtuosi and Latitudinarians could not be brought expressly
to own its excellence, on an Universal Ius Divinum praeceptivum, and would say,
that in any Church Government that by Divine Right would bind all Churches,
there must be not only praxis; but institutio apostolica.

The Pryers into the Rabbinical Learning of the Jews, have not been forced more
to observe their Criticizing on the Divinity of the Fire, which burned the
Sacrifices on the Brazen Altar, as coming from Heaven, both when the Tabernacle
was erected, and when the Temple was built, and making the fire in the first
Temple, to be Divino-Divinus, altogether Holy, and the fire in the second
Temple, to be Divino-Humanus, Human Holy, as being kindled as our fire, though
still kept in, as the fire of the first Temple was; and the third fire that
Nadab and Abihu offered to be Humanus, and likewise called by them alienus, as
strange fire; then the Readers of the late Controvertists of the Ius Divinum of
several Forms of Church Government among us, have been forced to take notice of
their* nicety in distinguishing it* And now after the Bishop of Rome had before
Henry the 8 th's time made the figure of the fire, Divino Humanus, and whose
Authority was then Extinguished (for so the Style runs of the Act of Parliament
I mentioned of 28 of H. 8 th. viz. An Act for Extinguishing the Authority of
the Bishop of Rome and as to whose Authority we are told by More, 463. that all
the power of the Pope, was not by the 25 of H. 8th. given to the King, but was
extinct; in Holy wells Case;) for any Writers without the Heat and Light of
much clear Learned Argumentation, to rekindle that extinguished ignis alienus:
a strange fire of Foreign power in our Beliefs, will, (I may modestly say) be a
strange Attempt, and not to be Effected by any Rhetorical Representer.

But here I cannot forbear observing, that the Author of the Papist
Misrepresented, etc. does in his Reflections upon the Answer to his Book in p.
13. refering to Dr. Hickes his Iovian, call him a Worthy Divine, and Cite him
for saying, that in Case a Popish Julian indeed, should Reign over us, he
should believe him incapable of Repentance, and upon that Supposition, should
be tempted to pray for his Destruction; and then in seeming Charity to the
Church of England deny that, because the Doctor used those Words, it is honest
hence to blacken the Church of England, with this Disloyal Principle, as if she
allowed her Members, though not to fight against, yet to pray for the
Destruction of such a Prince.

The Doctor, whose great Learning and Pains taken in doing right to the
Succession you have so particularly Represented in your Preface, and whereupon
if we reflect on the little or nothing, ex professo, writ by any Romanists
against the Exclusion, it will be no Complement to ^ay that, he has therein
labored more abundantly than THEY all, might if it had pleased this
Representer, have been deservedly referred to by him, with a higher Character.
And if in any expressions warmer than ordinary against the principles of
Popery, he had erred by any little Transports in any of his Books, he
sufficiently Merited from any Roman Catholic Critics, their mildest
Representation of them: And it had been but Justice in the Representer, to have
Cited the former part of the Doctors Sentence, viz. and if it should please God
to plague the Church with such a Spightful Enemy of Christ, etc. And if he had
done so, it would have invited the Reader to look back to what the Doctor had
written, from the 140 th page, to the passage which he Cites, and then his
Reflection would have come to nothing.

By what I have heard of the Doctors Loyalty, I believe him to be one who with
Effectual Fervent Prayers, does Importune Heaven, for his Majesty's long and
prosperous Reign; and does his Duty of praising God for his Majesty's being so
far a Nursing Father to the Church of England; And I have that opinion of the
largeness of his Christian Charity and Justice, that he is ready to retaliate
with the Representer, in not blackning the whole Church of Rome, with the
principles lately held by some Jesuits and others Casuists referred to in the
Popes Decree of March 2 d. 1679. in. 13, 14, 15. by the 1 st of which, it is
rendered no Mortal Sin, to be troubled for the Life of another, so it be done
with due Moderaton, and by the second, it is made Lawful to desire the Death of
ones Father, by an absolute desire, and by the 3 d. Lawful for a Son to rejoice
at the same, and perpetrated by a Son in Drunkenness.

I suppose you could not but take notice how that Answerer of the Papist
Misrepresented, etc. reflects on the unlucky instance there in Caiaphas, and
saying was not Caiaphas himself the Man, who proposed the taking away the Life
of Christ at that time? was he assisted in that Council? Did not he determine
afterward Christ to be guilty of Blasphemy, and therefore worthy of Death?

For you have well observed the ill Luck, that the Famous Hosius (as he is
called by you) had in this case of Caiaphas, as to which Dr. Crackanthorp
exclaims against Hosius, O Hominem Sacrilegum ac Blasphemum! Illene reus
Mortis, qui innocens and innoxius vitam dedit? An and Blasphemus etiam! Ea
judicij pars.

You may in Bishop Jewels Apology, find this blot of Hosius hit, where speaking
of the Pope, p. 151, 152. of the London Edition, in the ^ear 1581. he says,
Petrus quidem a Soto, and ejus astipulator HOSIVS, nihil dubitant affirmare
concilium illud ipsum, in quo Christus Jesus adjudicatus est morti, habuisse
spiritum propheticum, spiritum sanctum, spiritum veritatis: Nec falsum aut
vanum fuisse, quod Episcopi illi dixerunt: Nos habemus Legem, and secundum
legem debet mori, illos judicasse (Sic enim scribit HOSIVS) judicij veritatem:
omninoque justum fuisse illud decretum, quo ab illis pronuciatum est, Christum
dignum esse qui moreretur. Mirum vero est non posse istos pro se dicere, and
propugnare causam suam, nisi una etiam Annae Cajaphaeque pratrocinentur. Nam
qui illud ipsum concilium, in quo filius Dei ad crucem ignominiosissime
condemnatus est, legitimum dicent fuisse ac probum; quod tandem illi concilium
decernent esse vitiosum? Tamen qualia sunt istorum concilia fere omnia necesse
illis fuit, ut ista de Cajaphae Annaeque concilio pronunciarent, etc. He there
had Cited in the Margin Hosius contra Brentium. lib. 2.

But if so great a Divine as Hosius, who was a Polonian Bishop, and Cardinal of
Rome, and one of the Popes Legates in the Council of Trent, did thus err in
this point; the mistake of an other therein, who was of an inferior Character,
is not to be much wondered at.

However, as I am an Honourer of Learned Men, I Derogate not from the Talents
of Wit and Learning, shown in his Book; and do suppose that somewhat of the
Moderation he shows therein, may be attributed to the Candor of that Church he
was first Educated in: And am sorry that he should find any Cause in his Papist
Misrepresented, Chapter 31. Of wicked Principles and Practices, to say, take
but a view of the Horrid practices, She ( i. e. the Church of Rome) has been
engaged in of late years, consider the French and Irish Massacres, the Murder
of Hen. the 3 d. and 4 th. Kings of France, the Holy League, the Gunpowder
Treason, the Cruelty of Queen Mary, the Firing of London, the late Plot in the
year 1678. to Subvert the Government, and destroy his Majesty, the Death of Sir
Edmund Godfrey, etc. And then tell me whether that Church which has been the
Author and Promoter of such Barbarous Designs, ought to be esteemed Holy, etc.
and let never so many pretenses be made, yet it is evident, that all these
Execrable practices have been done according to the known Principles of this
Holy Church; and that her greatest Patrons, the most Learned of her Divines,
her most Eminent Bishops, her Prelates, Cardinals, and even the Popes
themselves, have been the chief Managers of these Hellish Contrivances; and
what more convincing Argument, that they are well approved, and conform to the
Religion taught by their Church? And as to which in his Papist Represented, he
fairly says, Neither let any one pretend to Demonstrate the Faith and
Principles of the Papists, by the Works of every Divine in that Communion, or
by the Acts of every Bishop, Cardinal or Pope; for they extend not their Faith
beyond the Declaration of General Councils, and standing fast to these. He had
before said there, against what was mentioned in the Papist Misrepresented,
about fireing of London, the Late Plot in the year 78, etc. And though he is
not bound to believe all to be Truth, that is charged upon them by Adversaries,
there being no NARRATIVE of any of these Divelish Contrivances and Practices
laid to them, wherein Passion and Fury have not made great additions, wherein
things dubious, are not improved into certainty, Suspicious into Realities;
Fears and Jealousies, into Substantial Plots; and downright Lies, and Recorded
Perjuries, into Pulpit, nay, Gospel Truth; yet he really thinks, there have
been Men of his profession of every rank and degree, etc. that have been
Scandalous in their lives, etc. But what then, is the whole Church to be
Condemned, for the Vicious Lives of some of her professors? etc. And in the
Conclusion, he says, These are the Characters of the Papist, as he is
Misrepresented, and as he is Represented: And as different, as the one is from
the other; So different is the Papist, as reputed by his Maligners, from the
Papist, as to what he is in himself. The one is so absurd and monstrous, that
it is impossible possible for any one to be of that Profession, without first
laying by all thoughts of Christianity and Reason. The other is just
Contradictory to this, and without any further Apology, may be exposed to the
perusal of all prudent and unpassionate considerers to examine, if there be any
thing in it that deserves the Hatred of any Christian, and if it be not in
every point, wholly conform to the Doctrine of Christ, and not in the least
contrary to Reason.

I will readily accord with him, that Delictum personae non debet ad ecclesie
detrimentum trahi: And do therefore suppose, that he likewise will not charge
the Constitution of the Church of England, with any imperfections; because many
of its Members have Misrepresented or Calumniated any Papist. Nor has any one
a greater Compassion, then my self, for such Innocent and Loyal Papists, as
have in the late Fermentation, been aspersed with the Shammes in Narratives.

Any one may easily Judge me not untaught, as to the Moral Offices of such
Compassion, from the Measures of, Non Ignara Mali, etc. I never in the
Conjuncture, when we were so much deafned with the Noise of Narratives, thought
otherwise of them, than as being partly like the River Euphrates, according to
the known Description of it, in that Hymn of Callimachus.

(...).

Assyrius fluvius volvit magno agmine fluctus,
Et trahit Illuviem, Multasque hinc indeque sordes.
The Recorded Infamous Person, who in his Affidavit that made so much noise,
and threw so much Dirt on me (and who by being so presumptuous therein, as to
Reproach his Majesty, with things that no Man of Sense could believe, thought
to eternize his Name like him, who burned the Temple at Ephesus) has Missed of
that Aim, as far as in me lay, and so shall: And I think you have done well, in
not naming the Profligate. But it having pleased God to permit him, while he
was under the Course of his due punishment, and under the protection of the
Law, to fall by the Hand of an Assassinate, (and at whose Hand, his Majesty
required his Blood) that Signal instance of the Justice, inherent in his
Majesty's Nature, has sufficiently encouraged all his Liege People, to think
themselves safe by his being a Terror to Evil Doers, and not bearing the Sword
in vain: According to the Moral Offices you have so well described, of not
Condemning whole parties, merely on the account of the immoral Actions of
particular Members of them; I however blame not any Religionary Caetus that
either the profligate, or assassin referred to for their respective Outrages,
did herd with. And as the Author of the Papist Misrepresented, etc. is very
fairly desirous, that we should take our measures of the Church of Rome, from
the Principles approved by it, I shall herein Comply with him. But here must
say, that I am sorry to find that the Author is in a Church, where the DEPOSING
Power, is so much as DELIBERATED: For as you have well cited it out of two
Heathen Authors, Dum deliberant, desciverunt; And, Ea deliberanda omnino non
sunt in quibus est turpis ipsa deliberatio. And I am glad, that in his 26 th.
Chap. viz. of Mental Reservation, he was enabled to cite the present Pope's
Decree, of the 2 d. of March 1679. for the Damning of the Doctrine of
Equivocation of Oaths: And among the many Principles of the Jesuits and other
Casuists, which may come under your Denomination of irreligionary ones, that
Sicarious one, as you properly call it, viz. It is lawful for a Person of
Honor to kill a Man, that intends to Calumniate him, if there is no other way
to avoid that Reproach; was in that Decree, very justly Condemned: And but for
that Principle, having till its Condemnation been approved in the Church of
Rome; there could be no more just cause to charge any Papist, except the
Actors, with the Blood of Godfrey, than there was to cast the odium of the
Execrable Murder of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, on any of the
Presbyterians, except the Ruffianly Actors.

And as to the case of Godfrey, I remember you told me, that since your warm
aggravations about it in your DISCOVRSE, you were a colder Concurrer with the
Justice of the Nation therein, and that you, thought there was still somewhat of
the Intervallum (...), uncertain, or (...), fabulous, in the case of his Death.

And as to what the Author speaks of Papists, being Misrepresented, with
relation to the late Plot, in the year 1678. To Subvert the Government, and
destroy his Majesty: I who in the Conjuncture of the (...) made so little about
it, shall not now make any at all. What I have read in a Pacificatory
Discourse, of a Pious Divine, published in the year 1653. where speaking of a
Spirit of Jealousy, and of envy, strife, Railings, and Evil Surmisings, and
having quoted 1. Tim. 6.4. and that Strife and evil surmisings, are near of
kin; and that if Contentious Men can get nothing against their Brethren, they
will surmise there is something, and if they can find nothing in their Actions
to Judge, they will Judge their Hearts: If there be nothing above-board, they
will think there may be something under-board; and from thinking there MAY BE
something; they will think it is very LIKELY there is something; and from
LIKELY THERE IS, they will conclude THERE IS, surely there is some PLOT
working; has still since inclined me to be cautious, how in my most private
thoughts I charged any Men, and especially, any great Bodies of Men, with PLOTS:

And I think the Author of the Papist Misrepresented, etc. will find enough
Protestants as ready as you and my self, to avoid troubling them with the
Witnesses Plot.

But since the Author has in this case, thought fit to invite us to a view of
the Principles APPROVED, and Conform to the Religion taught by his Church, I
shall, reflecting on the Principles approved by so many in that Church, tell
him, I cannot but Judge them short of that unconditional Loyalty, you have so
clearly asserted in your Discussion; and shall judge, as the L. Falkland the
Secretary did, in the Letter to Mr. Mountague I before referred to, where his
Lordship on Mr. Mountagues making POPERY the way to Obedience, having had these
words, viz. I cannot but say, that though no Tenet of their whole Church (which
I know) makes at all against it; yet there are prevailing opinions of that
side, which are not fit to make good Subjects, when their Kings and they are of
different persuasions; and having quoted D' Ossat, for saying, that it is the
Spaniards Maxim, that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, and more, that
the Pope intimated as much in a Discourse, intended to persuade the King of
France to forsake the Queen of England; and that they hold at Rome, that the
Pope to avoid a probable Danger of the increasing of Heresy, may take away a
Territory from the true owner, and dispose of it to another; and many also
defend, that he has power to Depose an Heretical Prince, and of Heresy, he
makes himself the Judge: His Lordship with a profound Charity and Judgment,
thus goes on, viz. So that though I had rather my Tongue should cleave to the
Roof of my Mouth, than that I should deny that a Papist may be a good Subject,
even to a King, whom he accounts an Heretic; since I verily believe, that I my
self know very many very good: Yet Popery is like to an ill Air, wherein,
though many keep their Healths, yet many are Infected, (so that at most, they
are good Subjects; but during the Popes pleasure) and the rest are in more
danger, than if they were out of it.

Moreover, as to the firing of London; which the Author refers to, in his
Papist Misrepresented, as well as the Death of Godfrey, I was always as careful
as you were, to charge no more Papists with the Odium of it, than such as the
Justice of the Nation Criminated therewith. Moreover, if any one will have it,
that Hubert and Peidelow were not Papstis, I shall not account it tanti, to
contend with him about it, and as you told me lately, that you would not I
remember when we were long since Discoursing of that fire, you showed me a Book
of Vigelius a Civilian, who treating, de praesumptionibus quaestionum facti,
laid it down as a particular Rule, viz. Si de causa incendij quaeritur, culpa
inhabitantium praesumitur factum, and says, quae regula approbatur l. 3.. 31.
ff de officio praefecti vigilum, ubi Paulus plerumque (inquit) incendia fiunt
culpa inhabitantium.

Moreover you once showed me it represented, as a Rule in Magerus his Advocatia
armata, that damnum quod ignoratur a quo provenerit, ab inimico illatum esse
praesumitur; which does partly agree with the presumption of the causer of the
damage mentioned in the parable of the tares, an enemy, has done this: And you
have with Candor in the Papists behalf, in p. 180. to show that the Pope was
not the inimicus Homo, helped them to the Testimony of an adversary, I mean of
Marvil, in his growth of Popery.

You have likewise done Justice to the Papists, in p. 181. Exploding the great
popular Argument of London, being designedly fired, by many Popish Persons;
because of the flames breaking out at once, in several places* distant from one
another: An Argument, that the Author of Pyrotechnica-Loyolana, printed in
London, in the year 1667. does in p. 130. lay great stress on, and says, that
as at Cracow in Poland (which he had before accused the Jesuits for having
fired) the flames did break out there, in several places of the City, at the
Tops of Houses, so here the fire did break first out at the Tops of several
Houses, which were every way, at a considerable distance, from the contiguous
burning in the main Body, etc. And therefore on the Account of the thing you
mentioned, and which is obvious enough in Nature, a fire first caused in
London, or Cracow, culpa inhabitantium, might afterward appear, breaking out in
several distant places thereof. And I have several times told you, how I was in
the behalf of the Roman Catholics, troubled at the Votes of the House of
Commons, that threw the Guilt of the fire of London, on the Papists in general;
and likewise, at what was spoke by an Eminent Son of our Church, and Minister
of his late Majesty's, that at the Condemnation of the Lord Stafford, in effect
did so, for there, as you have truly said in p. 179. the Evidence did not rise
High and Clear enough; for the charging any Papist with it. Nor need I now tell
you, that I was in the year 79 sorry to find that a Pamphlet against Popery,
that charged the Papists in general, with the Fire of London, and with that,
particularly of the Temple, caused by a Non-Papist Debauche, who was burned in
it, was then Licenced by a very Loyal and Learned Licenser.

But since our Roman Catholic Author, in his Papist Misrepresented, does
partly found the Mis-representation, on these execrable practices having been
done according to the known Principles of the Church of Rome, I shall take this
occasion he has given me, to offer it to him, to consider how far any known
principle, founded on the Papal Usurpations, and approved either BY or IN that
Church, might have Legitimated a practice of the like Nature: As for Example,
the Firing of the Heretical Villages at the Massacre of Merindol, affirmed by
Heylin and Maimbourg, and the designed one of the City of Westminster, in the
Gunpowder-Treason: And shall leave it to the ingenious Author to Recollect,
whether any Divines or Divine of the Church of England he withdrew from, and
much more whither any of its Canons, approved any princiciple of that
extravagant Nature.

Whatever Impressions it may make on his Thoughts, or those of the Gentleman
you refer to in p. 173. (and there mention with Honor; and, as one though
having forsaken the Communion of the Church of England; yet being a Pious and
Learned Roman Catholic, and of a nice tenderness of Conscience, and a lover of
Truth as such, and whose Inquisitiveness in Religion, is not at its Journeys
end in Rome, and whom you have found inclined to return to the Church of
England, if the Tenent I showed you, discussed by Gundissalvus, and asserted in
the gloss and Text of the Canon Law, can be charged on the Church of Rome, as
approved by it) I know not; but shall here send you a Transcript of the same,
and shall first observe, that the seeds materiae for this Tenet, that a whole
City may be burned with fire, if the Major part thereof were Heretics, is in
the Body of the Canon Law, namely in the Text of the Decrets it self, Can. si
audieris 23 Cause. Q. 5.

And if any one will consult the Body of the Canon Law, with the gloss and Case
of the Edition at Turin, in the year 1620, he will find it there as follows.

SI AVDIERIS. CASVS.

Cyprianus fuit interrogatus an mali post adventum Domini in hunc mundum, morte
sint puniendi; Et certe respondet quod sic: quia si ante adventum Christi hoc
fuit; ut probabitur autoritate Deuteronomij and exemplo Matathiae: Multo
fortius post adventum Christi hoc fieri debet: Autoritas durat a principio
usque. ibi cujus praecepti. Postea sunt verba Cypriani. SI AUDIERIS. Haec verba
sumpta sunt de Deuterono usque ad illum locum hujus praecepti.

Necabis] Tu quicunque sis: Et sic quandoque ille qui non est judex potest
punire malesicos, etc.

OMNES QUI. si Ergo aliqui haeretici sunt in una civitate tota civitas possit
exuri and sic ecclesia vel civitas punitur pro delicto personarum ut 25. q. 2.
ita nos, etc.

NVNC] id est in futurum, etc.

CVIVS] haec suntverba Cypriani.

MATATHIAS] ut legitur in libro Machabeorum.

Item Cyprianus lib. de exhortatione Martyrij cap 5.

Principes saeculi pessimis parcere non debent. 34.

Si audieris in una ex civitatibus quas dominus deus tuus dabit tibi inhabitare
illic, dicentes, eamus and serviamus dijs alijs quos non novisti, interficiens
necabis omnes qui sunt in civitate caede gladij: Et incendes civitatem igni,
and erit sine habitaculo in aeternum; non reaedificabitur etiam nunc, ut
avertatur dominus ab indignatione irae suae; and dabit misericordiam tibi and
miseribitur tui and multiplicabit te, si exaudieris v^cem dom dei tui and
observaveris praecepta ejus. Cujus praecepti and rigoris memor Matathias
inte^fecit eum qui ad aram sacrificaturus accesserat. Quod si ante adventum
Christi circa deum colendum and idola spernenda haec praecepta servata sunt;
quanto magis post adventum Christi servanda sunt, quando ille veniens non
tantum verbis nos hortatus est, sed and factis.

To this place in the Canon Law, Gundissalrus refers in his Discourse against
Heretical Pravity; and which I showed you in my Study among the Tractatus
Criminales, published by Franciscus Maria Passerus at Venice, in the year 1556.
and where in p. 158. he has discussed the Tenet at large, and ex professo.
It Is among those Criminal Tractates called Tractatus contra haereticam
pravitatem per Gundissalrum de villa diego Sacri Palatij Apostolici Auditorem.
char. 158. and where it follows thus, viz.

Summarium.
1. Civitas in qua aliqui insunt Haeretici an tota possit igne exuri, aut alias
destrui latissime usque ad questionis finem. 2. Civitas quando dicatur Haeresim
committere ut universe destrui possit. 3. Vniversitate punita de Haeresi, an
singuli quoque puniti videantur ita ut amplius puniri non possint.
Question 24.
Vigesimo quarto quae^o, an si aliqui Haeretici sunt in una civitate, possit
tota civitas exuri sive alias destrui, and glo. in c. Si audieris. 23. q. 5.
arguit, quod sic per illum tex. and videntur ibi velle Joan. and Laur. quod
quilibet possit hoc facere; sed in Contrarium inducitur ea q. si non licet.
ver. quasdam. and versi. his igitur and q. 4. ver non ergo and q. ^ult.
quodcunque and quod no. 33. q 1. inter haec. in 1. glo. Archi. in. c.
praesidentes de haere. l. 6. dicit quod Ecclesia concedit generalem
authoritatem exterminandi haereticos 23. q. v. si vos, etc. Si audieris. Quae
non tantum diriguntur principibus. Et facit eadem causa q. legi. and de
haeretici communicamus. Catholici. ubi etiam ad eos exterminandos, conceditur
cruce signat. indulgentia ultra-marina; tamen occifio and spoliatio talium,
tutum est quod fiat ex edicto principis aut Ecclesiae c. cum. secundum leges
eo. titu. lib. 6. ne ex cupiditate vel ultione potius quam ex justitia vel
obedientia pugnare videantur. 23. q. 1. quid culpatur and q. 11. c. 1. and q.
111. Sex differentiae. quod etiam tenuit in summa. eo. titu. versic: Sed
nunquid, and Goffre. in summa. eo. titu.. sed nunquid Catholici and Hostien. in
summa. eo. titu. qualiter evitentur. verse. sed nunquid Catholici. idem sequitur
Joan. And in novel. in d. c. praesidentes. and domi. qui subjungit oportere
necessario praecedere judicis declarationem super crimine haeresis ad hoc ut
ista executio fieret, per d. c. cum secundum leges.

Sed ista videntur mihi cum supportatione nimis crude and indigeste dicta, and
in tanta questione ubi de tantorum periculo agitur, and praesertim ubi
innocents pro nocentibus puniiuntur, gravius and profundius scribendum, and
calamus magis temperandus fuisset; quapropter ego dicerem quod etiam si aliqui
de civitate sint Haeretici, dummodo civitas ipsa haeresim non incurrerit, adeo
quod delictum istud universitati civitatis ascribi possit, non propterea
civitas possit uxuri aut alias destrui. Nullo enim jure hoc reperitur cautum,
omnia jura clamant in contrarium, scilicet quod peccata suos debent tenere
Authors. C. de pae. sancimus. de his quae fiunt a Majori part. c. quaesivit.

Ad jura quae in contrarium inducuntur stat responsio ad C. si audieris. per
quod glo. praefata se fundat, dici potest multipliciter. Primo quod illud erat
praeceptum legis veteris, and judiciale, ut patet clare, nam habetur
originaliter Deutero. 13. and talia in lege nova cessaverunt, nisi de novo
fuissent instituta, nec legitur nova institutio. Nam Cyprianus cui inscribitur
ille tex. in decretis non habuit facultatem jura generalia concedenai, cum non
fuerit To. Ponti. eo. Maxim ubi de incendio, and morte inferendis disponitur,
ut patet in illo tex. quae paenae ab ecclesia non imponantur ne cleri. vel
mona. sententiam sanguinis, and eo. ti. eo. lib. and de exces. praelatorum ex
literis; vel aliter dicas quod ille tex. non loquitur de haere. sed de
idolatris, and ista crimina sunt diversa, ut ex superioribus patet. Aliter
etiam potest dici quod loquitur, quando omnes de civitate inficerentur illo
crimine and si non omnes; illud tamen tempore illo licite fiebat, stante
praecepto Dei qui Dominus est vitae and mortis, pro quo bonus tex. in d. c. si
non licet, and in c. gaudemus de divor. ubi de homicidio Sansonis fit mentio.

Ad alia vero jura quae inducit Archidia. videlicet c. legi, respondetur quod
Authoritate dei illa facta fuerunt qui interius Authoritatem occidendi
inspirabat, ut in d. c. si non licet. ad c. vos. dicendum est quod loquitur
quum Authoritate judicis illa fiunt, ut patet in fine ejusdem tex. ubi dicit
diligentissimi rectores, etc. ad c. excommunicamus. Catholici. dicas quod
intelligitur quum in casu licito bellum contra eos moveretur and accedente
Authoritate superioris qui hanc concedere posset; alias autem sequeretur
absurdum, quod pro actu illicito, and reprobato Papa concederet indulgentias
quae tantum pro opere Charitatis sunt indulgendae. juxta no. per Doctores c.
quoth; autem de paenis, remissionibus, Pro quo est tex. eo. tit. cum ex eodem
tenet S. Tho. 4. sententiarum distin. 20. Stabit in hoc conclusio quod si
civitas labatur in haeresim, tunc demum possit exuri, and destrui and non
aliter. Hanc sententiam firmat Bar. in l. aut facta. Nonunquam. F. F. de paen.
in crimine haeresis, and in crimine laesae Majestatis, and alias ubicunque
filius pnnitur propter delictum patris, and sic fuit factum de Carthagine, quae
propter Rebellionem passa est aratrum, ut ff. quibus med. usufruct. amit. l. si
ususfructus. Dicit etiam se vidisse sententiam definitivam imperatoris Henrici
quam dedit contra civitatem Brixiae quae fuit sibi Rebellis in qua dicebat
illam civitatem esse subijciendam aratro, quam paenam postea ex Misericordia
relaxavit, quae sententia definitiva est lex ut l. ij ff. de lege and in l. fi.
C. eo and de re judica. c. in causis, et ita fecit Papa Bonifacius qui propter
delicta quorundam Templariorum totam ordinem eorum destruxit, quia erant
Heretici.

Hanc autem sententiam nullus inferior a principe far poterit, nec sine
principis authoritate hoc fieri potest secundum quod late prosequitur Bart. in
extravagan. quoniam. et idem sensit uno verbo. Sal. in l. 1. c. de sed in fine.

Sed quum dicemus civitatem committere haeresim, ut modo praemisso puniatur?
dicas quod si omnes essent haeretici, vel major pars, ut in l. quod major. ff.
admunicipa. et hoc tenet Bar. in d. extravagant. quum in simili materia, et
requiritur quod conveniant, ^ut universitas ad hoc faciendum, utpote
communicato consilio, alias dicerentur singuli facere, et non universitas juxta
nota per glo. l. sed si ex dolo.. 1. ff. de dolo. et l. aliud. refertur. ff. de
Reg. jur. neque per hoc credas quod paena corporali puniantur innocents pro
nocentibus quod manifest patet per ea quo Bar. no. in d. Nonunquam. et Saly.
in d. l. 1. C. de sediti.

Sed Iuxta praedicta quaero an punita universitate de Haeresi modo praemisso
censeantur singulares puniti ad hoc, ut amplius puniri nequeant. Ad hoc
respondeo quod singulares non eo minus puniri poterunt si culpabiles in hoc
delicto reperiantur, quia quoth debet universitas non debent singuli, et e contra.
ff. quod cujusque univer. l. sicut. 1. ff. de Reg. jur. aliud refert. facit.
ff. quod vi aut clam. l. semper si in Sedulchro. Ad hanc decisionem, faciunt
no. per Joan. Mo. et Io. And. in c. faelicis. de pen. li. 6. in fi. et per
Bart. in d. l. aut facta nonunquam.

Without troubling my self to make a formal Translation of this place, of
Gundissalvus; I shall for the benefit of Common Readers, set down the Substance
of it in English, omitting the References to most of the quotations out of
Lawyers, which to the unlearned in the Laws, might seem uncouth, and which the
Learned may Consult as they please in the Latin Transcript, viz. The Summary or
Contents.
1. Whether a whole City may be Burned with fire, or otherwise destroyed, in
which are some Heretics? This is discussed at large, to the end of the
question. 2. When a City may be said to be guilty of Heresy, so that it may be
wholly destroyed? 3. The Community being punished for Heresy, whether every
particular Person, may seem to be so punished, as that he may not be liable to
any further punishment?
Question the 24th.
In the 24 th. place, I enquire whether a whole City may be burned, or
otherwise destroyed, in which are some Heretics? And the gloss on the Canon,
Si audieris, argues, that it is so by the Text. And Johannes and Laurentius,
seem to be of opinion that any Person whatsoever, may do it. But other
Authorities are brought for the contrary, etc. And Archidiaconus says, that
the Church does grant the general power of Exterminating Heretics. And by the
Authorities Cited, the power for so doing, is not only directed to Princes: And
likewise, the Indulgence is granted to the Cruce signati, for the exterminating
Heretics: But as to the killing and despoiling of such, it is safe, that it be
done by the Edict of the Prince, or the Church: Lest any should seem to fight
rather out of Lust or Revenge, than out of Justice or Obedience, the which
Raynerius does also assert, and likewise Goffredus and Hostiensis. Johannes
Andreas, goes in the same Track, who subjoyns, that the Declaration of a Judge
on the Crime of Heresy, ought necessarily to precede to the effect, that
execution be so done. But those things seem to me (under favor) to be too
crudely and indigestly spoken: And in so great a question, where the danger of
so many is treated of, and especially, where the innocent are punished for the
guilty, the Subject is to be Writ of more gravely, and more profoundly; and
ones pen was to have been more tempered. Wherefore I would say, that though
some of a City are Heretics, yet while the City it self has not incurred the
guilt of Heresy, and so that that Crime cannot be ascribed to the Body of the
City, it may not therefore be burned, or otherwise destroyed; For this is not
found ordered by any Law. Nay, the Laws are evident to the contrary; Namely,
that Sins ought only to reach to their Authors.

To the Laws that are brought to the contrary, the Answer is clear, and to the
Canon, Si audieris, by which the gloss does found it self, much may be said: As
first, that that was a Precept of the Old Judicial Law, as appears clearly. For
it is found in the 13 th. of Deuteronomy And commands of that kind ceased to
oblige under the new Law, unless the institution thereof, had been renewed. Nor
do we read of any such new Institution: For Cyprian, to whom that Text in the
Decrets is ascribed, had not the power of issuing out the General Laws (for as
much, as he was not Bishop of Rome) nor especially in a Case, wherein order is
given concerning Burning, and Death; as appears in the Text, etc.

Or otherwise you may say, that, that Text does not speak of Heretics, but of
Idolaters; and those Crimes are different, as appears out of what has been
before said.

And again, otherwise it may be said, that it speaks so, when all Persons of a
City were infected with that Crime. And if they were not all infected, yet that
was lawful at that time, while there was a Command of God for it, who is the
Lord of Life and Death; and for which, there is a good Text, where mention is
made of Sampson's Homicide. But to the other Laws which Archidiaconus urges,
it is answered, that those things were done by Gods Authority, who did inwardly
inspire the Authority of killing, etc. and it is to be said, that he speaks,
when these things were done by the Authority of the Judge, as appears in the
end of the Text, etc.

And as to somewhat else Cited, you may say, that it is understood, when in a
lawful Case, War was waged against them; and there was added also to that the
Authority of a Superior, who could grant it: Otherwise this Absurdity would
follow; that for an Act unlawful, and disallowed, the Pope might grant
Indulgences; which are only to be granted for a work of Charity: According to
what is named by the Doctors, etc. and for which the Text makes, for as much as
Saint Thomas holds out of the same 4. Sententiarum. distinc. 20.

The Result of the whole, will rest here, that if a City does fall into
Heresy, then it may be burned and destroyed, and not otherwise.

Bartolus Confirms this Resolution in the Case of Heresy, and of Treason, and
in all other Cases where the Son is punished for the offense of the Father. And
thus it was done in the Case of Carthage, which for its Rebellion, was ploughed
up, as appears in the Pandects. He says likewise, that he saw the Definitive
Sentence of Henry the Emperor, which he gave against the City of Brixia, that
Rebelled against him, wherein he mentioned, that the City was to be ploughed
up: The which punishment he afterward out of his Mercy released, etc. And thus
Boniface did, who by reason of the faults of some of the Templars, destroyed
their whole order, because they were Heretics.

But none inferior to a Prince, can give this Sentence, nor can it be done,
without the Authority of a Prince, according to what Bartolus does at large
pursue. And Salycet was of the same Opinion.

But when shall we say, that a City commits Heresy, so that it may be punished
in the manner aforesaid?

I Answer, then, if they were all Heretics, or the Major part: And it is
requisite that they should meet together as a Community to commit this Crime;
Namely, by joint Councels. Otherwise single Persons would be said to do it and
not the Community, etc. Nor would I have you believe by this, that the Innocent
are punished with Corporal Punishment for the guilty, which appears manifestly
from what is said by Bartolus, etc.

But accrding to the premises, the question is, Whether the Community being
punished for Heresy, every single Person be deemed to be punished so, as that
he may be judged to be severally punished for it; and so ought not to be
punished further?

To this I Answer, that Persons singly, may nevertheless be punished, if they
are found guilty of this Crime; because what the Community does owe, Persons do
not singly, and so on the contrary, etc. For this Decision, those things do
serve, that are noted by Ioannes and the Moderns, and by Bartolus.



If any one would know what figure Gundissalvus makes in the account of the
Learned Papal World, you may tell him, that I suppose that Tractate of his
against Heretical pravity, was Printed long before it was bound up with the
Tractatus Criminales, before mentioned: For that by one whom I Employed to
Consult the TRACTATES in 17 Volums, in the Edition of Lions, in the Year 1544.
I am informed, that, that Work of Gundissalvus, is there in the Second Volume,
fol. 267. (the which alone, would show him to be a considerable Author) and in
the course of my Cursory View of some Civil Law Books writ of matters of State,
I have read him respectfully cited by Magerus de Advocatia Armata, cap. 8. and
p. 205. and by Klockius in his Book De Contributionibus. And as an Indication
of his not being valued as a singular or Heterodox Author by Passerus, who
published the Criminal Tractates aforesaid, you may find somewhat of the Famous
Boerius his Tractatus de Seditiosis, published in the same Volume, viz. char.
57. n 18. asserted to the same purpose.

But none need wonder at Gundissalvus, giving his opinion as he did, when he
tells us, that Johannes Andreas, and Laurentius, two Famous Canonists, seemed
to be of opinion, that an Heretical City, might be destroyed by any one; and
without the Judgment of the Church, particularly ordering it.

Yet here in this place, I have Cited out of Gundissalvus, it is worthy of
observation, that some passages may render him appearing no Slave to Implicit
Faith, or one as I may say that roweth in the Popes Galleys. His Judging of the
Case, as he did with so much Horror, was very Commendable in him; as was
likewise his reproof of the Cannonists by him Cited; and his saying that ones
pen was to have been more tempered, and his differing from the measures of the
Text and Gloss about the Canon Si audieris, and the Interpretation of the 13
th. of Deuteronomy and answering the objection thence taken, and from the
Authority of Cyprian, seems to have in it something of the Noble Berean. But
after all he does in reality show himself an arrant Canonist, and with other
Canonists by him cited, he founds the Papal power of destroying Heretical
Cities, on the Popes being a kind of Prince or fifth Monarch over the World,
and on Heresy being a rebellion against him: And that where the Major part of
a City are Heretics, the most moderate of the Canonists think the destruction
of it is lawful, if there be the Judgment of the Church, that is to say, of the
Pope in the case, as any could think the Destroying of a City, where the
Majority were Rebels when decreed by a Sovereign Prince.

No doubt but to all Loyal Roman Catholics who are willing on all occasions to
testify their Loyalty by the opposing that Irreligionary part of Popery (as you
call it) which refers to the Usurpations of the Papaute, and to its pretended
Universal Monarchy, the Publishing of this or any Tenet that shows the
Absurdity of the Popes claiming such a Power cannot be unwelcom. And as you
have well urged it that the Canon Law was never in Gross received in Eng. in
the time of our Roman Catholic Ancestors, so it would be a vain expense of
time to show that this particular Canon, Si Audieris, never was, and that
Malicious and Voluntary Burning of Houses being an Hostile Action, is presumed
in our Law to be done for Revenge, and as by an Enemy, to Consume the same by
Fire, in time of Peace. Any such Foraign power would by our Roman Catholic
ancestors have been Presently Adjudged to come under the Notion of what I
before referred to, as Ignis Alienus, and of outraging our Country Modo
guerrino; and the very claim thereof in the Canon Law cannot but make all
considerate and Loyal Roman Catholics startle at the thought of the
Extravagance of the former papal Usurpations in the world abroad.

But you have from p. 259. to 265. with so much Candor and Fairness,
discoursed of this Savage Tenet in the Canon Law, that you have saved any one
else much of his Labor in doing it; and I could wish, that all Writers of
Religionary Controversy, would proceed by such your Measures of thinking
themselves Morally obliged, to say all that the matter will fairly bear on both
sides. And I accord with you, in Judging any writer to be a kind of Falsarius,
who does not so: And am glad that you having so Justly branded that poor
partial way of Writing, wherein too many Protestant, as well as Popish Authors,
have appeared so defective, you have afforded the Age so fair a Specimen of
Writing with Morality about a Tenet very unmoral, and in so Cool and
Dispassionate a manner of a Tenet so fiery.

I am not now to tell you, what you have so long known of me, viz. That I never
was a Lover of the Canon Law: And that though I always had a great Honor for
the Principles of Nature and Reason, appearing in the Civil Law, yet as I never
thought better of the Canon Law, than Albericus Gentilis did in his 9 th.
Chapter, and Second Book, De Nuptijs, where he says, sed hoc jus brutum and
barbarum sane est, natum in tenebris Saeculorum Spississimis, productum a
Monacho, Tenebrione, etc. So my finding particularly Cyprian so miserably
abused in the Canon of Si audieris, has made me the more to Nauseate it. For
it is evident, that the place in Cyprian, does not prove what Gratian
proposes, viz. That a whole City now under the Gospel, may be burned for a few
Heretics inhabiting in it.

It Is plain, that Cyprian's design there is to encourage all good Christians,
rather to suffer Martyrdom, than to commit Idolatry, by Worshipping other Gods;
that being the Title and Subject of the Epistle, De exhortatione Martyrij; and
in order to this, he shows Gods great Hatred, and severe punishing of Idolatry,
Namely, from Deuteronomy. 1^.6. (the which making nothing for that Monks purpose, he
wisely leaves it out of his Canon) and from v. 12 th. and 13 th. of that
Chapter, viz. If thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities, which the Lord thy
God has given thee to dwell there, certain Men, the Children of Belial, are
gone from among you, and have withdrawn the Inhabitants of their City, saying,
let us go and serve other Gods, etc. It Is therefore plain, that this severe
Law* concerned only the Cities of Israel; the words in that Text being One of
THY Cities, which the Lord thy God has Given THEE. And as the Law under that
penalty, was given only to the Jews in Canaan, so it obliged them only, and not
any other People of any other Country. Moreover as to the Words in the Text,
viz. withdraw the Inhabitants of their City, and which Gratian thought fit to
leave out, they may be said to be Indefinite, and may mean all the Inhabitants:
And then it was evidently Just, to kill them all, according to the words in
Cyprian, Etiam si universa Civitas consenserit ad idololatriam. But if the
Major part be not indeed meant then, if you will consult Ainsworths excellent
Commentary, on Deuteronomy. 13. v. 12, 13. you will find, that the Doctors among the
Jews, say, that if a Major part of the City be drawn to Idolatry, then that
Major part shall be slain, and the City be burned. But if the Minor part only
be drawn to Idolatry, then they say, that Minor part shall be Slain; but the
City shall not be burnt. This the Jewish Doctors, who understood that Text,
much better than Gratian or John Semeca his Glossator, took to be the meaning
of that Text, and so likewise many Learned Christians did.

Cyprian then having shown how great a Sin Idolatry was; and how hateful it was
to God, he adds, Si ante Adventum Christi Circa Deum Colendum and Idola
Spernenda haec precepta servata sunt, quanto magis post adventum Christi
servanda sunt? But we know, Mosaical precepts* are either De officijs, or de
poenis. And as to the former, namely, Moral Offices, or Duty to God, and our
Neighbor; Of precepts for these Cyprian says, that if they were observed
before Christ, then quanto magis post adventum Christi, etc. who had in his
Sermon on the Mount, fully explained, and given us the true meaning of them.
And the clearer understanding of any Laws, does certainly induce a stronger
Obligation from them: And hence it is, that Cyprian thinks truly that
Christians are more strictly obliged to observe the Moral Law, than the Jews
were. But the Laws de paenis and supplicijs, Cyprian does not at all mention,
nor in that place intend or mean. For Christians are not bound to inflict the
same punishments on the Transgressors of the Law, to which the Jews by the
Mosaical Law were bound. For to the Jews Adultery, or breach of the Sabbath,
were Capital Crimes: But not so among the Christians. Theft was not Capital by
Moses his Law: Yet by the Law of England it is. By the Jews Law, it was an Eye
for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth; but our Blessed Lord declares against that
severity, as not to be used amongst Christians. And yet our Monarchus Tenebrio,
would have Cyprian understood de poenis; and against Truth and the Sense of
Cyprian concludes, that because Idolatry was by the Jews Law punished with
Death, therefore it should be so punished, since Christ, under the Gospel.

Gratian ends his Quotation out of Cyprian, with these words, viz. Si ante
adventum Christi haec praecepta servata sunt quanto magis post adventum
servanda sunt, quando ille veniens non verbis tantum nos hortatus est, sed and
factis? By which words he would prove, that our Lord did both by Words and
Deeds, exhort us to Kill Heretics: Whereas there is not one word in Cyprian,
or the Texts of Scripture he Cites, which any way concerns Heretics or
Heresy; but only Idolaters and Idolatry, which are things of a far different
Nature. And had Gratian considered what immediately follows there in Cyprian
(and which he there unluckily leaves out) he might have clearly seen that
Cyprian neither said nor meant, that the Meek and the Holy Jesus, did, by Deeds
or Words, Exhort Men to kill Heretics. But that which Cyprian truly says, our
Blessed Savior did by Deeds and Words Exhort us to, was that Christians should
patiently suffer, and by no means renounce the Gospel by serving Idols, and by
Idolatry. For as to those words with which Gratian ends his Canon, viz*
Christus veniens non verbis tantum nos hortatus est, sed factis, there should
have been only a Comma after factis, though Gratian makes a full point, as if
it concluded the Sentence. It immediately follows in Cyprian thus, viz. Non
verbis tantum nos hortatus sit, sed and factis, post omnes Injurias and
contumelias passus and Crucifixus, ut nos pati and mori exemplo suo doceret, ut
nulla sit homini excusatio pro se (pro Christo) non patienti, Cum ille passus
sit pro nobis, etc. In short, that which Cyprian says, Christ taught us with
Words and Deeds was not, that we should Kill Heretics, as Gratian would have
it; but that we should willingly suffer Death for the Gospel, rather than be
Idolaters.

We know that in the case of the Samaritans (who were both Heretics and
Idolaters) when James and John would have had fire from Heaven, to Consume
them, our Blessed Savior Rebuked them, and said, that the Son of Man was not
come to destroy Men's Lives; but to save them.

Because I love to make no breach among Christians wider, and because in p.
260. you have, in general, mentioned Gratian's Misciting of Cyprian, and in p.
261. showed that Gratian's founding a Tenet on Cyprian, or any places out of
other Authors, gives it only the weight that Cyprian and they had in their
proper Works, etc. I have here thought it worth while, to show that Papists are
under no Moral Obligation by this Canon, Si audieris, and do believe, that the
more Sagacious Persons of the Church of Rome, do (as is said in Pere verons
Book, you in the page last cited refer to) make Gratian's Decrees, and the
gloss claim nothing of Faith, and so even in the country's of the Pope, where
the Canon Law is in force, this part of the Decrees, so wilfully mistaken by
Gratian out of Cyprian, can bind none in Conscience.

And therefore as to what you mention of the Roman Catholic Gentleman's
observing, that the Council of Trent had gone far in the Confirmation of the
Canon Law, etc. I account you have said enough to Answer that Objection: For
though the Council of Trent has it in the 25 th. Session C. 20. De
Reformatione p 623, 624. of the Edition at Antwerp, in the year 1033 that
Praecipit sancta synodus sacros canones, and concilia generalia omnia, necnon
alias Apostolicas sanctiones in favorem Ecclesiasticarum personarum, libertatis
Ecclesiasticae, and contra ejus violatores editas quae omnia praesenti decreto
innovat, exact ab omnibus observari debere; though other expressions in that
Council, may seem to confirm some parts of the Canon Law, they cannot (I think)
Rationally be extended to confirm any thing therein that was void, ab initio,
and so not obligatory, and as this Canon, Si audieris, appears not to be, by
Gratians falsification as to Cyprian.

But how far a Tenet or Principle of this Nature, branded by no Index
expurgatorius, is yet chargeable on the Papacy as approved by it, I leave to
consideration, and do think it great pity, that when a Pope could find leisure
by a Bull, that I find King James the I. mentions in his Works, as beginning
with, Exurge Deus, to Damn among other sayings, that of Luther, Nova vita est
optima paenitentia; he did not find time to censure this thing in his Canon Law.

I thank God that I am Embarked in a Church, whose Articles and Canons contain
nothing inserted in them by any Falsarius; and by which nothing is approved, or
imposed on me to own, contrary to the Liberty purchased for me by my Redeemer.
You have in p. 71. cited a late Author of the Communion of this Church, for
saying that Image Worship, invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Purgatory
are, and will be Learnedly and Voluminously defended on each side, to the
Worlds End; and perhaps in the World abroad, it will be so. But I agree with
you, in believing that the Present State of England does, and probable future
one of it will here render Voluminous Writings of all Theological Controversies
out of Fashion.

Your p. 170. contains in it one Theological consideration, of more value in my
Opinion, than many Tomes of Controversy, viz. that Papists as well as others of
Mankind, have a right and title to the free and undisturbed Worshipping of God,
and the confession of the Principles of Religion, purchased for them, by the
Blood of Christ: And the very consideration of the Duty incumbent on all
Christians, to stand fast in this Liberty, so dearly purchased for them, would,
if I were in the External Communion of the Roman Catholic Church, prevail with
me to leave it, though there were perhaps, no other Argument in the case.

I have here our great Dr. Iackson on my side, in thus Judging in his Treatise
of the Church, 14th. Chapter, where having given two Reasons as just and
necessary for which Men may, and ought to separate themselves from any visible
Church, and named this as the first* Namely, when they are urged and
constrained to profess or believe some points of Doctrine, or to adventure upon
some practices, which are contrary to the Rule of Faith, or Love of God, he
mentions this as the Second, viz. In case they are utterly deprived of Freedom
of Conscience, in professing what they inwardly believe, etc. for which he
quotes, 1 Cor. 7.23. ye are bought with a price, be not ye Servants of Men.

Although ( says he) we were persuaded that we could communicate with such a
Church, without evident danger of Damnation, yet in as much as we cannot
Communicate with it, upon any better Terms than Legal Servants or Bondslaves do
with their Masters, we are bound in Conscience and Religious Discretion, when
lawful occasions and opportunities are offered, to use our liberty, and to seek
our Freedom, rather than to live in Bondage*

I am far from desiring to entrench on this liberty for Papists, in matters or
Tenets properly denominable by the Term of Religionary ones (according to the
expression by you frequently used) and do suppose, though there were no such
thing in the World, as a Pope or Patriarch, that the Religionary Tenets of
Transubstantiation and Purgatory, etc. may continue to be believed by many; and
if any one shall contrary to the Sense of the Government, and of Acts of
Parliament in Henry 8 ths time, believe, as the Representer does, that the
Bishop of Rome has here in Spirituals* more power by the Word of God, than
other Foraign Bishops; I shall not endeavor by any severity, to impose on him
the contrary Belief: But yet shall still by virtue of that Sacred Word, think
my self bound, and that particular passage in it cited by Dr. Iackson, not to
be a Servant of Men, as to any Doctrinal Impositions; and to forbear external
Communion with any Church, that would impose upon my Belief.

I know of none of the Church of England, who has avowed the practice of more
Indulgence to Papists in the Confession of their Religionary Principles, than I
have done: And I thank God, that my practice in this kind, has not been by
Fits or Starts, or Turns of Times or Humors; but that my Life has in this
Point of doing Just and Charitable Offices, to all Conscientious and Loyal
Papists been as (I may say) a Thread even spun upon every Wheel of Providence.
Your self can tell of the Signal good Offices I did to many Papists, and to
others, that a Clamorous Common Fame would have run down as Popishly Affected,
when you applied to me then in their behalf, during the Season of some of the
late Narratives; and I am able further to do you the Justice, as to remember
what you have long ago told me (and what I had reason to believe) that when the
figure you made in another of his Majesty's Realms, allowed you Virtute
officij, to have made many thousands of them groan under the Burden of the
Penal Laws, you held your self, in Conscience obliged not to do it, but on the
contrary, to rescue them from the least Hardship thereby.

But I shall here take occasion to tell you, that I have scarce in any thing
more showed my Friendliness to the Persons of some of my Roman Catholic
Friends, than by my Advice to them that they would apply to the Writers of
their Church, to forbear troubling our English World with new Models of
Reconciliation of Churches.

And indeed, Nature does now Loudly enough tell us, that the Real Peace of
Kingdoms ought not to be troubled by projects of a Chimerical one between
Churches. The best Men are Reconciled to one another, and the Reconciling of
all the worst Men in the World together, would make their Association more
troublesome to Mankind: And when we know that the Bigots of the Church of Rome
can stir no further from the Council of Trent, than our Soldiers in Africa,
could from their Garrison of Tangier before the Peace, there is no thinking of
their Traveling far to meet us. And if any one suppose that they would meet us
half way, yet notwithstanding he might likewise according to the Principles of
Nature suppose that the other Moiety of the Theological Controversies not
agreed in, would occasionally render Men's Spirits more Tempestuous toward each
other, and the public; as we usually see Storms to be most violent about the
Season of the Equinoctial. Moreover, they who give themselves the Office of
Reconcilers general, or intrude into the Station of the Public Mediators,
appearing thereby hot and unquiet in their own tempers, and rendering themselves
always liable to disquiet from abroad, by attacks from all parties, are of all
Men the most unlikely to be universal Peacemakers, or to gain any Blessing by
being such And as you have in your Discourse Studiously declined the use of the
little Names of Distinctions of three differing Parties in the State, so shall
I likewise do; but can easily give you occasion to guess which of them refers
to Men most Hated, and most Impolitick, by Minding you how the Systematical
Writers of Politics do often call neuters Middle Region Men, and such as being
Lodged in the Middle Rooms* are annoyed with the droppings from above, and
smoke from below.

You have expressed your self in your Preface and Discourse as so much agreeing
with me in this Subject, that I shall be but Just to you, in owning my Belief,
that your varying from some of the Measures of the Church of England in some
Points tended not to encourage others to undertake the Thankless Office of
being Match-Makers of Churches.

I know very well, what my Lord Primate Bramhall, in order to showing that the
Sons of the Church of England are not Slaves to its Articles, says, In his
Just Vindication of the Church of England; and how Mr. Chillingworth in his
Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, tells us, that by the Religion
of Protestants, he understands not the Doctrine of Luther or Calvin, or
Melanchton, nor the Articles of the Church of England, etc. But that wherein
they all agree, and which they all Subscribed, etc. as a perfect Rule of their
Faith and Actions, that is, the Bible, the Bible I say, the Bible only is the
True Religion of Protestants, etc.

And therefore what ever freedom you justly claim, by the Charter of the Bible,
to confess any Religionary Tenets however different from those I own, I am not
to envy you: But do know, that I am bound to pity you, or any else of Mankind,
that I shall think to err therein, though it should be in any Religionary Tenet
of Popery it self, or in the Power of the Bishop of Rome in Imposing Creeds or
Rules of Divine Worship on Men by Divine Right, as part of your Description of
Popery runs; and as to which I think, there may be occasion in your Review of
it, to avoid giving more Offense both to the Church of England, and that of
Rome thereby, than you perhaps intended

I have observed a late French Writer to avoid the Censure of describing the
Communion of the Church of Rome, or the Faith of that Church by a doubtful
Name, having used the Term la Catholicite. But as to your Description of
Popery, I may mind you, that according to your Quotation in p. 318. out of
Ames, of the Seven Venetian Divines, who, in that most Judicious Tractate of
theirs (as Ames calls it) of the Papal Interdict, affirmed, that a Christian
ought not to obey any Command of the Popes, unless he had first examined the
Command, as far as the Subject Matter required, whether it were convenient,
lawful and Obligatory, and that he Sins, who Implicitly obeys it; those Divines
though adhering to la Catholicite firmly enough, did thereby throw off the
Power of the Bishop of Rome, in imposing Creeds and Doctrines, and Rules of
Divine Worship on Men, as much as your Description does: And the Venetians
particularly opposing the Popes Interloping in their Jurisdiction, that other
thing referred to in your Description, is sufficiently known. But if by your
Description of Popery, you intend only to give us a Dictionary of your Sense of
the word generally, as used by you; and that you intend by the Extermination of
Popery, the Banishing only of those Principles of it, that are Irreligionary,
out of Men's Minds; namely, the Principles that tend to the Popes Spiritual and
Temporal Usurpations: I am not to quarrel with your expressing your own
meaning, But as I Judge several Roman Catholic Writers using the Term Popery,
to intend thereby, the Religion of the Church of Rome, as for example, the
Author of the Compendium, saying what I before referred to, that nothing but
Popery or at least its Principles, can make the Monarchy of England again
emerge or lasting (yet as to which a Divine Sentence was in the Mouth of the
King, when in his Gracious Expressions in Council concerning the Church of
England, he Judged otherwise, and said, I know the Principles of that Church,
are for Monarchy, etc.) and meaning by Popery, what was called la Catholicite,
I shall say, that according to the common acception of the Word Popery, were I
to explain what I usually mean by it, I would declare, that I mean not only the
Power of the Bishop of Rome; but of any General Councils in Imposing Creeds and
Doctrines, etc. on me: And I desiring to have all Religionary Errors banished
out of my understanding, and Loving my Neighbor, as my self, will desire they
may be so out of his, and particularly, if after he knows he is bought with a
price, he shall think it lawful for him to be a Servant of Men: And will not
only weigh the Commands and Decrees of any Bishop, But of any General Council
whatsoever: And if in Matters that Import my Salvation, I find them contrary to
the Bible, with a Salvo to the Reverence I owe to all Lawful General Councils,
I will desire them to excuse me from obeying them. Were it not for what you
have so well in p. 48. said, that the Protestant Religion not making the
intention of the Priest essential to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, is more
strongly assertive of the Real presence there, than the Popish Hypothesis, and
for that great and excellent Notion of yours, in your Discourse, viz. That
Papists and others being bought with a Price; that therefore they ought not to
be the Servants of Men, and my Judging that according to what I have mentioned
out of Dr, Iackson, that you would separate your self from any Church, that
imposed any thing Magisterially on Men's Faiths, I might think that perhaps, had
you lived in the Reign of Henry the 8 th, you would not have separated from the
Ecclesia Anglicana, as then by Law Established.

And therefore, when by your warm Expressions in p. 47. after you have said,
that the Protestation that the Protestant Religion requires, is such a
continual one, as is Reiterated upon every fresh Act and Attempt of the Papal
Religion, upon ours; (and whereby it would impose Creeds and Doctrines on us,
contrary to the Liberty of the Church of England, as now by Law Established)
You tell us, that We are to show no Mercy to these Principles of Popery, that
disquiet the World, and on the several occasions offered, protest against the
Damages, that both our King and Country, may have from the Rage of Popery, I
may tell you; that this PROTESTANCY amounts to no more than what we read of in
the Review of the Council of Trent, where in Book 1. and 12 th. Chapter, the
Author refers to the French King by his Ambassadors, causing a PROTESTATION to
be made against the Council of Trent, and as appeared by the Oration there made
by Mr. Arnold de Ferriers, the 22 d. of September, 1563. where among other
things* having mentioned many grievances, he says, that according to the
Commands of the most Christian King, they were constrained CONCILIO INTERCEDERE
VT NVNC INTERCEDEBANT, by the same Token, that that Book relates, how thereupon
a certain Prelate of the Council of Trent, not well understanding the Propriety
of the Word Intercedere, which the Tribunes were wont of Old to use, when they
made their Oppositions and Hindrances, asked his Neighbor, PRO QVO ORAT REX
CHRISTIANISSIMVS?

But of the French Kings Ambassadors protesting not only against Grievances in
the Council of Trent; but against it self, as a Grievance, and of some
occasions thereof, it will come in my way to speak hereafter.

Nor was there ever any Instrument or Paper Writ with more sharpness of Anger
and Scorn in the way of Defiance against Papismus or Popery, than H. the 8 ths
Protestation against the Council of Trent; and yet inclusive too of another
Protestation, I mean, of his Adherence to the Faith then called Catholic. That
long Protestation calls the Pope by the Name of Bishop of Rome, and says,
surely except God take away our right Wits, not only his Authority shall be
driven out for ever; but his NAME also shall be forgotten in England.

Nor did ever any Protestant Writer in Queen Elizabeth's, or King James the
First's time, or in our late Fermentation, so zealously press the Exterminating
of the Papal Power, as Henry the 8ths. Proclamation, about the Abolishing the
same, Triumph at its being here done: And where he says: We have by Good and
Wholesome Laws and Statutes made for this purpose, EX^IRPED, ABOLISHED* Separated
and Secluded out of this our Realm, the Abuses of the Bishop of Rome, his
Authority and Jurisdiction, of long time Usurped, etc. And the King there
Orders, all manner of Prayers, Oraisons, Rubricks, Canons of Mass-Books, and
all other Books in the Churches, wherein the Bishop of Rome is NAMED, or his
Presumptuous and proud Pomp and Authority preferred, utterly to be Abolished,
Eradicate, and Razed out, and his NAME and Memory, to be never more (except to
his Contumely and Reproach) remembered; but perpetually suppressed and obscured.

The Act of 28 of Henry the 8 th. before spoken of, called an Act for
Extinguishing the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, was here referred to, and
which Act, and other Acts of Parliament Establishing the Kings Supremacy, and
Excluding the Pope for ever, I mentioned as revived in Queen Elizabeth's time*
after their being repealed in Queen Mary's.

I need not observe to you, how this present French King has likewise lately
shown a very Commendable Zeal for the Exterminating the Usurpations of the
Papal Power in the Business of the Regalia, and that the Case of that Kings
Power is much altered for the better, since D' Ossat Writ to Villeroy from Rome
with so much Joy, for his having found out an expedient, as to the difference
between Henry the 4 th. and the Pope, about the granting to one a Church-
Dignity in France, Namely, to have the Words put into the Popes Bull thus, viz.
pro quo Christianissimus Rex scripsit, instead of quem Rex Christianissimus
nominavit.

I doubt not, but your Curiosity has led you to see a Copy of the Letter, writ
to the French King, on the 10 th. of July, 1680. by the Arch Bishops and
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastics of France appointed by the Clergy there,
about the last Breve of this Pope, upon the Subject of the Regale, in which
Letter they take notice, how THIS POPE required him not to subject any of their
Churches to the right of the Regale, and threatened him, that he would make use
of his Authority, if his Majesty did not Submit to the Paternal Remonstrances
he had often made, and repeated to him about that point; and they there pass,
as YOUR Protestants, so far, as to make a PROTESTATION, (as their word is)
against the Papal Usurpation designed by THIS POPE.

And moreover, YOUR sober party of the IESVITS, have in France adhered to the
King against the Pope in this Contest about the Regale.

But how severe the same Archbishops and Bishops in France, who made that
PROTESTATION, have since been in their ADDRESS against the True Protestants
there, who have been averse from the Religionary part of Popery (as you call
it) I suppose you cannot be ignorant. For undoubtedly, the Acts of the general
Assembly of the French Clergy, in the year 1685. Concerning Religion, together
with their Complaint against the Calumnies and Injuries, which the pretended
reformed have, and do every day publish in their Books and Sermons against the
Doctrine of the Church, presented to the King by the Clergy in a Body, July the
14 th. 1685. Cannot have escaped your view, the same having been since printed
in London, Translated into English, and, as I suppose, by some of the Roman
Catholic Religion, and will not trouble my self to guess for what intent of
the Publisher. I have looked it over, and leave it to our Divines, to consider
whether it deserves any Answer. I observed in it one Reference to Peter du
Moulins Nouveaute de Papisme, of the Edition of Sedan, about Protestants
rendering the Papists Idolatrous, as invocating Saints, which was an Instance of
the freedom allowed Protestants in that Realm, in Writing and Publishing Books
against the Religion of Popery, as by Law Established in France, a liberty that
the Publisher of that Translation has likewise sufficiently taken, in
publishing it here without License; and whereby he has brought our Famous
Whitaker and Downham, Rainolds and Ames* into the Range of Calumniators and
Publishers of Calumny's against the Church of Rome.

Though the Course of my Studies, has lain much more among Law Books than in
those of Polemical Divinity, yet the time I have spent on the latter, has
enabled me to observe one very Inauspicious passage under the first Article,
and the Column of the Calumny of the pretended Reformed about it; and where the
French Clergy accuse them of Calumny, for saying, That with the Heretics
mentioned by St. Irenaeus, Roman Catholics reject the Holy Scriptures, that
with the Montanists, they accuse it of Imperfection, that they Contemn it; and
afterward that the Roman Catholics call the Scripture a Dumb Rule, a Stumbling
Stone, a Nose of Wax, a Two edged Sword: And for that purpose, having begun
with accusing our Whitaker and Downham as Calumniators, and referred to their
works to prove it, they afterward quote the Thesaurus Disputationum
Theologicarum in Academia Sedanensi, etc. de summo controvers. Iudice. Tom. 1.
p. 26. Onerant (pontificij) Scripturam plaustro convitiorum, vocando eam
Regulam Mutam, lapidem scandali, nasum cereum, gladium ancipitem.

But without any undue Reflections on that Clergy, I think it might have been
more worthy of their great Learning and Hatred of CALVMNY, and their Tenderness
for the Honor of the Scripture, and their Obligation to handle Theological
Controversy with the fairest and softest hands they could, and in short, more
worthy of the Honor of the Church of Rome, if they had quoted Turrian. cont.
Sadel. p. 99. Canus. lib. 3. Loc. Theol. Cap. 2. Sect. ^ec vero. Ecchius in
ench. tit. de ecclesia. Hosius lib. 3. de Auth. Sac. Script. Sect. fingamus. p.
148. as I find them Cited by our Dr. Crackanthorp, under his De loc. arguendi
ab Authoritate, that you have referred to, and whom you have Celebrated for
being just in his quotations, and who there speaking of Papists slighting the
Scripture, thus quotes these Authors, viz. HI Scripturam vocant gladium
Delphicum, Nasum cereum ad sensum quemvis flexibilem, quae non nisi ecclesiae
(suae) authoritate authentica sit, de qua posse pio sensu dici volunt eam, si
destituatur ecclesiae authoritate, non plus valere quam Aesopi fabulas: And had
further Cited some index expurgatorius, for censuring the profaneness of those
expressions in Roman Catholic Authors, and one of whom was a Legate in the
Council of Trent, and another a Divine sent to that Council by the Pope.

There is another Eminent Father of our Church, whose Writings the French
Clergy might if they pleased, have quoted, for the same purpose they did those
of Whitaker and Downham, and that is Jewel in his Apology, who in p. 106, 107,
108. says, Itaque Sacrosanctas Scripturas quas Servator noster* Jesus Christus
non tantum in omni sermon usurpavit, sed etiam ad extremum sanguine suo
consignavit, quo populum ab illis, tanquam a re periculosa and noxia, minore
negotio abigant, solent literam frigidam, incertam, inutilem, mutam,
occidentem, mortuam appellare: Quod nobis quidem perinde videtur esse, ac si
eas omnino nullas esse dicerent. Sed addunt etiam simile quoddam non
aptissimum: Eas esse quodammodo nasum cereum, posse fingi flectique in omnes
modos, and omnium instituto inservire. An PONTIFEX ista a SUIS dici nescit? Aut
tales se habere patronos non intelligit? Audiat ergo quam sancte, quamque pie,
de hac re scribat Hosius, quidam polonus, (ut ipse de se testatur) Episcopus,
certe homo disertus, and non indoctus, and acerrimus ac fortissimus propugnator
ejus causae. Mirabit^^ opinor hominem pium de illis vocibus, quas sciret
pro^ectas ab ore Dei, vel tam impie sentire potuisse, vel tam contumeliose
scribere, ita praesertim, ut eam sententiam non fuam unius propriam videri
vellet, sed istorum communem omnium. Nos, inquit, ipsas scripturas, quarum tot
jam non diversas modo, sed etiam contrarias interpretationes afferri videmus,
facessere jubebimus, and Deum loquen^em potius audiemus, quam ut ad EGENA ista
ELEMENTA nos convertamus, and in illis Salutem nostram constituamus. Non
oportet legis and Scripturae peritum esse, sed a Deo doctum; vanus est labor
qui scripturis impenditur. Scriptura enum creatura est, and egonum quoddam
Elementum. Haec Hosius. Eodem prorsus spiritu atque animo, quo olim Montanus,
aut Marcio, quos diunt solitos esse dicere, cum sacras scripturas contemptive
repudiarent, se multo and plura, and Meliora scire, quam aut Christus unquam
scivisset, aut Apostoli. Quid ergo hic dicam? O columina religionis, O
praesides Ecclesiae Christianae! An haec ea reverentia vestra est quam
adhibetis verbo Dei? And afterward says, aut illud verbum, quo uno, ut Paulus
ait, reconciliamur Deo, quodque propheta David ait sanctum and castum esse, and
in omne tempus esse duraturum, egenum tantum, and mortuum elementum
appellabitis?

I have not time to Consult the Works of Whitaker and Downham as Cited by the
French Clergy: But do find that by Jewels Citing Pighius, and likewise Hosius
to make good his Charge, the French Clergy knew why, and wherefore, to spare
Iewell's Name in their Class of Calumniators* Jewel in his Margent Cites,
Pighius in Hierarchia, and in his Margent referring to Hosius, says very
heartily, Haec Hosius in lib. de expresso verbo dei sed astute, and sub
alterius persona: Quamvis and ipse alias eadem, in eodem etiam libro, disertis
verbis affirmet.

They afterward referred to our Learned Rainolds, as a Calumniator under their
6 th. Article, and Cite him for saying, that Roman Catholics do call the
Virgin Mary Queen of Heaven: And they might if they had pleased, have called to
mind, that in the proper Mass of her seven Sorrows, she is called Caeli Regina
and Matter Mundi, and that in an Office where the Te Deum is Travesty'd to her
(and which Office the Present Pope has worthily Suppressed) she is called the
Queen of Glory

But as to their charging our Ames under their Seventh Article with Calumny for
saying in his Bellarminus enervatus the Pope was the ILLE Antichristus, I shall
make no remark on their Charge; but let it pass.

There was however, another thing that I could not but take notice of in that
Book of the French Clergy* that made their accusing the Writers of the Reformed
Religion, as Calumniators and Falsifiers of the Doctrine of the Church, seem to
me very severe: Namely, that Clergy's joining the Decisions of the Council of
Trent, with the Profession of their Faith, and noting in one Column, that
profession and the Articles of the Council of Trent, and there making the
Doctrine of their Church a result from both, and opposing thereunto in another
Column the Calumny's in the Writings of the Reformed; and yet by the Date of
the Impressions of many of those Writings as mentioned at the end of that Book,
it appears, they were Printed long before the year 1615. and some before the
year 1579. in which latter year, Cressy in his Epistle Apologetical to the Late
Earl of Clarendon voucheth (but to no effect, as I shall by and by show) that
De Marca in his Volume De Concordia Sacerdotij and Imperij, tells us the
Definitions of Faith of the Council of Trent were admitted by a public Edict
concerning the same in France; and as to which former year, Cabassutius an
Oratorian in his Notitia council. declares out of the Records of the French
Clergy, that in their General Assembly at Paris, in the year 1615. the Canons
of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, were unanimously received by the whole
Clergy. And in p. 6. of the Translated Book of the French Clergy, a Book of
Beza's is cited, as printed in the year 1576, and one of Luther's, printed in
the year 1558. and one of Melanchton's in the year 1552, to show them
Calumniators of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, as the Received Doctrine
in the Gallican Church. And whether the many other Authors there cited as
printed before the year 1615, and yet too Cited as Calumniating for injuring
the Trent Doctrines, as being those of the Gallican Church, were not likewise
severely dealt with, is left to the impartial to Judge, and to whose view of
that Book of the French Clergy, it will be obvious that the profession of Faith
inserted at the end of the Council of Trent, is brought in, in the beginning of
that Clergy's Representing the Doctrine of the Church.

I love not to be Curious in aliena Republica, and much more, not to be so in
aliena Ecclesia: But since the Acts of that Clergy have been made to speak
English here; and so without License to Travel about our Country, I cannot but
occasionally make a further Remark on the Severity of that Clergy, in taking it
ill of the Protestants there supposing that the Catholic Church Disguiseth or
Condemns the most Essential verity's of Religion, and Representing her under
the Hideous idea of a Society professing an impious Doctrine, and denying the
chiefest Articles of Faith; since as I said, that it was but in the year 1615.
that the Canons of the Council of Trent, were pretended to be unanimously
received by the whole French Clergy at Paris, and that it was but a year
before* that the SAME Clergy (as I find it observed by the Author of The
Difference between the Church and Court of Rome, p. 31.) referred to the
Account of what was done upon the meeting of the three Estates, and when
Cardinal Perron, being the Clergy's Spokes Man, told the King, that The Matter
contested, was a point of Doctrine, etc. and that the Power of the Pope was
full, nay, most full and direct in Spirituals, and indirect in temporals, etc.
and that they would Excommunicate all those who were of a contrary Opinion to
the Proposition, which affirmed, the Pope could depose the King, etc. and for
which it is there Cited, how the Pope by a Breve in that year 1615. returned his
Solemn thanks to the Clergy of France, for what they had done against the
Articles of the 3d. Estate, wherein his Power was concerned. The use I make of
this, is only to show that the present French Clergy, who no doubt are
Conscious of the Error of their Predecessors in such a DOCTRINE, wherein
Religion and Loyalty are concerned, were obliged to show all the Tenderness and
Compassion to their Frail and Fallible Brethren, not Erring in a Point of that
Nature; but only in such as were Subject to Controversy.

I shall here observe that Cressy in the Book aforesaid reflects on the late
Earl of Clarendon, for saying in p. ^48. of his Vindication of Dr.
Stilling-fleet, that the Council of Trent is not yet received in France, and in
many other Catholic Country's; and says to the Earl, under favor Honored
Sir, you will, I suppose, grant that the late Famous and Learned Archbishop of
Paris, Peter de Marca, was better informed in the Ecclesiastical State of
France, than your self a Stranger, and quotes the Volume of De Marca before
mentioned, lib. 2. cap. 17. S. 6. for Writing expressly, that the Definitions of
Faith of the Council of Trent, were admitted by a public Edict made concerning
the same matter, in the year 1579; but that the Decrees which regard
discipline, are not received in France, because they are not ratified by the
Law of the Prince; although the Chief Heads which do not infringe the received
Customs* and Ancient Rights of the Gallican Church, are Comprehended in Regal
Constitutions several times published concerning that matter: Which thing how
grateful and acceptable it was to Pope Clement the 8 th, is testified by the
late King Henry the Great in his Rescript of the year 1606. And then he Quotes
Cabassutius his Notitia Council. in fine, for the purpose I have mentioned
before, and declaring out of the Records of the French Clergy, viz. that in
their General Assembly at Paris, in the year 1615. the Canons of the Doctrine
of the Council of Trent were unanimously received by the whole Clergy:

Father Cressy then farther adds by way of Triumph over the supposed mistake
in the said Earl, in p. 131. of that Epistle: And long before that, even from
the rising of the said Council, each particular Bishop had received it in their
Respective Diocesan Synods. Thus Sir you see a sufficient Reception of the
Faith delivered by the Council of Trent in France both by Authority Episcopal
and Regal.

I must not here forbear to take notice, that if it were true what Cressy
alleges, namely, that from the ri^ing of the said Council, the French Bishops
did receive it in their Respective Diocesan Synods, before any PVBLISHING of it
by the French King, and not staying for the same, they made such a kind of
Invasion of the Regal power in France, Namely, by introducing Religionary
Establishments without ITS Authority, as was never practiced by our English
Clergy, since the Reformation, nor perhaps before it; and such as the French
Clergy, cannot charge the pretended Reformed with.

For their Petition to the King does in p. 3. mention their ( i. e. the
pretended Reformed) having been by Edicts, permitted the Exercise of their
Religion, and the Freedom of Acting in their Synods, as they have done. But
this by the way.

If we consider the time of the very Professio fidei (that the Acts of the
French Clergy speak of) being first owned, and that in the year 1564, the time
likewise of the Confirmation of the Trent Council, and which was not made nor
Composed by the French Clergy, but by the Direction of the Trent-Fathers, and
Published by Pope Pius the 4 th. in the year last mentioned, must it not seem
hard, that Luthers Book printed, as was mentioned, in the year 1558, and that
of Melanchton's printed in the year 1562, and before the Date of their very
Profession of Faith, should be brought in as Calumniating it?

When any had a Triumph Decreed them in the Old Common Wealth of Rome, the
Writers of such Solemnities tell us, the Custom was, Vt a militibus and
abjectissimis quibuscunque triumphalem currum sequentibus, diversis
triumphantes Convicijs incesserentur, ne prospera illa fortuna plus justo
insolescerent. But the new Church of Rome, I mean the Tridentine one in France,
will bear no Raillery, nor Calumny of Words, nor yet any to ask them when* and
by whom their Triumph was Decreed them, and if their Doctrine was Crowned
Lawfully. And methinks, as if Nature and its God meant that all should
ludibrium debere, that would Triumph over Fallibility in what Church soever,
Our Honest Monk whom I lately mentioned, as Decreeing himself a Triumph over
that great observer of all things he referred to, I mean the late Earl of
Clarendon, had in his Triumphant Chariot the usual Compliment of that
Solemnity, viz. Hominem te esse cogita, there put on him by Nature.

And one might to him Cite D' Ossats Letters, and with some Allusion to his
Words to the Earl of Clarendon say, that he supposed that that Cardinal
understood the State of the Council of Trent, relating to France, as well as
any one, and much better than De Marca, or any one else who would make its
definitions of Faith admitted in France by an Edict in the year 1579.

Let any one for this purpose, who pleases, look on D' Ossats Letter from Rome,
the 19 th of November 1596 to Villeroy, where he advises, that the Council of
Trent might be Published in France, and mentions that the Clergy of France had
often desired a Publication of it, and says, that the Huguenots by reason of
the Edict of 77. would not be prejudiced by such publication; and on another
Letter to Villeroy from Rome, on the 19 th. of February 1597, where he again
presses for the publication of that Council, and says of it, La publication
sans l' observation, pourroit plus que l' observation sans la publication: and
that the Courts of Parliament and others, would have no cause of complaint
thereupon, and that a Salvo of two or three Lines, would be a remedy against
any complaints, and on his long Letter from Rome, the 28 th of March 1599. to
Henry the Fourth, where he minds him from the Pope, that the Council of Trent
might be Published, and says, Que la pluspart des Catholics, and ceux qui
plus peuvent Comme les Parlemens, and les Chapitres, and les principaux
Seigneurs, ne veulent point du dit Concile, pour n' avoir point a laisser les
benefices incompatibles, les confidences and autres abus quae la Reformation
portee par le dit Concile osteroit; and on his Letter from Rome the last of
March, 1599. to Villeroy, Animating him to promote the Publication of that
Council, and where he says, I never knew that that Council prejudiced any
Regal Right, as some say it has done; but though it might prejudice it in some
point, it might however be published, with adding thereto such a Salvo as we
could have, Namely, as to the Prerogative and Preeminences of the Crown, the
Authority of the King, the Liberties and Franchises of the Gallican Church, the
Indults of the Court of Parliament, and the Edicts of Pacification, and all
other things that we would have excepted, and on his long Letter to Henry the
Fourth from Rome, of June the 11 th. 1601. where mentioning his excusatory
replies to the Pope, about the not publishing that Council, he says, that not
only the Heretics, but a great part of the Catholics were against it; and
that his Holiness might remember how Henry the Fourth's Predecessors, could
never be brought to publish that Council.

I might here mention how Father Paul in his History of the Venetian Interdict,
p. 4. and 48. tells us, that the Trent Council was not received in France, in
the year 1616, and that Thuanus assures us, that the Trent Council was not
received in France in the year 1588, and therefore not in the year 1579.
according to De Marca. For that excellent and most Faithful Historian, Tome the
4 th. lib. 93. p. 361. of his History, tells us, that at that time (i. e. An.
1588.) Magno Caloris aestu contentio de Tridentina Synodo toties agitata denuo
renovata est, and how stoutly the promulgation of it was opposed.

And there is the Work of another French Historian, that may be here referred
to, viz. Historiarum Galliae ab excessu Hen. 4. Libri 18. Authore G. B.
Gramondo in Sacro Regis Consistorio Senatore and in Parliamento Tolosano
Praeside. Tolosae 1643. and where in p 57. the Author tells us, that in the
year 1615. (the year in which Cressy out of Cabassutius says, the Clergy
received the Trent Council) Proposita a Clero Concilij Tridentini promulgatio,
and molliendae invidiae adjecta est haec clausula sine praejudicio Coronae
Regiae, and Libertatum Gallicanae Ecclesiae, etc. and that Cardinal Peron spoke
Elegantly and Learnedly for it; but that after long debate about the Reception
of that Council (especially between the clergy and the 3 d. Estate) the issue
was, that the third Estate carried it against the Clergy; and the Reception and
Promulgation of the Trent Council, was absolutely rejected, and (p. 69.)
PRAEVALVITQVE CLERO POPVLVS.

Where it is evident. 1. That what Cabassutius in his Notitia Conciliorum, p.
720. names only a Convention of the Clergy in that year 1615. (as if that had
been all) was in Truth, Conventus trium Regni Ordinum, a Convention of the
three Estates, the greatest and Supreme Convention of France, and as Gramondus
says, p. 58. 2 dly. That whereas Cabassutius says, the Trent Council was
received in that General Convention of the Gallican Clergy; De Marca says, and
evidently proves, that no such Convention of the Gallican Clergy had any
Authority to Receive or Promulgate the Trent Council* or any other. Approve it
they might; but receive it they could not. But it was so far from being
recieved by the Convention of the French clergy, that it was absolutely
rejected by the Supreme Convention of the three Estates, and that after a long
and free Debate.

It is true and most Notorious, that not only in France, but in England
heretofore, many of the Papal Clergy were generally more addicted to advance
the Papal Power, than the Just Prerogatives of their own Kings, or the Rights
of the Laity: Because as by the Clergy's help and assistance the Papacy grew
greater, their Jurisdiction and Revenues were thereby increased. And thus
Anselme and Becket being zealous for the Pope, and Disobedient to their King,
found their account in the Pope's Assisting and Favoring them with his Power
while they lived, and Canonizing them, and making them (what their Loyalty
could not while they lived) Saints after their Death. But as our Magnanimous
Roman Catholic Princes did then bridle the Papal Power, so likewise those of
France have done; and even where Cabassutius says, that the Trent Council was
received in the year 1615. a Clero Gallicano sub Ludovico 13. he does not say
that the King received it, and thus De Marca tells us in his De Concordia
Sacerd. and Imperij. Lib. 2. Cap. 17. S. 7. p. 33. Decreta Conciliorum legis
vim in Gallia non habent, nisi recepta a Clero, and Regia Authoritate munita.
But De Marca had in that Book informed us, that in the time the Trent Council
Sat, when it evidently appeared by the Decrees of that Council, the Liberty of
the Gallican Church was in quamplurimis apitibus destroyed, the Ambassadors of
Henry the 2 d. and Charles the 9 th. left the Synod, being called home by their
Kings: And had complained in that Council, that the Liberty of the Gallican
Church, and Regia dignitas erant imminutae; and their recesse from and leaving
the Council was a good reason, as De Marca there proves, non admittendae Synodi
(i. e.) of their not receiving that Council.

Father Paul likewise in his History of that Council says, that the French
Bishops left it on the same account.

But moreover De Marca in the same place tells us, that the whole Clergy of
France did most frequently in their Synods Petition their Kings, that they
would Publish and Recieve the Trent Council (excepting those things which were
repugnant to the Liberty of the Gallican Church) and that they would never
grant their Petition, nor Publish or Recieve the Trent Council, though with
that Exception. His words are, Totius Cleri Gallicani Conventus Concilij
Tridentini promulgationem a Regibus nostris supplicibus libellis postulaverit,
ea lege ut ea Capita exciperent, quae libertatibus Ecclesiae adversarentur:
Quorum desiderijs Principes, toto hoc negotio saepe in Consilium
prudentissimorum relato, se accommodare non potuerunt. From whence it is
evident, if that great Archbishop says true, that the Kings of France would
never recieve any of the Trent Council, no not that part of it, which was not
against the Liberty of their Church, or their Kings Regalities.

But after all this, I must not forbear to observe how here it appears, that
the Learned De Marca does contradict himself. For in the same page and Column,
viz. p. 133. Col. 1. he says, that the Definitions of the Council of Trent
concerning Faith were admitted in France by a public Edict, Anno 1579. (which
must be in the 6th. year of Henry the 3 d. of France) and yet he tells us in
this same page and Column, that although the whole Clergy of France did most
frequently Petition their Kings to Promulgate and admit only that part of the
Trent Council, which was not against the Liberties of the Gallican Church, yet
their Kings would never admit it. If these words of his mean any thing, I think
they must mean the Definitions of Faith, which De Marca says were recieved by
the Edict 1579. But if their Kings would never admit any of it, though the
whole Clergy did Petition them to do it, then was it not admitted by any
Public Edict in the year 1579.

I remember the Learned Author of the Nouvelles de la Republique des letteres,
for the Month of March 1685. there mentioning the Histoire critique du Vieux
Testament par le P. Richard Simon Pretre de la Congregation de l' Oratoire of
the New Edition at Rotterdam that year, says that that New Edition contains a
Letter of a Protestant Doctor, who procured the 5 th. Edition of that Critical
History; and further quotes that Protestant Minister for giving an Answer to
the ordinary Distinction, viz. that the Council of Trent has been recieved in
France, in what concerns Faith, but not in matters of Discipline; and he speaks
of an Assembly of the Clergy held, which he says, Deliberated how to present a
Petition to the King, that that Council might be recieved as to what concerns
Faith only, and that whatever deliberation the Prelates made there upon, the
Court would not grant their Request. And if that Council (says he) has been
received, let them produce us the publication of it, or any Act that shows us
that it has been truly received and published; for according to the Rules of
Right, a Council cannot Fair Loy, if it has not been published.

But if any one were minded to speak Argumentatively, and show that the French
do not now receive the Trent Council, no not in rebus fidei, he might urge. 1.
That the whole Clergy of France in their Assembly, March 19. 1682. declared
that a Council is above the Pope. 2. That he has no Power in Temporals in any
Princes Dominions. 3. That he has no Power to Depose Princes. 4. Nor to
Absolve Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance. 5. That he is not infallible.
And though the Pope declared by his Bull Dated at Rome Apr. 11 th. 1682. that
those Acts of theirs were Null (the words of Improbamus, Rescindimus, Cassamus,
etc. being in the Bull) yet the French King had before in his Edict of March
23. 1682. Registered in Parliament, Ratified and Confirmed them all. Nor is it
deniable, that these 5 Propositions, contradict many things in the Trent
Council, which are settled in it as Doctrinal Points.

And moreover it is obvious to any one to observe, that in the Acts of the
General Assembly of the French Clergy in the year 1685. they Cite their new
Trent Creed (i. e.) some PART of it: For the last of it they cite, is p. 38. of
that Book, and leave out the LAST part of that Creed, which is contained in
these words, Caetera item omnia Sacris Canonibus and aecumenicis Concilijs, ac
praecipue a Sacro-Sancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and declarata,
indubitanter recipio ac profiteor, simulque Contraria omnia atque haereses
quascunque ab Ecclesia damnatas and rejectas and Anathematizatas, ego pariter
rejicio, damno, and Anathematizo. Hanc veram Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo
salvus esse potest, quam in praesente sponte profiteor and veraciter teneo,
eandem integram usque ad extremum vitae Spiritum Constantissime retinere and
confiteri, atque ab illis quorum cura ad me in munere hoc spectabit, teneri,
doceri and praedicari quantum in me est curaturum. Ego idem N. spondeo, voveo,
juro, etc. These are the words which the French Clergy leave out in their Book
above mentioned, and they knew the Preservation of the Liberties of the
Gallican Church, obliged them to such omission.

For by this part of the Trent Creed, they are bound to believe and profess,
Omnia a Concilio Tridentino tradita, definita, declarata, and so not matters of
Doctrine and Definitions of Faith only: And it is most plain, that the Council
intended both matters of Discipline and Doctrine. And in the aforesaid words of
the Trent Creed, a firm Belief is required to be given, omnibus in Concilijs
oecumenicis traditis; and then a long farewell to all their Liberties of the
Gallican Church would ensue, and their Sanctio Pragmatica, which is the
Authentic Comprehension of them is Damned by Leo the 10th. approbante
Concilio, in the General Lateran Council.

It may be moreover said, that the words above mentioned that the French Clergy
left out of their Book are a part Fidei Catholicae extra quam non est salus:
and therefore if the French do not receive (as it seems they do not) this part
of the Trent Creed, then it may very well be doubted, whether they received the
Definitions of Faith of the Tridentine Council, as De Marca would have us
believe.

The Trent Creed I have referred to, is at the end of that Council in most of
the Editions of it; but in the Edition at Antwerp, which is the best, viz. Anno
1633, it is in the Body of the Council. Ses. 24. p. 450, 451.

It here occurs to my thoughts, to entertain yours out of Hoornbeck's Examen
bullae Papalis: Printed An. 1652. where in p. 42. speaking of the French
Ambassadors claiming the Honor of sitting before those of Spain, he says, uti
apparuit in Oratorum Galliae Regis Carol. 9. protestatione in Concilio
Tridentino facta An. 1563, quando secus fieret, and Oratores Hispan. Regis post
Imperatoris, locum Caperent primum: Cujus omnem Culpam in solum rejiciebant
Papam Pium 4 tum, Cujus, aiebant, imperium detrectamus, quaecunque sint ejus
judicia and sententiae, reijcimus, respuimus and contemnimus. Et quanquam,
Patres Sanctissimi, vestra omnium Religio, vita and eruditio, magnae semper
fuit and erit apud nos auctoritatis; cum tamen nihil a vobis, Sed omnia magis
Romae quam Tridenti agantur, and quae hic publicantur magis Pij 4 ti placita
quam Concilij Tridentim decreta jure existimentur, denunciamus and protestamur,
quaecunque in hoc conventu, hoc est, toto Pij nutu and voluntate decernuntur
and publicantur, ea neque Regem Christianissimum probaturum, neque Ecclesiam
Gallicanam pro decreto oecumenici Concilij habituram. Interea quot quot estis
Galliae Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Doctores, Theologi, vos omnes hinc
abire Rex Christianissimus jubet, redituros ut primum Deus opt. max. Ecclesiae
Catholicae in generalibus Concilijs anttquam formam and libertatem restituerit;
Regi autem Christianissimo suam dignitatem and Majestatem.

And he afterward in p. 192. desires that after those words dignitatem and
Majestatem, may be added, what follows among the addenda, there to his
foregoing work, viz. In Concilio Tridentino vehementer illa inter Gallos and
Hispanos agitabatur Contentio de praecedentia: Non solum illis primum a legato
Imperatoris locum petentibus, sed and nolentibus ut Orator Hispani Regis alio
quo singulari loco ab illis sederet, sed ordine post eos: aliter se protestari,
non adversum legatos, aut Philippum Regem, aut Concilium, aut Ecclesiam
Romanam, sed adversus ipsum Papam Pium, 4 tum, non pro legitimo illum habentes
Papa, and provocare se ad Concilium aliud liberum in Gallia Cogendum.

Ubi illud facetum accidit, quod quando adversus Oratoris Gallici
expostulationem, diceretur cum Scommate, Gallus Cantat, hic Concinne protinus
respondit, Vtinam illo Gallicinio Petrus ad resipiscentiam and fletum
excitaretur. Illaque causa postmodum Gallis fuit inter alias quo minus
Concilium Tridentinum in Regno and Ecclesiis Gallicanis, vel ejus publicatio
admissa fuerit.

This Book of Hoornbeck, was Printed at Vtrecht, and the Papal Bull on which it
very Learnedly Animadverts, is that by which the Pope endeavored to Abrogate
the Peace of Munster.

But to go on with my Assertion of the Non-reception of the Council of Trent in
France, I shall acquaint you that another considerable Author, Namely, My Lord
Primate Bramhal, who was an Exile in France, in the time of the Usurpation, and
whose observation penetrated as far into the Constitution of the Gallican
Church, as either F. Cressy's or any Man's else, having in p. 284. of his Just
Vindication of the Church of England, spoke of the Trent Council, says, We
have seen heretofore how, the French Ambassador in the Name of the King and
Church of France, protested against it, and until this day, though they do not
oppose it, but acquiesce, to avoid such disadvantages as must ensue thereupon,
yet they never did admit it. Let no Man say that they rejected the
Determinations thereof only in point of Discipline, not of Doctrine: For the
same Canonical Obedience is equally due to an acknowledged General Council in
point of Discipline, as in point of Doctrine.

Monsieur Iurieu in his Historical Reflections on Councils, and particularly on
that of Trent, which were Translated into English, and Printed in the year
1684. Says that the French Kings their Parliaments and Bishops dislike several
things in the Decrees of the Council of Trent; and mentions as the Reasons why
the Council of Trent is not received in France, these following. 1. That the
Council has done and suffered many things that suppose and confirm a
Superiority of the Pope over Councils. 2. It has confirmed the Papal
encroachments upon ordinary's by exemption of Chapters, and privileges of
Regulars, who are both withdrawn from Episcopal Jurisdiction. 3. That it has
not restored to the Bishops, certain Functions appertaining to their Office and
taken from them, otherwise than to execute them as delegates of the Sea of
Rome. 4. That it has infringed the privileges of Bishops, of being Judged by
their Metrapolitan and Bishops of Provinces, by permitting a removal of great
Causes to Rome, and giving Power to the Pope, to Name Commissioners to Judge
the Accused Bishop. 5. That it has declared, that neither Princes, Magistrates
nor People, are to be consulted in Settling and placing of Bishops. 6. That it
has Empowered Bishops, to proceed in their Jurisdictions by Civil pains, by
Imprisonment, and by Seisures of the Temporalties. 7. That it has made Bishops
the Executors of all Donations, for Pious uses. 8. That it has given them a
Superintendency over Hospitals, Colleges, and Fraternities, with power of
disposing their Goods, notwithstanding that these matters had been always
managed by Lay Men. 9. That it has ordained, that Bps. shall have the
examining of all Notaries Royal and Imperial, with power to Deprive or Suspend,
notwithstanding any Opposition or Appeal. 10. That it has given power to
Bishops, with consent of two Members of their Chapter, and of two of their
Clergy, to take and retrench part of the Revenue of the Hospitals, and to take
away feudal Tithes belonging to Laymen. 11. That it has made Bishops the
Masters of Foundations of Piety, as Churches, Chapels and Hospitals, so as
that those who have the Care and Government of them, are obliged to be
accountable to the Bishops. 12. That in confirming Ecclesiastical Exemptions,
it has wholly ascribed to the Pope and Spiritual Judges, all power of Judging
the Causes of Accused Bishops, as if Sovereign Princes had lost the right they
had over their Subjects, as soon as they became Ecclesiastics. 13. That it
has empowered the Ordinaries and Judges Ecclesiastic, in Quality of Delegates
of the Holy See, to enquire of the Right and Possession of Lay-Patronages; and
to quash and annul them, if they were not of great necessity and well founded.
14. That in Prohibiting Duels, it had declared, that such Emperor or Prince, as
should show favor to Duels, should therefore be Excommunicated and Deprived of
the Seignory of the place holding of the Church, where the Duel was fought. 15.
that it has permitted the Mendicant Friars to possess Immoveables. 16. That it
has ordained an Establishment of Judges it calls Apostoles in all Dioceses,
with Power to Judge of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Matters, in prejudice of
the Ordinary. 17. That it has declared, that Matrimonial Causes, are of the
Churches Jurisdiction. 18. That it has enjoined Kings and Princes to leave
Ecclesiastics, the free and entire possession of the jurisdiction granted them
by the Holy Canons, and General Councils, that is to say, usurped by the Clergy
over the Civil Power. These are the Principal Points Disputed in France: These
that tend to the Diminution of the Authority and Privileges of Bishops, to
enlarge the Roman power, are Rejected by the Bishops: And those that would
extend the power of Bishops to the Prejudice of the Civil Authority are
Rejected by the Parliaments. Between both, this Council, as enacting contrary
to the Rights and Liberties of the Gallican Church* was never at all received
in France, so as to obtain the force of a Law. He then shows, that the Popes
Superiority over Councils, is a point of Doctrine, and was decided in the
Council of Trent: And yet that the Gallican Church believes the contrary. I
know it will be said (says he) that the Council of Trent has not decided,
that the Pope is Superior to Councils. Men may talk as they please; but things
for all that, will continue as they are. It is true, that among the Decrees and
Canons of the Council, there is none that says in express Terms, that the Pope
is Superior to Councils, and can be judged by none: But the effect of such
Decision is apparent in all the Acts, and through the whole Conduct of this
Council. And he afterward says, that the Clause of proponentibus legatis, was
a plain Decision of the Popes Superiority over the Council.

But to these 18 Reasons of Mr. Iurieu, about the Reception of the Trent
Council in France; being neither practicable nor practiced; I might add, that,
according to what my Lord Primate Bramhal observes in another place of that
Book of his, I Cited before, the Obedience promised to the Bishop of Rome, as
Successor to St. Peter and Vicar of Jesus Christ, pursuant to the Trent
Council, may seem to quadrate but ill with the liberty of the Gallican Church,
to set up a Patriarch. For in p. 194. of that Book, he mentions that in
Cardinal Richelieu's Days it was well known, what Books were freely Printed in
France, and publicly sold upon pont neuf of the lawfulness of Erecting a new,
or rather restoring an old proper Patriarchate in France, as one of the
liberties of the Gallican Church: And thereupon says, It was well for the
Roman Court, that they became more propitious to the French Affairs.

And if we consider how in the 22 d. Session of the Council of Trent* Chapter
the 11 th. all Kings and Emperors are Anathematized, who hinder any
Ecclesiastics from the Enjoyment of any of their feudal Rights, or other
profits; and that it might well be supposed, that the Course and Vicissitudes
of time would put Roman Catholic Princes on somewhat of that Nature, and which
so eminently influenced the French King in the Munster Treaty; none need wonder
at the Trent Councils not being received in France.

There was a Book called a Review of the Council of Trent, written by a Learned
Roman Catholic, and Printed A. 1600. and Translated by Dr Langbain and Printed
at Oxon 1638. The Author is believed by Rivet in his Answer to Coeffeteau, and
by Langbain, to be William Ranclin Dr. of Laws, fiscal Advocate in the Court of
Aids at Oua in Henry the 4 ths. time, and afterterward Attorney General in the
Sovereign Court of Aids at Montpellier, In chapter 1. p. 11. of the Translated
Book he tells us, that being at Court, he saw many earnest Suits Exhibited to
the French King, in behalf of the Pope, for the receiving that Council; and
such as had been made to the preceding Kings; but which they would never grant,
nor allow the publication of what they conceived so dangerous to Church and
State.

And in chapter 2. he gives us several Instances, which were made to the late
Kings, for receiving the Council of Trent. Charles the 9th. was moved by the
Ambassadors of Pope Pius the 4th, the Emperor and King of the Romans, the King
of Spain, the Prince of Piemont, soon after the year 1563. to Publish that
Council. The King said, he would have the Advice of his Lords: But it was
Determined by them, that he should not hearken to their Requests. That in the
year 1572. when Cardinal Alexandrino knew the Popes Nephew came out of Spain
into France, with Commission to reinforce the Suit to Henry the 3d. both the
Pope and the Clergy urged him to publish it; but nothing was done. The Request
was renewed by the Clergy at Blois, and especially by Peter Espinoc Archbishop
of Lions, in the year 1576; but without any effect.

The Request was renewed by the Assembly of France, Assembled at Melun in July
1579. The Speaker was Arnalt Bishop of Bazas. Nicholas Angelier Bishop of
Brien, made the like Instance to the same King, Oct. 3. 1579. and again July
17. 1582. Renald of Beaune, Archbishop of Bourges, and Primate of Aquitaine,
Delegate for the Clergy, made the same Request at Fountain-Bleau; but all in
vain.

In the beginning of A. 1583. A Nuntio came from the Pope into France to Henry
the 3d. but could not stir him from his purpose: and in a Letter to the King of
Navarre Henry 4. who afterward Succeeded him, he protests, that it was never in
his thoughts to admit of it.

November the 19th. 1585. the aforesaid Bishop Nicholas Angelier renews this
Request very earnestly to the King; and another Assault is made on him October
14. 1585. by the Bishop and Earl of Nayan, who in his Speech is very Confident,
that the Council of Trent was guided by the Holy Ghost.

He adds, though it was not received, yet several things in that Council,
especially what concerned the Clergy, were inserted in the Canons of some of
their Provincial Councils held in France, at Rohan. 1581, at Bourges 1584. at
Tours 1585. and at Aix in Provence the same year.

One of the Kings Lieutenants General for the Administration of Justice, in an
Assembly of the States particularly, An. 1588. makes a Suit to the King to
publish the Council; but to no purpose; Nay more, The King did not receive so
much as those very Decrees of the Council, which were no way Repugnant to the
Gallican Liberties. However, Suppressing the Name of the Council, they Decreed
the very same things at Blois, An. 1579.

But after all that this Author has mentioned of the Parliament at Blois,
Decreeing the same things in the year 1579. that were agreeable to the Canons
of the Council of Trent, and of the fruitless Request of the Archbishop of
Bourges in 1582. and of others afterward for the Reception of that Council, I
cannot but call to mind that Thuanus Hist. Tom. 4. lib. 94. p. 388. Edit. An.
1620. tells us, that in the year 1589. the same Archbishop of Bourges in a
Convention of the ^ Estates, did among other things propose, ut Concilio
Tridentino tradita disciplina ab omnibus recipiatur: But nothing was done; and
the Speech of the Archbishop and some others made in that Convention, are by
Thuanus called, Orationes intempestivae.

And I might add, that the Author of the Inventoire General des affairs de
France, from the Death of Henry the 4 th. to the year 1620. tells us, that in
the year 1615, on the 19 th. of February, the Clergy Deputed the Bishop of
Beauvais, to pray the third Estate to agree to the publishing the Council of
Trent: And that Monsieur le President Miron in the Name of the 3d. Estate,
Replied, that they could not at present receive that Council: The which agrees
with what I have before alleged contrary to the Measures of Cressy; and as
does likewise the Popes issuing out a Breve to the Cardinal of Ioyeux, An 1605.
and mentioned in the Memoirs p. 391. after the Histoire du Cardinal Duc de
Ioyeux par le Sieur Aubery Advocat en Parliament and aux Conseils du Roy,
Printed at Paris An. 1654. and in which Breve, the Pope desires that Cardinals
earnest endeavors for the introducing the Constitutions of the Council of
Trent into France; and acknowledges the Difficulty of that Work; but withal
adds that he confideth in the Cardinals Industry, as to the Laboring that
point, and says, that he had Writ to Hen. the 4 th. about it. And p. 931.
there is another Breve of the Pope to that Cardinal, A. 1615. which begins
thus, Venerab. Frater noster. Salut. and apostol. benedict. Plane dicere
possumus, expectavimus pacem and ecce turbatio: Superioribus namque diebus spem
non levem conceperamus, fore ut SSti Concilij Tridentini decreta in Gallia
reciperentur, and dum animum nostrum varietate and multitudine pastoralium*
Sollicitudinum pene oppressum Sublevare hoc Solatio curabamus, repent ad nos
allatum est quod 4 to Nonas ^ebr. in publico conventu isthic attentatum fuerit
in detrimentum supremae Authoritatis hujus SStae Apostolicae sedis, etc. And
where he afterward complains to this effect, that the King ( i. e. H. 4.) had
several times abused him with promises and pretensions that he would publish
the Council of Trent; but that nothing came of it.

If then any one will yet say, that the French Clergy not being able in the
year 1615, to engage the 3 d. Estate, to agree to the Publishing the Trent
Council, did then Publish it themselves, I shall leave him to consider both the
Nature and the Event of such an Invasion of the Regal Rights, and shall further
acquaint him, that according to the saying of, De facto factum potest de facto
tolli, he may if he pleases, consult the Publication of the Peace Relating to
the French King, and the Prince of Conde first Prince of the Blood, Published
in the Town of Loudun, the 14 th. of May A. 1616. and where he will find the 5
th. and th 6. Articles to be as follows, viz. 5th. That the Authority of the
French church be observed, and no allowance or Permission be granted for any
Encroachment upon the Rights, Franchises and Liberties of the same. AGREED
UNTO. 6th. That, that which was made by the Clergy for the Publication of the
Council of Trent, without the Authority of the King, be Repaired and Amended,
and all such things formerly done in the Estate, be Reformed. AGREED UNTO.

Yet if any one wants further Confirmation, from Authorities about the Trent
Council not having been received in France, I may send him to the Synopsis of
^ouncils, Writ by Dr. Prideaux, sometime Regius Professor of Divinity at
Oxford, and afterward Bishop of Worcester, where the Bishop Writing Chap. 5.
and p. 29. of the Trent Council, says, This Council cried up by so many
Acclamations, and so Solemnly Confirmed by the Seal of of the Fisher, the
French admitted not.

But after all this said of the Council of Trent's not having been Published
and Received in France, if either by the Government or Clergy or Laity there,
any of the Religionary or Doctrinal points of Faith contained in that Council,
are inwardly believed, and openly professed, I leave them and all Mankind to
the Exercise of the Liberty wherewith christ has made them free; and will
suppose, that if after all the Old Protestations of the Government against that
Council, Roman Catholics in France having found the Doctrinal Points of their
Faith, that were Stated and Determined by former General Councils, to be more
fully and clearly made out in the Tridentine one, did prosess the belief of the
same, and did refer to that Council, when they would give an exterior Account
or Reason of their Faith; and did think themselves obliged for the supporting
the Unity of the Roman Catholic Church, to profess the same Doctrinal Points
with these Countries, where that Council had been received and published: I
will make this Charitable Construction, that they did and do intend no more
Diminution of the Regal Rights and Liberties of the Gallican Church thereby,
than the Nations of Europe did intend a Diminution of their Freedom, by
receiving any part of the Civil Law of Rome, and still continuing the Use and
Authority of the same in their Commerce, and in the Interpretation of their
public pactions, and of the Ius gentium: Nor than the Romans did intend to
lessen the Rights of their Government, by taking their Law of the twelve Tables
from Athens, nor their Maritime Law from Rhodes; and no more than our
Roman Catholic Ancestors did intend a Subjugating of our Laws to the Popes
Canon Law (against several parts of which, they openly protested) by the
receiving of some other parts of it, they thought agreeable to the good of
Church and State; or than the Government at present intends any Recognition of
Foraign Power, by any parts of the Civil or Canon Law, being still incorporated
in our Laws, and continuing here to be a part of the Lex terrae QVOAD certain
causes Ecclesiastical or Maritime.

And indeed it must be acknowledged, to be for the Honor of the Trent Council,
that in France and some other Countries where it has not been received and
published, its Doctrinal Definitions have yet got ground in the Belief of many
Roman Catholics, on the supposed Merits of the things themselves therein
contained; and as it has been for the Reputation of some things in the Civil
or Canon Law, that on their being thought reasonable, our Laws have Adopted
them as their own.

But as with all due Tenderness to all my fellow Christians in France or
elsewhere, whether Lay or Clerical, I forbear to Censure or Reproach them in my
most Secret Thoughts, for Embracing the Belief of any such Tenets as may be
called Religionary, though taken up from Trent by them, after they have used
all the due means for the finding out Truth in the same (and do most earnestly
pray, that God who has been pleased in Scripture to express his Divine
Philanthrophy by the Discreet Love of a Father, and the Tender Love of a
Mother, would bestow the same Blessings on them, that I wish for my self, and
my most near and dear Relations) so I should have been glad to have found the
like Spirit of Charity Breathing in the Acts of the French clergy with Relation
to their Christian Brethren differing from them in points Religionary, instead
of pronouncing their breach made with them, to be founded only on Calumnies,
after the Pastoral Advertisement of that Clergy to them in the year 1682, and
instead of affording them their Compassion for not being able in the three
following Years, to receive that Faith of that Trent Council, which I account
from the year 1564. the time of its Confirmation to this Day, not to have been
Published or Received in that Kingdom, and whose Publication may be said to be
there yet, but (as it were) in abbeyance, and instead of further charging them
as Calumniators, because of the things Writ against the Romanists by our
Whitaker and Downham, a hardship I have observed complained of in some late
Writings of the French Protestants.

But the great Royal goodness of our Gracious King, and the fervent Zeal and
Charity of the present Divines of England, have made them an amends for what
they suffered on the account of those our former great Clergymen.

Yet must it be acknowledged, that in one point that Clergy in their Petition
to the King, does the Huguenots this Justice as to say the pretended Reformed,
how great so-ever their Blindness is, are not arrived to that height of Folly,
as to maintain their lawful practice of the Crimes of Imputations and Calumny.

And I am glad that since the 2 d. of March. 1679. so much occasion has been
given by the Popes Condemning the Tenets of the Jesuits, about the Doctrine of
CALVMNY, and their Sicarious Principles, for the not charging them on the
Church of Rome, as approved by it as formerly. But on the account of the Horrid
Calumnies against Fathers and Councils, still continued in the Decrets of the
Canon Law, and forged with as much Falsehood as any could have been by the
French Clergy observed in the Case of the pretended Reformed, as I have
particularly enough shown in the Case of Cyprian I may well urge it as an
Argumentumad hominem, that neither the Pope nor French Clergy, should have been
Authors of too much Severity to those Reformed, on the pretense of their
Calumniating the Doctrine of their Church: And have been careful not to charge
on the Catholicite (as the Term is) the Falsehood of Gratian, and the lachesse
of the Popes, that so long suffered so much Trompery in him to pass for Law:
And were I at Rome now, while the Pope is so worthily busied in strengthening
the preparations against the Turk in this Conjuncture, would not divert him
from the same, by importuning him to make a better Canon Law for his Flock. Nor
do I charge on the Gallican Church or State, what I have mentioned out of
Boerius, a President of Parliament there: If they hoped by the publication of
their Book in France, to effect a Reconciliation of Churches there, or the
Translators of it any such thing by their Printing it here, much good may their
Design do them: But it seems an untoward way of beginning a Reconciliation by
giving the lie, or accusing the pretended Reformed of Calumnies and Falsities.
But the Author of the Papist Represented and Misrepreted, has outdone the
French Clergy in Civility of Expression to Protestants, and by rendering them
only Misrepresenters of the Church of Rome.

Yet since both these Books do agree in Representing Roman Catholics as owning
the Doctrine of the council of Trent, I standing fast in the Liberty I have,
not to be imposed on by those Doctrines, intermeddle not here with others
liberty, to own any Religionary Tenets of the same.

And our Excellent and Learned Clergymen will no doubt, both by Preaching and
Writing occasionally, secure the Souls of their Congregations, from any danger
that they shall apprehend from any of the Papal Clergy, propagating such Tenets
among them.

But here I shall occasionally say, that I think that few of the Religionary or
Doctrinal Tenets of the Council af Trent either do, or in the time of our Fears
and Iealousies, have so much Animated the Aversion of many of the Populaae here
against that Council, as their apprehension of the exterminium of Heretics
designed long ago by the calling of that Council. The benefit of the peace, and
rest the Protestants had obtained by the Interim, A. 1548. and its formula
inter^religionis, was but to last to the end of the Council of Trent: And I
have some where met with John Paul Windec, cited for boasting in his Book, de
Haeretic extirpand. that nothing was accorded for the Protestants by that Edict
or Formula; but a Dilatory Reprieve and Toleration, till the end of that
Council. And moreover we know, that in that Council there is an express
Confirmation of former General Councils, and of the Terrible Lateran one in
particular. For though you mention some Popish and Protestant Writers as
denying the Lateran Council to have been a General one, and that Protestant
Authors are somewhat put to it, who would prove it so to have been, yet if you
had considered what the Bishop of Lincoln in his first Book about Popery says
in p 51. that the Council of Trent in Sess. 24. cap. 5. calls that Lateran one
a General Council, and confirms one of its Canons; you would have thought it a
very easy task, to have satisfied any Reverers of the Council of Trent, with
the others having been a general one. And the Trent Council having, as that
Learned Bishop shows there in p. 43. Commanded Emperors, Kings and Princes to
observe the Sacred Canon, and all General Councils and Apostolical Sanctions in
favor of Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Liberties of the Church; and where
the Title to the Chapter is said to be, Cogantur omnes Principes Catholici
conservare omnia sancita, etc. and those words which in p. 57. the Bishop
refers to the Council of Lateran for, viz. Catholici qui Crucis assumpto
charactere ad haereticorum exterminium se accinxerint, illa gaudeant
indulgentia quae accedentibus ad terrae sanctae subsidium Conceditur, and that
Councils having so threatened Princes with Deposition, and the absolving of
their Subjects from their Allegiance, in Case they do not Exterminate
Heretics, has really been the most Considerable and ^perative Objection that
any Protestant Writers have brought to show the dread of that part of the
Principles of Popery, that you term Irreligionary: And few of the Writers
against the same, in our late Fermentation, but instanced in that Objection:
And to which none of the Roman Catholic Writers then, that I read, did Attempt
to apply the least Answer.

The Author of the Compendium (whom you mention with the Title of Ingenious)
does there in p. 79. tell us, That there is not one single Paragraph in that
Book of the Bishops; but what was either fully Answered, or what does not at
least wound the whole Protestant Party by its Consequence more than us: But was
so Ingenuous, as to answer not a word that I can find there, to the Objection
of the Lateran Council, and which omission in him proceeded not from
inadventence; for in that one leaf where he insinuates, that he has fully
Answered the Bishops whole Book, he tells us twice, that no Council ever
imposed the Deposing Power on our Belief. And I observed, that my Good and
Learned Friend Father Walsh, where in the Preface to his Causa Valesiana,
printed in the year 1682. he endeavors to answer that Book of the Bishop, did
not think fit to take notice of the Objection of the Lateran Council.

But after your common way in all your Writings I have seen, namely to fortify
Objections, before you answer them, thus (as I may say) to Deck and Crown the
Victim you intend to offer to the World, as I find you have done right to the
considerableness of this of the Lateran Council, and have in your discourse
Termed that Learned Bishops Book both unanswered and unanswerable, it is by all
Ingenious and Loyal Protestants and Papists, to be acknowledged to you, that
you are the only Person, who has appeared in Print, to give the Objection the
Answer that it will bear; and for which none I believe will thank you more than
that excellent Prelate. For after you had taken the freedom in your
Introduction or Preface, to Reflect as you have done on Archbishop Vshers
Prophecy, and the Predictions of Bishop Morly, you with great Curiosity set
forth the factum of the Munster Peace, whereby the Age may learn, that as with
God, all things are possible, so by his having influenced the understandings of
Roman Catholic Princes, and by their having showed much better than by Words I
mean, by their pacta Convenia really observed, that they think not themselves
obliged by the Lateran Council, and the Deposition there threatened to
exterminate their Heretical Subjects, and you Heartily show the Artifice of the
Objection in a great Measure answered by the God of Nature, and by Natural
Causes inclining the great Roman Catholic Crowned Heads of Christendom to
permit the dire passages in that Council, to be in a manner Abrogated by
Desuetude.

You have fairly related it, how the Roman Catholic Princes agreed in their
Treaty, that no CANONS or DECREES of COVNCILS or ABSOLVTIONS whatsoever, should
in future times be allowed against any Article of it, and consequently that the
Canons or Decrees of that Council, Threatening Princes with DEPOSITION, and the
Absolving of their Subjects from their Allegiance, for the not Exterminating
their Heretical Subjects from their Allegiance, were by all those
Roman Catholic Crowned Heads, Contemned and defied; and you have shown how the
Papacy has since Acquiesced therein, and since lex currit cum praxi, and that
Peace has been so long observed, your account of it has been of much more
Importance to the Papists, as to the helping to bring them off in some Measure
from the Odium of the Disloyal Doctrine of the DEPOSING Power, than any thing
said by their Writers has been, and no doubt but when any more such close
Attacks shall be made upon them by our Writers, as have been since his
Majesty's Reign, to charge the Allowance of the Deposing Power on their Church,
they will not neglect to Crave Aid from what you have said in that your
Historical Account of that Peace.

I assure you it was no easy Task to give so Critical and so Impartial an
account of the factum of that Peace, as you have done, and so much for the
Advantage of the Papists, and whereby you have Merited much more from them,
than their Favorite of our Church, Dr. Heylin did by Writing of the Outrages
that accompanied the Reformation. And your occasional rectifying the Mistake of
a considerable Writer of the Church of Rome, and of such another of the Church
of England here in the Negotiation of that peace, has showed the Niceness and
Difficulty of stating it exactly as you have done.

The Author of the Novelles de la Republique des Lettres, for the Month of
November last past, giving an account of Dr. Burnets 2d. Part of the Hist. of
the Reformation, being Beyond Sea lately Printed in French, does there in p.
1250 give the World a fresh view of the Horror of the Lateran Council* by
rendering our Queen Mary as prompted by that Council, to the Persecution of her
Protestant Subjects.

But you having in your Discourse with the Exquisite Artifice of Oratory,
mentioned some Passages in her Reign, not commonly known, and that on the
Foundation you laid so low in the Rubbish of her Reign, you might with more
Advantage support the whole Super structure of your Judging that any Roman
Catholic Prince that should inherit the Throne here, would perfectly Decline
her politics, and likewise in your Preface particularly fortified the Minds of
People against the Fears and Jealousies of such a Prince, that might be
Occasioned by the Lateran Council, did very seasonably thereby advance the
measures of Loyalty and Men's more cheerful adherence to the Lineal Succession.

And the Truth is, that among the many Pamphlets Writ, with most Artifice and
ill applied Learning ad faciendum populum, and to pervert them to the
Exclusion, I observing the Lateran Council so much insisted on, cannot but
Judge your undeceiving them in that point, to have been the more necessary. The
Pamphlet you showed me in 4 to, Pr for Ianeway in the year 1681. and called A
Moderate Decision of the Point of Succession, humbly proposed to the
consideration of the Parliament, does harp much on that Council: And another
Pamphlet Printed in the same year for the same Person, and called The Case of
Protestants in England, under a Popish Prince, etc. did there among the many
Quotations out of the Canon Law and Canonists, councils, and Popish Divines and
Schoolmen making for its purpose in p. 5. and 27. trouble us with the Lateran
Council, and mentions Bellarmines calling it the Papists great and most Famous
Council. Your having in your Discussion, so succesfully combated the
obligatoriness of that Council upon Papists, was of great use for the
unblundering many nominal Protestants (as your term is) in their fancying it so
necessary for the quiet of Christendom, that Princes and their Subjects should
agree in the Belief of the Speculative points of Religion, as your expressions
are, and whereupon you promise the Age your publication of the fact of the
Munster Peace and its Consequences, and which promise you have in your Preface,
so well and fully performed.

The Author of the Answer to the Book called, A Papist Misrepresented, does
refer to Lessius his Discussio decreti magni Council. Lateran. and saying that
the Churches Authority would not be maintained without the Deposing Power, and
in p. 104. making the Councils of Lateran under Alex. 3. and Innocent 3. to be
general ones. And in the Reflections on the Answer, nothing is mentioned to
deny it. But your having in your Discussion cited Cardinal Peron, for having so
strenuously asserted that Councils being a general one, and yet not thinking it
Obligatory for the Exterminating the Persons of Heretics from France, where
their number was so great, and your having cited Cardinal D' Ossat partly to
the same effect, and further showing this their Doctrine Incarnate in the Lives
of so many Roman Catholic Crowned Heads, and their Empires after all the
dismal effects that the contrary practices produced, and that the Voice of
Nature did, in the Storm their Country's were in, and when it was so necessary
to have many Hands, speak it as plainly concerning Heretical Subjects
continuing with them, as St. Paul's words were to the Centurion, and to the
Soldiers, viz. except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved, and your
showing that pursuant to the Munster Peace they did abide in the Ship, and
thereby saved themselves and it, was time by you very nobly spent, in your
helping Men to See, how far Nature had by its powerful Hands, effectually
delivered People from their Fears of the Lateran Council, and which time was to
much better purpose spent, than that of some Roman Catholic Apologists, for
any harsh thing Decreed by General Councils, and saying that they are not
declared as Doctrinal points, and that the Decrees relating only to Discipline
and Government, come short of being Articles of Faith, as the Author of the
Reply to the Reflections upon the answer to a Papist Misrepresented and
Represented, o^^erves, and as to which he there further in p. 54. quotes the
Vindication of Dr. Sherlocks Sermon, for saying, that to Decree what shall be
done, includes a Virtual Definition of that Doctrine, on which that Decree is
founded.

But such little Arts the great Cardinal you mentioned, forbore to use in the
point of the Lateran Council: And it is not Art but Nature, that can satisfy
the Curious in this inquisitive Age, and by the great prospect of Nature you
have showed Men appearing in the Munster-Peace, they will be naturally untaught
their Fears of that Council, now they know its Sting is plucked out, what ever
humming about their Ears it may still make by the help of any Writers.

The Learned Author of the Seasonable Discourse in his other Book of the
difference between the Church and Court of Rome considered in p. 21. speaking
of the Lateran Council, and how his Roman Catholic Antagonist had Cited one
John Bishop, who in a Book Written in the time of Queen Elizabeth, affirmed,
that the Constitution of the Lateran Council, on which the whole Authority of
Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, and Deposing Princes is founded, is
no other than a Decree of Pope Innocent the 3 d, and was never admitted in
England: Yea, that the said Council was no Council at all, nor any thing at all
there Decreed by the Fathers, does in the following Pages, substantially
Confute his Adversary, and sets up the Authority of Cardinal Peron, and of the
Council of Trent against that John Bishop, and refers to Dr. Vane's Vindication
of the Council of Lateran, and shows how and when the Canons of that Council
were allowed and confirmed in the National Synod held at Oxford, 1222.

When therefore I consider how one said, that Custom having once through
Continuance, Naturalized it self into any sublunary things, it is then (to
speak properly) no more Custom, but Nature; and that Custom according to Galen,
is a kind of adscititious Nature, and that Origin tells us, that of all
Customs, none stick so fast in the mind, when once settled there, and none so
hard to be wiped and washed off as those, which he calls (...) i. e. the
Customs of Opinion and Doctrine, be they right or wrong, and have found Gregory
the Pope Cited for ascribing to Custom a power to make things that are bad in
themselves, to become Just and Legal, viz. Si pravae rei aditus antequam diu
patescat, non clauditur, usu fit latior and erit consuetudine licitum, quod
ratione Constat esse prohibitum. Greg. Reg. Epist. P. 7. Ind. 2. Ep. 120. and
do consider how far, and how long your instances were extended of the Lateran
Council, having lost its Nature by the Customs of Opinion and Doctrine contrary
thereto, obtaining much in the Papal World, any Philosopher or indifferent Man
must say, that you have said something of Substance, and indeed, the best thing
that can fairly be said to show Men the vanity and illogicalness of their
former fears of Roman Catholic Princes* being bound by their Religion to
Exterminate their Heterodox Subjects, by your showing the Treaty when, and
place where and named the Year and Month, in which that Irreligionary Principle
of Popery, was it self Exterminated by them; and a custom contrary to the
Lateran Laws, been there firmly Naturalized, It Is said in Jeremiah 2.24.
concerning the Wild Ass: all they that seek her, will not weary themselves; in
her Month they shall find her; alluding to the Hunters being able to take her
in her Month, when she was burdened, and so near Foaling: And the endeavors of
the Wise to Hunt down that Foolish and Cruel thing called Bigotry, were not
ineffectual when its Month was come and when it grew so Burthensom to it self;
and you have led us to the Month in which the Monarch of Spain was put to it to
Relinquish his Right and Sovereignty in those Provinces, from whence so many
Nominal Heretics had been formerly exterminated.

You have in your Discussion, been very kind to the Character of a very Pious
and Loyal Gentleman, on the account of what you had been informed of as to his
Signalising the Weight of his Political Remarks and Learning, as well as of his
Loyalty (as your words are) by his Speech he made against the Exclusion, and
his instancing in some Princes and their Subjects of different Religions,
living very happily together. But whether you have not over-acted your part of
praising that performance of his, I am to leave you to consider; for if that
Speech of his was truly related in the Printed Collection of the Debates of the
House of Commons, at the Parliament held at Westminster, on October 1680. there
was nothing to justify the Learning of his Political Remarks to the purpose
you spoke of, but his saving, that it was no such strange thing, to have the
Prince, of one Religion and People of another; and his instancing, that the
late Duke of Hannover was a Papist, and yet lived in Peace with his People,
though Lutherans.

It was pity but on that occasion, he had opened the prospect of a larger
Scene, than what the Case of the quiet living of that Duke, and his Subjects
could import; and that both he and all the Speakers and Writers against the
Exclusion, that I took notice of, omitted the referring to the happy effects of
the Treaty of Munster, that provided for so many great Popish Princes, and the
vast Numbers of their Protestant Subjects living well together, though yet it
happened, that there was an occasion fair enough in all Conscience, for all
Men's taking notice of it, who mind the Affairs of Christendom; and that was,
that in the first project or platform of Conditions of Peace made by the French
King in order to the Peace at Nimeghen, and in which project (as Dated at St.
Germans the 9 th of April 1678.) it is said expressly, that as to what concerns
the Empire, that he will insist only on the restoring of the Munster Treaties
in all their points, and to have them once more to be the means of restoring
Peace to Germany; and in the Peace between the Emperor and the French King
Signed at Nimeghen (and which mentions the Settlement of that Peace, as
Resulting from the Successful Mediation of his Majesty of England) there are
these words in the Second Article, viz. and for as much as the Peace concluded
at Munster in West Phalia, is to be the Foundation and basis of this present
Treaty, and public Tranquillity, the said Peace shall from henceforth be
restored in all and every its points, and remain in full force and vigor, as
if the same were word for word inserted herein, except in such points as are
Derogated from it by this present Treaty.

And as to that we know, that exceptio firmat regulam, and thus too in the
Articles between the Emperor and the King of Sweden, Signed at Nimeghen on the
same Day with the former Articles* viz. February 5. 1679. The third Article
runs thus, According to this Foundation of an Universal and Unlimited Anmesty,
and to the end a more certain Rule of Friendship and Peace, may be settled
between the Parties, it has been by mutual consent agreed on between them,
that the Peace Concluded in West-Phalia, shall remain the Basis, and Rule of
the pre^ent pacification in such manner, that it shall be restored to its first
Force and Vigor, and inviolably kept hereafter, and continue as it was before
the present War, a Pragmatick Sanction, and Fundamental Law of the Empire, etc.
And in the Articles between the Emperor and the French King, as likewise in
those between the Emperor and the King of Sweden, there are some to include the
King of Great Britain in the Treaty after the best and most effectual manner
that may be, and to admit his Guaranty for the Execution and Performance of the
Pacta Conventa herein: And his present Majesty has in the past time of his
Reign, appeared as tender of the Performance and Stabiliment of them, as of the
Apple of his Eye, and on an Emergent occasion, was (as I am informed) heard to
say to a great Foraign Minister; but I WILL have the Nimeghen Peace OBSERVED,
and with a parallel bravery to that in those words of Henry the Fourth, you have
mentioned; but I WILL have my own.

Thus is the Munster Treaty, and the Liberty thereby given to Protestants and
Calvinists, both as to the Enjoyment of their Religion and their Estates (and
many of which Estates were Church Lands) notwithstanding the Popes Declaration
of the Nullity of that Peace supported by his Present Majejesty, and as I doubt
not, but it always will be, as well as by other Roman Catholic Crowned Heads.
And the figure the present French King made in the Munster Treaty, in the year
Forty Eight, and in the Restoration of its effects, and Vigor in Christendom
in the year Seventy Nine, is a sufficient Demonstration of his thinking it
lawful for the Lateran Council, to be Disobeyed by Popish Princes, as to the
point of Exterminating their Heretical Subjects.

I do therefore account this your Manly way of Confuting the Fears and
Iealousies founded on that Council, to have been at this time the more
opportune, and the more worthy of your Loyalty; because (as you have mentioned
it after the End of your Discussion) It may seem the Design of some People in
the World abroad, to increase our Divisions, and the popular hatred against
Papists and Popery here, by the usage that Protestants meet with there, as if
the Religion of Popery did necessarily Cause the same. You have therefore well
reputed it the opus diei here in England, to show the contrary, and have done
it more effectually, than any late Writer of the Church of Rome, I know, here
has done, or perhaps was able to do: And your quoting for this purpose in p.
208. D' Ossats Speech to the Pope, and wherein he so Argumentatively both like
a Divine and a Statesman, asserted the Law^ulness of Henry the 4 th's of
France observing the EDICTS in favor of his Protestant Subjects, and wherein
he mentioned how other Roman Catholic Princes had done what was tantamount to
it, and how that the Pope made no Reply to him thereupon, may much help to show
our Timid and Jealous People, that the Religionary part of Popery or Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, does not oblige Roman Catholic Princes to make the
Lives of their Protestant Subjects uneasy to them.

It here falls in my way, to acknowledge to you, that the great Instances you
have given in your Discourse concerning the Consummat Loyalty of great numbers
of Henry the 4ths. Popish Subjects to him while a Protestant, and under the
Popes Excommunication, have been very useful for the enlarging Peoples
Charitable Thoughts, as to the Persons of some Papists, and the tendency of
their Principles to Loyalty, and to the showing, that though in the Great
Lateran Council (wherein were 1215 Fathers) it was Synodically and
Categorically concluded, that the Pope might absolve Subjects from their Oaths
of Allegiance, that yet great Numbers of Henry the 4ths. Roman Catholic
Subjects knew, and Practiced better things, and that their great Absolute and
Unconditional Loyalty to him, lives in the Records of the Impartial Thuanus:
And that notwithstanding any principles Chargeable on the Church of Rome, the
Faith of many particular persons in it has by its Works shown it self very
perfect for Loyalty.

But here I am likewise obliged to gratify you by my Complaisance with your
Temper in differing somewhat in Opinion from you (for you say, you are better
pleased in Conversation with those who in many points differ from you, than
with those who in all agree with you) and am frankly to tell you, that though I
am sufficiently satisfied with your discharging of the Moral Offices of
Honoring all Men, and giving Honor particularly to some Roman Catholics to
whom it was due, and particularly where in p. 360. You have with so great a
Height of Expression Celebrated the Virtue of the Queen Dowager (and from whom
I had the Honor to receive Thanks, by the late Earl of Ossory for the Justice
I did her Majesty in a late Conjuncture.) Yet there is one thing at the end of
your Discourse, and another after the end of your Discussion, wherein you are
pleased to give your Judgment concerning the Papists here in geral, as I would
not have given mine in the Case. You say in p. 285. That after the Various
Intervals in which the Discourse was Written, it having happened that the
Papists are to the General Satisfaction of Impartial Judges of Men and things,
become as sound a part of this Nation, as they were and are of the Dutch
States, and as throughout the Discourse you always supposed them Capable of
being, and in p. 361.You say, that it is with Justice to be by all Men to our
Popish Fellow Subjects acknowledged, that what ever petulance some of them were
formerly guilty of, or of any Ambitious Design of making too great a Figure in
the Internal Government of the Nation, yet that the Deportment of the
Generality of them, has lately appeared with such a Face, not only of Loyalty,
but of Complaisance with his Majesty's Measures, in employing the Hands and
Heads of Protestants of the Church of England, in the Management of great
Matters of State, as is necessarily Attractive of our Christian Love and
Compassion, etc.

But though I account my self Morally obliged to Judge several Papists of my
Acquaintance to abound in Loyalty, and to be such whose Moderation is known to
all Men, and to be no Exorbitant Affecters of making too great a Figure in the
Internal Government of the Kingdom; and do hope that many others are so with
whom I am not acquainted, and will Judge no particular Papist to believe or
practice Principles of Disloyalty, without particular grounds, and though on the
account of the Trite Rule that Interest never lies, I will hope that the
generality of them will in his Majesty's Reign and afterward be neither
Disloyal, nor Heady nor High-Minded, nor affecters of Pre-eminence: Yet if I
were required to give my present Judgment in short of the present Temper of the
generality of them, as to the Qualifications about which you have given your
Judgment in the Case, and that too relating to future times, I considering the
Formulary of the Letters denoting Judgment, given in the Mode of the Old Roman
Laws, viz. A. and C. and N. L. would not presume either to Absolve or Condemn
the gross of their Numbers as to those Qualifications; but would interpose the
Non Liquet in their Case; and much less will I Condemn your Judgment of Charity
to them, and say, that some of your Sharp Reflections on Popery, and some
Papists, have favored of the Common way of some Partial Judges Biased with an
intent to bring off some Criminals, Namely, to make some disobliging rough
Language previous to the obliging them with their Sentence at last: But taking
every thing in the best Sense it will bear, shall suppose that your Information
of the Temper of the Generality of them, might be what arrived not at my
Knowledge, and that therefore you pronounced thereof as you have done. And
moreover, your Discourse being Writ before the Late Kings Death, I shall
account it was for several Reasons, a strengthening of Loyalty, and weakening
of the Fears of Timid Protestants, for you both in the Close of your Discourse,
as well as your Discussion, to do the Persons as well as Tenets of Papists all
the Justice you could.

From your having in that Discussion occasionally so much dilated on the Moral
Offices of Loyalty to our Princes, without respect to their Religion, and what
ever Religion they may profess different from that by Law Established, I shall
be glad if the thoughts of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, will Receive
deep Impressions of the peculiar Duties we owe to him our Great and Gracious
Sovereign, particularly eo nomine. When ever we pray for him at the Prayers of
our Church, or our private Devotions, let us think of him, with the Honor due
to a King, and Gods Vicegerent; Let us not Slander the Footsteps of Gods
Anointed, in what ever way to Heaven he has placed the same, nor yet by
Reproaches make the few of this great populous Nation uneasy, who as Viatores
attend him in the same way; but be the more Civil to them, for being part of
his retinue therein. Since it is Rudeness for any Man to be Curiously
Inquisitive into the Speculative points of Religion held by Subjects, it may be
thought both that and Profanation of Gods more than ordinary Care over the
Hearts of Kings, to be prying and intruding into the Sentiments of our
Sovereign As there are peculiar Moral Offices that concern Subjects, when the
Prince is not in the External Communion of the same Church with them, so there
are such likewise incumbent on those Subjects, that are in the External
Communion of the same Church with their Prince, and which oblige them
particularly to promote the Ease and Tranquillity of his Reign.

It having pleased God by the Course of the Executive power of the Law in his
Majesty's Hands, to free them from many Hardships to which they were before
liable, and to put a great price into their Hands (if they have Hearts to make
use of it, and to give them an opportunity by their Moderation, and by their
Complaisance with his Majesty's Measures in the Defense and Supporting of the
Church of England, and by their knowing in this their Day, the things that
belong to their Peace, to compass an Universal and lasting Tenderness in the
great Body of the English People toward their Persons, and making the Laws and
the whole Hive of the English People to guard them, and the very Anger and Zeal
of the Protestants to be a Defensive Wall of Fire round about them, (as your
words are) it becomes them to contribute to the ease of his Majesty's Royal
Cares, by their being what you say they generally are, and by their not
Misrepresenting or Calumniating those who are of the Religion different from
theirs, which yet you have showed Father Parsons predicted they must
necessarily do, and by their not affecting such an excessive internal Power in
the Government, as you say in the distant Reighnes of some of our Protestant
Princes they did.

It concerns them by their Reverently using their present Temporary Indulgence,
to effect for his Majesty, that in the Case of his easing their Consciences and
their Estates from some Penal Laws* it may be as was in the Reign of David,
viz. that whatsoever the King did, pleased all the People.

There is none desires more than my self, that among the various Opinions in
Religion, all exasperations against each others Persons, and Misrepresentations
of each others Doctrines, may for ever cease.

And therefore according to the expressions used in the Acts of the General
Assembly of the French Clergy, complaining of Calumny published against the
Doctrine of the Church, and the Faith of the Catholic Church, and their
seeming there to restrain that Doctrine and that Faith, to the Decisions of the
Council of Trent, and such as are of the Nature with those printed in one
Column apart, I in what I have Written in my private Papers concerning the
Religion of the Church of Rome, have observed the Measures that our great
Writer Mr. Chillingworth has done in his Book forecited, and where he says,
Chap. 6. N. 56. I do not understand by your Religion, the Doctrine of
Bellarmine or Baronius, or any other private Man among you, nor the Doctrine of
the Sorbon, or of the Jesuits or Dominicans, or of any other particular company
among you; but that wherein you all agree, or profess to agree, the Doctrine of
the Council of Trent.

And tho in your Explication of what you mean by Popery, you seem to restrain
your aversion to it, as comprising only the Papal Usurpations, or what is
Congrous to the known Distinction of the Court of Rome and the Church of Rome,
and profess to follow the Measures of the late Earl of Clarendon, of whom
Cressy in p. 101. of his Epistle Apologetical, says that he makes the Popes
Temporal power to be the Hinge, upon which all other Controversies between
Protestants and English Catholics do hang and depend so entirely, that if that
only were taken off, all the rest would quickly fall to the ground; I am
pleased with his Lordship or yours, having gone so far with me in my way
against Popery (for if any Friend bears me Company good part of my way in any
Journey, I shall be pleased therewith, tho he accompany me not to my Journeys
end) I am yet to tell you, that in my way to Heaven, I have further to go, than
merely so far as the leaving that Temporal Power of the Pope behind me: And
must freely pass the bounds of Trent, but yet strictly observing the Moral
Offices of not injuring or troubling, or Misrepresenting or Miscalling any Man
for not going my way; and if I find the professed observers of the Doctrines of
the Council of Trent seeming but tacitly to reject the Disloyal Principles
propp'd up formerly by the Council of Lateran, and owning expressly only the
Doctrines of the Council of Trent, I shall not trouble my self or them to
charge them with the Odious Matter of the former Council, or to Recant by Words
what you say so many and so great Papists have done by Actions.

And if the Roman Catholics who were supposed to have publish^d that
Translated Book of the Acts of the French Clergy, intended only thereby to
caution us against the Misrepresenting them and the Doctrine of their Church, I
shall be glad if the Caution may be justly pursued by all Men.

But some Critics on that Translation have presumed to Judge their publishing
the French Kings Edict of the 14 th. of July last, for Restraining the French
Protestants former Liberty of Writing and Speaking against the Doctrines of the
Council of Trent, or as the words there are, from speaking directly or
indirectly after what manner soever of the Catholic Religion, was perhaps done
with an ill intent by some who with an Evil Eye looked on the Kings goodness to
the Church of England.

I am far from Attributing the Heat or Indiscretion of particular Persons, to
the Body of any Religionary Party: And do Judge, that when our Excellent
Divines of the Church of England shall be of Opinion that the Emissaries of
Rome are not more than ordinarily busy in endeavoring to pervert any of their
Flocks from their Religion, they will naturally throw off Debates of
Speculative Controversial Divinity. For granted it must be, that both
Protestants and Papists do stand more in need to be taught what were the Moral
Practices of the Primitive Christians than what were their Speculative
Assertions: And as a late Divine has well remarked, Sixteen Hundred Years are
run out, since the Son of God came down to Sanctify and Save the World, which
are so many Degrees, whereby we are Descended from the first Perfection. We are
more distant from them in Holiness than in time; so universal and great is the
Corruption, that it is almost as difficult to revive the dying Faith of
Christians, and to Reform their Lives according to the Purity of their
Profession, as the Conversion of the World was from Heathenism to Christianity.

And when I consider how much the Christian Religion has been Debased to a
Religion-Trade, as your Term is, and and a project to advance Men's Ambition or
profit, and by ways and Artifices contrary to the Law of Nature, and below that
generous Contempt of Sordid Actions and below the fides, verecundia, honestas,
and the Simplicity of Manners that Adorned the Minds and the Conversations of
the Ancient Heathens, and how much the Old pietas in patriam, you have referred
to in Cicero, is evaporated among Christians, and the very ideas of Heroical
Actions lost, that is, such Actions as were termed so as respecting the good of
our Prince and Country, and when I consider how by that Cruel Revengeful
implacable Spirit, rendering Christians worse Enemies to one another, than even
ever Julian was (for he in one of his Epistles to Iamblichus professed that he
thought then was not fit for him to persecute the Christians, (...). i. e. I
think it fit to teach, but not to punish Fools) and seeing some Christians to
apostatise from that which was commendable in the temper of Julian the
Apostate, I cannot forbear thinking of those severe words of my Friend Dr.
Hammond, in the Epistle to his practical Catechism, viz. As Machiavel, thought
Religion would emasculate and enfeeble Common wealths, we have more reason to
complain, that it has Debauched and Corrupted Lives: And were it not that God
has been pleased to preserve a scattered Remnant, a few in every Nation to be
the Records (as it were) from whom it may be seen what Christianity is able to
do, if it may be hearkened to: Were it not that there are a few Ancient
primitive Spirits, by whom as by a Standard others may, and ought to be
reformed, we have reason to think, and say that Christian Men are the impurest
part of the World: That Satan's after-game has proved more prosperous and lucky
to him, than his first designment did; that his Night-walk has brought him
more proselytes, than his unlimited range of going up and down, to and fro over
the face of the Earth: that as Sin by the Law, so Satan by the Faith of Christ,
has taken occasion, and so deceived and ruined us more desperately, more
universally, than by all the National Idolatrous Customs of Heathenism he has
been able to do.

There is one noble Virtue of the Primitive Christians, that has indeed by the
Successful labors of the Divines of the Church of England been lately much
Propagated in this Land; and that is, Loyalty to our Princes, and God be
thanked that we have many thousands of the Layety of that Church who have been
better instructed in that Primitive virtue* then ever Bellarmine was* as
appears by his Quia deerant vires.

And I wish that for the ease of his Majesty's Cares and Safety of his
Government, all Men's Ideas and Practices of Loyalty, may grow both more refined
and firm. And that according to your excellent quotation out of Seneca, Quanto
latius officiorum patet quam juris Regula, all his Majesty's Subjects may
practice the Primitive Obedience to the Height of all Moral Offices, and not to
think that their being barely legales homines, in doing what the Law compells
them to for his Service, is all the Loyalty or Obedience requisite.

The obvious thought of Children, as well as Parents being Morally bound to be
helpful to each other beyond what they are constrained to by the Law, may show
us the reasonableness of the extending our Obedience to our Political Father,
to all the Noble heights of Virtue.

I-am very well pleased with the passages in your Discourse, that brand
Mercenary Loyalty in p. 274. and the I opeans you sing to the Crowns victories
obtained over Mercenary loyalty. And here I cannot omit being so just to your
self, as to acknowledge that you have as good a warrant, as any Subject of the
Crown I know, to reprehend Mercenary Loyalty; since on your modest Application
to the late King upon the importunity of your friends, for a Compensation of
your varicus Services done him almost ever since his Restoration, and the
Reinbursment of your expenses in his Service, and on his Ministers by reference
consulting my Judgment about your Case, I found several thousands of pounds due
to you on that account, and do Judge that you never since applied to his late
Majesty, nor any of his Ministers about the same. But one instance more of your
unmercenary Loyalty I shall not conceal, that I was assured of from a Lord in
High Favor with his late Majesty, Namely, that when in his late Majesty's
Reign, he knowing your Abilities to serve the King, did of his own accord offer
to you his readiness to move his Majesty to afford you a fair Pension, you
Over-Modestly requested his Lordship to move no such thing in your behalf,
professing to his Lordship that it should be the business of your life, to
promote all his Majesty's Just Measures in what you could, without any
expectation of other reward than what the pleasure of all Actions of Loyalty
necessarily included in the doing of them. And to this too I might add, that in
the time when the late Western Rebellion was most considerable, your having
with other Gentlemen appeared to his Majesty, as ready at your own expense, to
be then in Arms to serve the Crown at an Hours warning, was a further fair
example of your unmercenary Loyalty.

And the truth is, that in the Present State of England, when it so much
imports us to restore England to its Old Office of ballancing the World,
Mercenary Loyalty would be now a kind of Monster In morality.

It here falls in my way to observe that you have in p. 156. and 157. very
usefully shown Mercenary Religion to be a thing both senseless and odious. And
therefore tho you may seem the only person of the Church of Eng. who has in
print varied from its Homilies or Articles since his Majesty's Reign in any
Religionary point: Yet as to your self, I have had reason to guess that you
long ago in the late Kings Reign had some Theological Sentiments some what
differing from what I took for our Churches Articles, and that I speaking to
you thereof, you replied out of Bishop Bramhalls Just Vindication of our
Church, that our Articles are not penned with Anathemas, or Curses against all
those even of our own, who do not receive them; but used only as an help or
rule of unity among our selves.

Nor have I forgot how you once discoursed to me your opinion of the Tenet,
that the Souls of good Men, do not immediately after Death go up into Heaven,
nor the Souls of bad Men then immediately down into Hell: But that the former
than go into a good (...), and the latter into a bad one, and that such place
was called (...) i. e. inconspicuus as being so not in regard of it self, but
of us, and that our Saviors Soul went (...), and that this Tenet was more
particularly Tertullians, and that he describing the (...) said 'twas a place
ubi bonis been erat and malis male, and that good Men did there in Candida
expectare diem Judicij, and that the Expression of aeternitatis Candidati, was
first taken occasionally from those words of Tertullian, and that it seemed
suitable to the Measures of Divine Justice, not to give the great Sentence
concerning eternal rewards, and punishments, before the Trial of the Day of
Judgment, and that as a Thousand years with God, are said to be but one Day,
the time of that Trial might possibly last so long, and that it might else seem
a diminutio capitis, for Saints to be brought from the Caelum beatorum, to the
Bar, and that somewhat like this notion of the State of Souls after Death the
Jews had, and likewise all the Fathers for the first four Centuries, and when
some of them encouraging Men to be Martyrs, said that such did uno saltu get up
into Heaven, and that our Savior saying in my Fathers House are many Mansions,
etc. and if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive
you unto my self, tho therefore the good will not be received by Christ into
those Mansions, till he comes again, yet their condition will be much better in
the good (...) then in the most prosperous State here below, where they are
continually exposed to the Contagion of Sin: And as you have in p. 317.
mentioned that some of our Protestant Divines owning this Tenet, have not been
therefore Censured as Popishly affected or maintainers of Purgatory, so neither
shall I therefore thence infer your owning the Notion of a Purgatory or Limbus,
nor the usefulness of Praying for any Souls in the Hades, and much less, that
your favoring this notion of Hades by publishing it now, as what some of our
Protestant Divines favored, was in the least designed by you as any humouring
of a Project to reconcile Churches, a project that you have expressed to be so
ineffectual, when some well meaning Men had it in their Heads in a Conjuncture
long ago, and when Withers a dull Poet of the Age, yet a favorite of the
vulgus, did in his Emblems p. 3 of his ep. dedicat. (as you once told me) amuse
them with his fancies of the Union of Religion.

And as you have in your preface observed it that the few florid Sheets lately
published on the Subject of Toleration, have made no other figure than that of
the poor resemblances of flowers extracted by Chemical Art out of their ashes,
and that a little shaking them together in the glass of time, must make them
presently fall in pieces, I have observed likewise, that the perhaps well meant
Velleities or Wishes or little Essays of some few private Persons that since
his Majesty's Reign, amused any by propounding a Reconciliation of Churches,
have appeared but like extracted resemblances of the flowers of private Men's
proposals of that kind in the Conjuncture before the year 1640; and since his
Majesty's happy Reign, they have been easily shaken in pieces.

Mr. Prynne in his History of the Trial of Arch Bishop Laud, in p. 191. tells
us what a ferment Mr. Adams his Case made in the University of Cambridge, in
the year 1637. who Preaching in St. Mary's, and there asserting the necessity
of Auricular Confession, was by Dr. Brownrig the Vice Chancellor enjoined to
Recant that Doctrine, and about which great Heats arose among the Heads of
Houses there.

But the Sharpness of the canons of 40 against Popery, showing the zeal the
Archbishop expressed in the making of those Canons, and of that Clause in the
Oath there for the abjuring Popery, viz. and that I will not Subject the Church
of England, to the Church of Rome which Oath the Archbishop in his Defense
says, was a more strict Oath, than ever was made against Popery in any Age or
Church, may easily Convince the Sagacious, of the Church of Englands Sense
then, about any Project of Reconciling the Church of England to that of Rome,
being altogether vain.

The Archbishop had it seems by long and deep observation found the project of
the reconciling of our Church and Romes, a thing utterly unpracticable;
however, as to his having been formerly a Visionaire about the possibility of
the same I remember I have seen some angry reflections of Dr* Williams Bishop
of Lincoln against him, and Writ with that Bishops own Hand in the Margent of
the Archbishops Printed Star Chamber Speech, where over against those passages
that seemed to be somewhat trimming in favor of the Church of Rome, Bishop
Williams wrote the nearer you come to the Church of Rome, the further she will
fly from your Courtship and Caresses, and will tell you that Rusticus es
Corydon, nec munera curat Alexis.

But what thing the Reconcilers would be of Churches mean, to themselves is
sufficiently plain. As to the natural meaning of any thing of that nature, I
call to mind, that a Presbyterian Minister speaking to you once of
Comprehension, and of the Divines of his persuasion, and that of the Church of
England being that way Reconciled, you told him you wished a Coalition of such
with the Church of England as were formerly of his Persuasion: But that you
supposed by his comprehension, he desired to be a Comprehensor of some of the
Livings of the Divines of the Church of England, and that therefore when you
found any Divine speak of the Essaying to Reconcile Churches, you naturally
thought of those Words in the Acts of the Apostles. C. 17. v. 18. What will
this Babbler say? and Rendering the word (...) there by Church Robber, Altar
Robber, and Sacrilegious Person as our Broughton did, and justifying that your
Critical Acception of the word out of the Greek Classick Authors, viz.
Demosthenes and Aristophanes, whom you had said, you had found Cited for that
Sense of the word, at the end of Cloppenburg de Sacrificiis, and who Citing
Aristophanes his Comedy of (...) aves where the Birds threaten Jupiter with a
Holy War, shows that by (...) was meant, Avis Seminilega, and that the
Athenians thought St. Paul would despoil the Altars of the Gods of the
Provisions of their Offerings: And in Fine you said, that such various readings
of that word, would certainly meet in any ones being thought a Babbler by those
of the Religion Established, if he would interlope in their Maintenance.

I doubt not but you have heard of the late Candidate Beyond Sea, for the
Office of the Reconciler of Churches, I mean the Author of TVBA PACIS, ad
universas Dissidentes in Occidente Ecclesias, seu Discursus Theologicus, de
unione Ecclesiarum Romanae and Protestantium, nec non amica Compositione
Controversiarum sidei inter hosce Caetus, per Matheum Praetorium Memela
Prussum. Printed at Collen, An. 1684. and which that Author Dedicates to the
Emperor, and to the Kings of Poland, France, England, Denmark, Sweden,
severally, and to the Electors and other Princes of the Empire: And just before
he blows his Trumpet, he warn thus of the two Old Pronouns, that have so long
troubled the World, viz. Meum and Tuum, and which will always continue so to
do, till all Men shall be of St. Francis his mind, whom when a Friar told that
he came a cella tua, St. Francis when he heard the word tua, said he would
Lodge no more there. The Author tells us in his 10. Chapter, Tentavit quidem
Compositionem Vir ob studium pacis a plurimis and principibus viris Long
Laudatus Georgius Cassander, sed non fausto Successu, Contradicentibus partim
Romany, partim and protestantibus, and tells us there of the like Event, that
Marcus Antonius de Dominis, and his Work for that purpose had. But our Author
had the Fortune to Catch a Tartar of an Objection in the last Paragraph of his
Book save one, viz. At dicet aliquis si unio nostrarum Ecclesiarum Cum Romana
Ecclesia sieret, Romanus Pontifex jus suum repeteret* tot* bona olim
Eccliastica quae jam per pacta and transacta in manus serenissimorum principum
Cessere quae nunquam principes in aerarij sui damnum adimi sibi patientur. And
to this Objection, he returns this Answer, viz. Respondetur, Omnino aequum
est Ius suum Cuique tribuere, nec Romano Pontifici illud derogandum quod ipsi
legitime Competit. Bona Ecclesiastica quae olim fuerunt, nunc autem aerario
principum adscripta, jure gladij and pactorum acquisita NON PVTAMVS Romanum
Ponti ficem pro sua qua pollet prudentia repetiturum. Frui Concedet ijs ad qua^
admissi sunt possessionibus. Nihil ijs vel decedere vel adimi cupiet. This the
good Man in his Embassy Speech to the World, as its Reconciler tells us of this
Pope; but without showing his Credentials either from the Pope, or any one
else: And I believe on the account of what you have shown of the
Munster-Treaty, the Princes and Electors of the Empire, to whom he has
Dedicated his Book, will not fear this Popes being either able or willing to
give them any disturbance in their Church Lands. Nor need any of us in England
more fear the Popes being able or willing to hurt our possessions of the
Church Lands. We are sufficiently shown it out of Mores Reports, f. 1.282. that
the Popes Bulls giving Monasteries to Wolsy, with the consent of the King, and
the Surrender of the Priors to Wolsy, would not serve the turn: and that
nothing but an Act of Parliament would alter the Property.

You have here an instance of our present Foraign Reconcilers of Churches,
being very poor Middle Region Men, in Comparison of Cassander and Antonius de
Dominis, and others; as our late little Reconcilers likewise have been,
Compared with the unfortunate ones of the Old Conjuncture. The question of what
will this Babbler say, is properly applicable to them from all Parties.

But one thing I cannot but here observe to you, that as I was very well
pleased with your Design, that you Communicated to me after you had begun this
long VOYAGE of your THOVGHTS (as I may call it) and writ the former part of
your Discourse, namely, that because in your occasional Conversation with
People of all sorts, you have found that Men's Fancies were (as you said) Nailed
to POPERY, and their Tongues Tied up as to any thing but POPERY, and that they
could not go beyond the Tedder of that in their Discourse; and that POPERY's
Monopolizing so much of their Discourse, had been one of its VSVRPATIONS, you
intended to try to divert them from it, and make them pass ad autres, by laying
before them such various Matters of Calculation, relating to their own Country
and many places of Christendom, as might give them somewhat beside POPERY and
PLOTS to think and speak of in Company; So I am much better pleased with your
Performance of that your Curious Enterprise, and do think that your Book by
containing in it so many MISCELLANEA, must eo nomine, prove highly useful to
our English World in this Conjuncture.

It here occurs to me to observe to you, that after an Erratum of the Press in
Page 38. of your Discourse, Namely, where you referred to P. 325 in the
Advocate of Conscience Liberty, instead of Page 225, you make the last Letter
of D'Ossats to be from Rome An. 1596, and I suppose you happened to do so, by
casting your Eye on the Old Date of the last Letter but one Printed in the
Volume of his Letters in Folio of the Paris Edition, An. 1625. and finding it
to be An. 1596. But it came not into your Mind then, to observe that the last
of his Letters as they are Ranged in Order, was the 199 th. and in the End of
Book 9 th. and which was to Villeroy from Rome, March the 6 th. An. 1604, and
in which Year he died, as you rightly refer to his Epitaph to show. But it
seems after that last Letter in Book 9 th. of the Paris Edition, the Publisher
saying that he had recovered some others of his Letters, Prints them without
respect to the Order of time; and there makes the Date of the last Letter save
one in the Volume, to be in the Year 1596. as you have there done. But however
this Derogates not from the Justice of your Animadversion in page 38. on the
Roman Catholic English Priest, for making D' Ossat to have known the
Gunpowder Treason Plot to be a Sham one, Eight Years before it was to be
Executed. For the Letter of D' Ossat that that Priest alleged to prove what I
now mentioned, was Dated as you justly say from Rome, March 29 th. An. 1596,
and he never read the Letter that can find any thing of the Gunpowder Treason
in it.

I shall here take occasion to make my Excuse to the Reverend Divines of our
Church assuring them, that by adding Observations on the Writings of the Author
of the Papist Misrepresented and Represented; I intended not to Derogate from
the Sufficiency of the Learning and Reason they have showed in their Answers
thereunto. But the truth is, though as in our Parliaments, frequently when any
have moved for some Additional Branch to be set^^ed on the Revenue here after
the Example of somewhat of the like Nature in France, the Naming of France ^n
the Case then for a Pre^ident, has been observed ^o make many speak against
the Vnseasonableness of the Motion, who otherwise would not have done it; so
the writing of any thing that was contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, and after the Mode of the Bishop of Condom and the Acts of the French
Clergy, just at this time of Day, was a thing that I could not but show my
Resentment against, as very much unseasonable. And moreover according to the
saying that one ought not t^ be Patient under charge of Hesie, I may justify
the warmth of my Resentments, against the Acts of the French Clergy charging
some of ours both with Heresy and Calumny and bringing up our Whitaker and
Downham there in the Van of the Calumniators under the first Article, and our
Raynolds under the Sixth.

I Remain SIR, Your Affectionate Friend and Servant. ANGLESEY.

FINIS.

