ANGLIAE Decus and Tutamen: OR, THE GLORY and SAFETY OF THIS NATION, Under our
Present King and Queen; PLAINLY DEMONSTRATING, That it is not only the DUTY,
but the INTEREST of all JACOBITES and DISAFFECTED PERSONS to act for, and
submit to, this GOVERNMENT.

LONDON: Printed, and Sold by Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1691.

ANGLIAE Decus and Tutamen: OR, THE GLORY and SAFETY OF THIS NATION, Under our
Present King and Queen, etc.
THE Physicians have a very bad Opinion of that Disease that begins with most
violent Agitations, with Tremblings that shake the very Bones out of Joint, and
extremely debilitate the Nerves, with dreadful Convulsions, with frantic and
extatical Indispositions of the Brain, that overrun the whole Economy. They
are never deceived in their Judgment, when they pronounce such Distempers
mortal. It is the same thing in States; their Diseases which begin with violent
internal Agitations, are commonly Presages of great Revolutions. France is in
this Condition; the Preparations that are made against her by all Europe, in a
joint Conspiracy, threaten her with great Mischiefs, and there is nothing more
effectual for fortifying the Hopes of the Confederate Princes and States, than
the convulsive Motions that are observed, not only in her Bowels, but in all
her Actions, if we consider her Arms, nothing ever appeared so strange; France
(although it be as yet entire, and has not incurred the loss of either Men or
Provinces) is subject to all those Agitations to which she can be exposed,
which would be infallibly improved into the last and fatal Paroxism, if there
were an Enemy in the midst of the Kingdom. She obliges all her Inhabitants to
take Arms, she exhausts her Treasures to the bottom. Ruin and Desolation are
the Blessings she leaves in those Places which she cannot keep; she is
notoriously guilty of the most inhuman Excesses; for all the Palatinate, and
almost all the Countries upon the Rhine, with their Towns and Castles, that are
levelled with the Ground, burnt and reduced to Ashes, are in such a Motion, as
cannot be imputed to any thing else, but a Fit of a violent Frenzy, that is
so prodigious, that we cannot but see therein the Characters of an internal
Agitation, that is attended with the most dreadful Violence, of all has been as
yet observed. Every Knight of the Post brings us an Account of Symptoms of this
cruel Disease, which does expose her to such fearful Agitations, and threatens
her with the most violent Death; and there is something that is singular in the
Violence of these Motions; and it is this, that the Revolution that has lately
happened in England, by the wise Conduct of William III. King of England does
irritate them to so great an Elevation of Fury. If his present Majesty had
poured his Forces into France, and obliged that King to leave his Throne, the
Rage would have been raised to such a pitch, as to admit of no Accession. The
Piety, Clemency and Justice of King William (who now strikes Lewis with so
great a Terror) is the August Subject of this Discourse. These glorious
Qualities made manifest in his said Majesty's late Expedition into England, in
Opposition to the French Designs there, are the Subject matter of this small
Treatise. Neither the late King James, nor the Irish and English Papists, his
Friends, were so hot in their Resentments as the French. There is something
extraordinary in it, and this boundless Wrath of the French King against
William, King of England, was possibly not so much kindled by the consideration
of what he has done, as by the fearful prospect of what he can do; Yet the most
powerful measures they can take, for the overthrow of their own Interest, is to
provoke an Enemy, who is so potent at this day. It is possible that he is not
altogether irreconcilable, they ought to be more careful, to observe those
just and decent Methods, by which he is to be treated. The Designs of France
afforded a necessary occasion for an Expedition, the whole Course of which runs
parallel with the Rules of Piety which inspire King William's Royal Breast.

Since the King was of the Years of Knowledge, there never passed one year,
wherein he did not publicly receive the Sacrament several times, there passed
not one Sunday on which he was not present at the public Service and Devotions;
he never heard a Sermon which touched him, which he obliged not himself to
recollect, and upon which he made not pious Reflections, he never heard a
Sermon, but with such Attention and Devotion, that made Private Persons
ashamed. He never went out in the Morning without secret Prayer and devout
Reading. And they who entered into his Closet observed his Table to be adorned
with Books of Devotion that were fit to nourish Souls. His generous way of
interessing himself in all the Miseries that those suffered, who were
Persecuted for the sake of their Religion, was a visible Testimony to all the
World of the Sentiments of his Heart concerning them. We may say, that the
Qualities of a Hero and of a great Man are chiefly due to himself and to his
Blood; And God who took care for his Welfare, and of his Soul, besides other
means of Princely Education, provided him an Excellent Master, in the things of
Religion. And therefore, from his Infancy, he received the Seeds of Piety,
which have sprung up to so great Maturity, as we see at this day. He affords
Matter of Edification to all Protestants who know him. He foresaw very well all
that the Rage of the contrary Party could say against his Enterprise, which
obliged him to deliberate on it for a considerable time; for he not only loved
Virtue it self, but cherished the outward appearances of it. He had never
overcome the scruples that presented themselves, if the Security of Religion
and of the State had not determined Him. As for the Queen, it is generally
agreed, that there was never one more Devout, nor more exact, in the Practice
of her Duties toward God. Her Piety is not accompanied with the vain show of
Hypocrisy. She is great without being Proud: She has a Natural Air, she appears
in all her Actions without Affectation. She is tender and full of Compassion,
and incapable of forgetting the Obligations of Nature;

As for his Majesty's Expedition into England. First, It is requisite that we
show that the Possessions and Affairs belonging to the Public are not governed
as the Possessions of Private Persons, and that we are not to judge of them by
the same Rules. Princes, Kings, and in general, Sovereigns have Men and
reasonable Souls for their Possessions; and Private Men for their Possessions,
have only Houses, Lands, Oxen, Sheep and Horses, etc. That if a Private Person
is of a bad Conduct, and does mismanage those Possessions which Providence has
put into his hands, there will no other inconvenience ensue thereupon, but only
the disposition of some Lands or Movables, which, in respect of the Public,
will be altogether in as good, and possibly in a much better Condition, in the
hands of those to whom the profuse Life of the last Proprietor brought them,
than in his hands, who made such a disposition; and the Public Laws have not
established so exact Rules, for hindering the Alienation of Lands, Possessions
and Movables, as they have settled for preventing of the Ruin of the State,
and the dissolution of Societies. If Houses, Trees, Horses and Oxen had
reasonable Souls, God without doubt, had ordained Laws of Right to limit the
possession of the Proprietors. Thus, because private Persons have a full right
to do with their possessions as they please, and to govern them according as it
seems good to them, yet Public Persons cannot govern States and Societies
according to their own Caprice, without any right, left to their Subjects and
Members to oppose and hinder the devastation thereof; and in some respects,
even the Children of a House, and the presumptive Heirs of a Private Person,
have a right to hinder the wasting of the Possessions that belong to the
Family. It is very well known, that the Laws have allowed Means to Heirs, for
the prevention of their own impendent Ruin; that they may not be barred of
their right to that Estate, which ought to revert to them. With far better
reason may Princes, Heirs of Crowns and of Kingdoms have a Right to hinder the
Ruin and Devastation of those Countries, which they are to possess one day.

Besides there is a difference betwixt Public Possessions and those of Private
Persons. The Law and one's Birth give the latter without any reservation, but
it is God and the People who bestow Public Possessions and Sovereignities, and
with this reservation, that the Welfare and the Safety of the State and of the
People is the Sovereign end of Governments and the Supreme Law. God, I say, and
the People confer Sovereign Power, and bestow it on whom they please, without
being obliged always to have regard to the Laws of Succession. David invests
himself with the two Crowns of the People of Israel during the Life of the
Children of Saul, who was their true and lawful King, and which is more, the
Children of Jonathan, his incomparable Friend. The Laws of Friendship and of
such a Friendship as that was, betwixt Jonathan and David, are, at least, as
inviolable, amongst honest Men, as the Relations of Son-in-Law and
Father-in-Law: Yet David, without any scruple, went up to Hebron, and made
himself be Crowned King of Judah, and not content with this, seven Years after,
he treats with Abner, General of the Army of the People of Israel, to draw them
from their Allegiance to Ishbosheth, the Son of Saul, their lawful King, by
Birth, by Succession and by Possession; to oblige him to put the Ten Tribes
upon Revolting from their Obedience to their lawful Sovereign.

If a People, in prejudice of an eldest Son, would establish Cadets upon the
Throne, in the opinion of some By assed Persons, Hell it self could not afford
Colors black enough to Paint the Rebellion, Enterprise and Attempt of that
People; yet we may see how the People of Judah and Israel set Solomon on the
Throne, in prejudice of I do not know how many Elder Brothers of Solomon, all
of them Men capable of government. It may be objected, that God who is the
disposer of Crowns, does bestow them on whom he pleases; it was he who gave the
Crown to David and to Solomon in prejudice of the true Heirs; he could do it. I
find the answer very good for the Objector, it is also for me, and it amounts
to what I have said, viz. that God and the People are the Lords of Crowns, to
give them to whom they please, God as the Sovereign Lord, the People as the
Lords of their Possessions under God, God as the Lord of all Crowns in general,
every People as the Lords of their own Crown in particular; thus we find
innumerable instances in History of People who in their Families make one to
Inherit in prejudice of another, who prefer a Cadet to the Eldest Son, and
oftentimes the Son to the Father, because the safety of the People and the
welfare of the Society does so require. The People go further, they transfer
the Sovereign Power from one House to another. The Jews leave the Royal Family
of David, and take that of the Maccabees. The French renounce that of the
Morivingians to take that of Charles Martell, and at last forsook that of
Charles Martell, who had Male Issue, to set on the Throne a third Race which
Reigns at this day. There is no State of which History is not full of such
Examples; it will only wast time to set them down; And such an Action is the
only Foundation of the right, by which the Crown of France is held. Examples of
this nature have the force of Laws, for the constant and perpetual Custom as
well of the People of God as of other Nations, does make it manifest to us,
that it is the Peoples right; and without enumerating Examples, good sense and
right reason make a Law and clearly declare, that since Societies do make Kings
for their own preservation, they have a right to transfer the Power of the
Government, to him who is Judged the most capable to preserve the Society and
Commonwealth.

If these two Truths be joined together, First, that Kings are not Lords of
reasonable Souls, as private Men are Lords of their Lands, and of their Cattle.
Secondly, that God and the People may of right bestow Crowns on whom they
please, a third Position will result from both, viz. that the People, as well
as the Church, is always a Minor, that Kingdoms are Pupils, that Kings are
properly their Guardians, and that consequently in the same manner as it is
permitted to presumptive Heirs of the Possessions of a Pupil, to hinder the
disorders, and prevent the wasting of the Estate which belongs to him, or may
belong to him for the time to come; so the presumptive Heirs of a Crown not
only can, but ought by the Laws of Religion, of Piety and of conscience, to
hinder disorders, to preserve the Society which is going to ruin, and repress
the violences of him who having in his hand the Sovereign Power, uses it to the
destruction of the public; though the lawful Heir of a Crown should have no
other interest but his own, he ought to be allowed to maintain and preserve it;
much more, and with better reason, when he has in his view the interest of
Religion and of the Kingdom, and there is no relation, either of Son in-Law, or
of Father, or of Son, but ought to yield to so inviolable an Obligation; for we
must love God and the Commonwealth more then Father and Mother: besides this
is not so much to love superiors, as to abandon to them a Kingdom or a Church,
for the common ruin and destruction thereof. It is to suffer them to take a
full career to Hell and Death, it is to permit them to cover their memories
with shame and infamy, it is to assist them in a conduct that renders them
odious to mankind, and consequently to oppose their disorders is to wish them
well and to do them good. Was it ill taken that the Dauphin Charles, who was
afterward King of France, under the Name of Charles VII. made a Campaign with
a considerable Army against his Father Charles VI. and that he opposed a
Government that exposed the state to ruin, and threatened the Kingdom with utter
destruction; and because Charles did not bear to his Father a base compliance
by leaving him and his Ministers to commit what mischiefs they pleased, had
Charles reason to disinherit his own Son, to set up a Foreign Prince in the
Kingdom, to make him be Crowned in Paris during his own Life? Would Charles
have done well to suffer such outrageous Mischiess because he received them
from a Father. Let us suppose a King who is not only profuse, but a Tyrant, who
brings desolation upon the Community, who kills, massacres, who ravages all the
State, who reduces it to the brink of ruin without remission or concealment.
Can it be believed that a presumptive Heir, though he were even a Son, would be
obliged to behold such grievances without redressing them; he that would
persuade himself of such a thing would justly deserve the Character of a
complete Fool. On the contrary, a Prince, who is Heir of the Crown is obliged
to join himself with the States of the Kingdom, to disarm the Tyrant, and to
deliver the Kingdom out of his hands, that it may not become a frightful
desert. Let us descend yet one degree lower and suppose a King not so ill as
the former, but who Acts under the covert of some formality of Justice, who
likewise might possibly have some good intention, but who nevertheless being
possessed with evil Counselors, and blinded with a certain extraordinary
Zeal, does lay the whole Kingdom desclate, and ruins the honestest Gentlemen of
the Realm, depopulates the State by illegal and rigorous proceedings, that
strike the whole World with horror, who lays an indispensable Obligation on
his Subjects to desert him, by suffering unjust judgments, and practices
violent courses, oppressions and Massacres; by charging the Kingdom with such
excessive impositions, that it was very near involved in an universal ruin by
sowing the Seeds of Rebellion over all, by exciting the hatred and horror of
all Foreign Princes, by unjust Wars, by breaking his Promises, by violating his
Treaties, by infringing his most Solemn Capitulations, by perpetual and violent
Invasions of the Rights and Properties of his Neighbors, by drawing upon the
Kingdom the dreadful Calamities of some Foreign War, which threatened the State
with imminent ruin; if such a King, I say, has been found of this stamp and
conduct, the presumptive Heir, whether Son, or Son in-Law would be
indispensably obliged to take some course in such an exigency, and to oppose
such mischiefs, by force of Arms; First, because every one ought to preserve
and maintain his own Inheritance from violence and desolation. In Crowns that
go by succession, a Prince and Heir, during the time that he is yet presumptive
Heir, has no right to govern, it is true, but has an undoubted right to demand
a Part in the Government, after he is past the Years of Minority, and is
arrived at those of perfect Maturity. A King who ruins his Kingdom, who slights
and sends away his Son of sufficient Age to govern, and treats him as one of
the Pages of his Court, may thank himself, if the Son does himself Justice, and
demands a little better information, about the measures that are taken in the
Government of the Kingdom, which he beholds; running against the fatal Bank, by
the maleadministration of the Royal Pilot; and whereof himself is one day to be
both Father and King. He meddles not in Affairs that do not belong to him; for
nothing can be more his interest. Thus therefore a Prince, Heir of the Crown,
has an interest, that he may not inherit a vast desert instead of a Kingdom,
and that his Father, by a violent Conduct may not leave him both his Subjects
and Neighbors for Enemies, out of whose hands he cannot escape; There is yet a
reason and an interest, that is more considerable and likewise more
justifiable, viz. that of the Public. The Laws of Charity do oblige all to
rescue those that are in misery, and to deliver them from their Afflictions. A
Prince, Heir of a Crown, ought to look upon all the Subjects and Members of the
Kingdom as his Brethren; he is obliged in Conscience to lend them his Hand, and
save them, although even his and their common Father be the Man who involves
them in a common ruin. If an Elder Brother sees his Father take his Children,
one after another, and plunge them in a River to drown them, this Eldest
Brother is not bound to see his Younger Brothers drowned, without plucking them
out of the hands of his Father, for fear of violating the respect that is due
to a Father: Humble remonstrances toward a Father who is so unnatural are not
enough, what he owes to God and to the Public is far above all the Duties of
Blood, of Alliance and Parentage. Here are two interests, one of a Prince, and
the other of the public, both together, which ought to oblige the Presumptive
Heir to repress the violences of his own Father; because this King, whom we
have last supposed, has filled the Kingdom with Malcontents, exhausted its
Treasures by excessive Impositions, ruined it by proscriptions and
depopulations, made all the Neighboring Princes his Enemies, and does thereby
make way for a mighty revolution, which may preclude the lawful Heir from his
Right, and reduce his Kingdom either to an Anarchy, or a Civil War, or make it
pass into the Possession of strangers. This is clear, for an oppressed State,
such as we have supposed (attacked by Enemies which their King's Injustice has
procured) will be sure to give a joyful reception to a Foreign Power, that
shall make an entrance by force of Arms, and look upon them rather as their
Saviors then Enemies. They will say, and will have reason to say, that they
can be no worse treated then they are, that they can lose nothing by changing
their Master; and the Truth is, a stranger entering into a Kingdom, has nothing
else to do but to Proclaim Liberty, every one would hasten to come under his
Banner; and from this would ensue the desolation of the Realm by a Civil War,
or the ruin of the Government, which would pass into their hands. A Prince,
Heir of the Crown, is not obliged to be a Spectator of so pressing and so great
dangers, without applying a Remedy thereunto; if he be always Patient, the
Enemy will come, the Malcontents will join in a Body with them, and he will
be deprived of those means whereby he might justify his rightful Pretenses to
the Crown, or at least the Kingdom will be left to him distracted and divided
into a thousand Fractions, one Party favoring the Stranger, and another taking
the part of the lawful Heir, just as it happened under Charles VI. and Charles
VII. the English Possessed themselves of the Kingdom, some took his part, and
others were against him, and the Kingdom began to sink under the weight of that
dreadful War. It is then clear, that, in such a Case, a Son, after having made
respectful Remonstrances to his Father, and having made him sensible of the
formidable disorders occasioned by his ill Conduct, may with a good conscience,
make use of force to deliever the Kingdom out of the hands of one who Devotes
it to ruin, who lays it desolate, and does Transubstantiate it into a desert,
and who by the ill Measures he takes, does evidently expose it to a Foreign
Invasion.

Now it is certain, that King James was destroying the Kingdoms, Bodies Politic
and Natural by his Mismanagement of the Government, his violation of the Laws,
and making himself the Arbitrary Judge of their Sanction and Observation,
dispensing with them at Pleasure, by depriving them of their Authority, by
putting honest Men out of their employs and bestowing those Offices on Men, who
were by Law incapable of exercising the same, by taking off innocent Persons.
This directly tended, first to the ruin of the Religion, that was by Law
established; for he deprived Protestants of their Offices, on purpose to bestow
them on Roman Catholics, who were Enemies to the Protestants and their
Religion, he violated all manner of Laws as he pleased, he filled the Kingdom
with Priests and Monks, he made the Exercise of the Popish Religion public in
all Cities and Counties, he gave to the Jesuits the Colleges that were of
Ancient Foundation, and allowed them to found new. He ordered Churches to be
Built for them. The Jesuits opened Schools in London. A Jesuit sat in Council
and was the first Minister of State. The King sent Ambassadors to Rome and had
Ambassadors sent to him from thence, and all this against the express Laws of
the Kingdom, and that he might do all these things securely, he maintained a
powerful Army in time of Peace, which is also contrary to the Privilege of the
English People. This Conduct tended to the overthrow of the Monarchy, as well
as of the Church. A Civil War was unavoidable in a little time, England's
patience was come to an end. The Kingdom was fallen into the same condition it
was in, in the time of King Charles I. It is possible, that King James II.
would have incurred the same fate with his Father, and without doubt the
Fanatics would have made themselves Masters of the Government, to the Exclusion
of the lawful Heir. Thus His present Majesty for the preservation of his
Religion, and the Crown to which he had a good Title, and which ought in that
juncture to be reduced into possession, was obliged to put a stop to the
current of those Mischiefs, in the Fountain; he endeavored to do this by
moderate means. He Passed into England to curb the immoderate Power of his
Father-in-Law. This Father-in-Law could not endure to receive Law from any one.
He fled, he Abdicated the Throne. The Nation filled it with him who was come to
deliver them, His Majesty King William Accepted the Crown, it had been a cruel
piece of Piety to behold the Bowels of the State torn, the Religion of the
Kingdom perishing, the spilling of so much Blood, the oppression of so many
innocent Persons, so many Families reduced to Beggary, and the right of the
lawful Heir exposed to evident ruin, for I know not what respect to Relation
and Kindred. Brutus and Manlius were praised for not having spared their own
Blood, and for having punished by death the Rebellion and Disobedience of their
Children. God is our first Father, our Country is our principal Mother, there
are no Relations or Alliances which ought not to be Sacrificed to these great
Names.

Besides, these general Considerations, there are also particular ones which
are no less proper for the justification of their Majesty's of Great Britain
and Ireland. The first is that King James II. was not lawful King, although he
was acknowledged by the Three Kingdoms, he had drawn the Subjects of those
three Kingdoms thereto, by surprise; being a Papist he could not be the King of
England, the People and Kings annex to the Succession of the Crown what
Conditions they think fit. Since Henry VIII. all the Kings and Queens of
England ( Mary excepted) were Protestants, that is to say, Enemies to the Papal
Tyranny, this was a Quality annexed to the Crown of England. All the Laws
forbid the acknowledgment of the Pope for Head of the Church, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ. They make the King of England Head of the English Church, and
it is High Treason to say otherwise. It is true, that James the II. made a shift
to thrust himself into the Throne in spite of all these Obstacles, for the
removing of which all imaginable diligence was used, false Promises and false
Oaths were not wanting. It is known what were the Sentiments and the Interests
of those who were Assisting in such a Violation of the Laws. It is not
necessary to make mention of them in this place, although the Violation was
nothing else but a suspension, for the Laws were not Abrogated, and though they
had been so, the English would always have had a Right to retrieve and
re-establish them, which were made for the security of Religion. They Enacted,
Recognized and Declared, that to be King of England and a Papist are Qualities
that are absolutely incompatible, and they were no ways to be blamed, for the
thing is plain, and his present Majesty had reason not to Abandon to another
the Succession that belonged to himself and his Royal Consort, who have the
same Qualities and are of the same Religion as is required by the Law, and who
moreover are the lawful and next Heirs. It is not the first time, that the
Children have taken the room of the Father, whom the Laws and his own personal
Qualities excluded from the Enjoyment of the Rights and Possessions which his
Birth had allowed him.

After all, we must know that the English Government is not in the hands of one
Person; There is one King, the King is Sovereign, but he is not in the
Possession of all the Sovereign Power; He who cannot make Laws nor break them
is not in the Possession of Arbitrary Power. The Parliament partakes of the
Legislative Authority with the King. The People have their Privileges which
the King and Parliament cannot take from them. If for Example a Parliament
should meet with the King, for making an absolute change of the Form of
Government, for abolishing the use of Parliaments, and for depriving the People
of all their Privileges, Charters and Immunities, the People might justly
provide against these Violations. James II. endeavored to Cancel all the
Privileges of the Nation, but durst not disanul Parliaments, but he dissolved
them, and caused them to be dissolved by his Brother, as soon as ever the
Parliaments did any thing that displeased him. He deprived the Corporations of
their Charters and Privileges. He obstructed free Elections; he took upon him
a Power of dispensing with the Laws, and of acting in a direct opposition to
what was thereby ordained. He was not legally empowered to proceed so far, and
therefore he transgressed the due Bounds, and thereby put the Nation in a
rightful Capacity no longer to acknowledge him; for it is certain, that in all
Relations, of Father and Son, of Wife and Husband, of Master and Servant, of
Subject and King, where there is an express Contract, and certain Conditions
laid down, when one of the Parties happens to violate the Contract, and to be
wanting in the performance of the Conditions, that the other Party is no longer
obliged.

The Lawyers Maxim, Princeps Legibus solutus est, has no place here, By the
Prince is understood one that is Sovereign, and a Magistrate that is absolute
without limitation. Unhappy are the People who have got such Masters, who have
suffered their Privileges to be disanulled; but the People and the Nations
which are so happy as to preserve the Bulwarks, which, in the Establishment of
their Monarchy, have been raised against the Ambition of their Princes, are
very Wise in maintaining them. The King of England does not boast, that he is
above the Laws; for he is obliged to Reign according to the Laws; If there be
any Sovereign in England, who is above the Laws, it is the Parliament and the
King together. This Sovereign makes Laws and repeals them; and so is not bound
thereby; but the Parliament alone can neither make nor repeal Laws; neither can
the King alone do it. So that these Words of Cambden, concerning the Authority
of the Kings of England, does not take away the Rights of Parliaments and the
Privileges of the People, that are publicly known; Seeing the Kings of England
are bound to Reign according to the Laws, there lies no obligation upon the
People any longer to acknowledge them, when they raise themselves above the
Laws, and have no regard thereunto.

Indeed a modern Writer has said, that Protestants may be trusted, because they
swear Allegiance to the Prince without reservation; But we swear Allegiance
without reservation, only where the Law does not annexed it, and where the
Princes have their bounds limited by the Laws, our Religion does not at all
oblige us to make Oath of Fidelity without reservation, and without condition;
since the Kings of England themselves, in Conjunction with their Parliaments,
have annexed certain reservations to the Oaths of Allegiance which they require
from their Subjects. We do no ways believe, that the English violate their
Oaths of Allegiance, when they think that they are free so to do, by the
Invasion that their Kings make upon the Fundamental Laws of the Realm. From all
this it follows, that the English Nation did justly look upon King James II. as
incapable of the Crown, because of his Religion, and as fallen from his Rights
by his violation of all the Fundamental Laws, and consequently William III. his
Son-in-Law, and Mary his Daughter, now King and Queen of England possess the
Crown most lawfully, which returns to them by Right of Succession, and which
was confirmed to them by the unanimous Consent of the three Estates of the
Kingdom; They did not trample upon the respect which they owed to him who was
their Father, or held the place of a Father, for nothing is owing to a Father
in prejudice of the Rights that are due to God and our Country. They committed
no Violence as a means of coming by the Crown; for they first received it, from
a free Convention; they did nothing against the Commands of St. Peter and St.
Paul of being Subject to the Powers, for neither St. Peter nor St. Paul had any
design of Establishing the Arbitrary Power of Kings (whose Authority is limited
by the Laws) nor of favoring Tyrants.

Now as there have not been Men wanting to misconstrue His Majesty's late
Expedition, so there have been some of his Majesty's Enemies, mentioned at the
beginning, who charged the Misfortunes of the Two De Wits. Anno. 1672. on the
then P. of Orange. But it is known to all the World how the Matter went; it
happened by a popular Commotion which was, like Gunpowder, kindled and spread
in a moment. It is true, that the two De Wits were accounted Enemies to the
Prince. It is true, that there were two Parties formed in the State, one
against the Prince, and the other for him; but if things had gone well, and the
order which the De Wits had given for the preservation of the Country had
succeeded, no Person had ever muttered against them; but Unhappily, the State
was without any Defense, without Arms, without Forts, without Forces, without
Alliances, which afforded the French an Opportunity of Marching into the very
Heart of the Country, leaving nothing but Desolation behind them. Those who
were at the Helm were narrowly looked to, whether they were to blame or no. The
People thereupon were enraged against those who had the management of Affairs.
They made a general insurrection in the Town, against the Magistrates. It was
much less for the Prince's Interest, then for their own, that there was such an
uproar amongst the People. The Mobile had been little enough concerned who
governed, provided the Government had been in safety. Hitherto; the Government
of the De Wits, as it had been happy, so it had been attended with
Tranquillity. But in the Year, 1672. the Government of those Gentlemen was
extremely Unfortunate; the People, who peremptorily reckoned the Unhappy
Success of the measures they took to be an Effect of their Mismanagement of
Affairs, fell upon them and spent all the Magazine of their Rage against them.
And it was the King of France to whom the De Wits were indebted for that
Tragical Execution; it is he who by his unjust Enterprifes and his happy
Success did provoke the People's Patience, to the last extremity, and obliged
them to avenge themselves by force, on those who had so very ill provided for
the safety of the State. The Prince was no ways concerned therein but
accidentally, if he had had the Administration of Affairs for some Years before
that, if he had been mistaken in his Measures, as they had been, if the King of
France had met with the same Success after the Administration of the Prince of
Orange, that he had after that of the De Wits, it is certain, that the Prince
of Orange had been in danger of having been the object of the People's Fury, as
those Gentlemen were; but it is well known, that this is the usual manner of
popular Commotious, that when they make an insurrection against one, they make
a Bulwark of another. Expressing their Fury, because the Government, being
altogether a Republic, had not provided against those extreme Grievances which
they lay under, it was easy for them to find at hand, the Name and Person of
the Prince of Orange, to whose Family, upon former considerations, they had the
greatest Obligations; and therefore their Acclamations for the Elevation of the
Prince, were mixed with Exclamations of Fury and Rage against the De Wits. It
is the greatest injustice to charge this as a Crime upon a Young Prince, who
then, being but a Youth, had given proofs of his Wisdom, and of a consummated
Moderation. Neither have I heard that in Holland any of those who were the
greatest Loosers by the Death of the De Wits, and the Change of Government, did
entertain the least suspicion thereof. The Battle of St. Denis is also
objected, which his present Majesty gave at the very time when the Treaty of
Peace at Nimeghen was a concluding, in which seven or eight thousand Men were
killed on one side and other. His Majesty was not at all obliged to know, that
the Peace was concluded, and it is well known that he was extremely
condescending to make the best Conditions he could. If the advantage had been
more complete, and the French Army had been entirely defeated, it had very well
appeared that the Action had not been so ill construed. The Peace was signed at
Nimeghen, but it was not ratified, and until the Ratification of a Treaty,
there is always time allowed to the Parties to change their Councils, either
for the Confirmation or relaxation thereof. From the same Source does proceed
another Charge against his Majesty, in favor of a little Gentleman, called the
Prince of Wales, as if he had been looked upon to block up his Majesty's way
to the Crown, but the true Heirs of the Crown, had no ground to believe that
the pretended Prince of Wales did block up their way to the Crown. He was very
far off, he was born a Papist, he had the Pope for his Godfather, he was
naturally excluded from the Crown of England upon that score; and the Party
which had set James II. on the Throne though a declared Papist, could not
maintain their pretensions for any long time. James II. had supported him by
his forwardness, by his Intrigues and by his Army. On his Death or oververthrow
by some blow, the Stripling's Aspect would have been soon changed with his
Fortune. This young Popish Prince surviving either a Minor, or destitute of
Strength and Wisdom for supporting himself, could not maintain his Point for
any long time against the known Laws of the Country, against the People and
against the Religion of the Land, and the lawful Rights of the Princess;
besides a Birth so obscure and so destitute of good proof could not be
maintained against the manifest and professed Birth of the two Princesses who
were lawful Heirs. This Prince of Wales would have been obliged one day to
prove his Birth against the two Princesses who would dispute it; and it is very
probable that he would have come but ill off. I do not at all doubt, but that
his Birth, whether true or supposed, obliged the Nation to be more Urgent in
calling for his present Majesty's Assistance. So long as they saw none else
seated upon the Throne, a Popish King, on whom Old Age and consequently Death
was making it is near approaches, they might have Patience, in hopes of seeing
within a little time, Protestant Successors in the Possession of the Crown. But
when they perceived that a New Prince was trump'd up (who in all probability
was nothing else but a Chimera) to perpetuate the Popish Religion on the Throne
from Generation to Generation, they were awakened, they thought of their own
safety, they implored help from their deliverer; they had reason to crave it,
and his present Majesty had reason to grant it; for it was a perilous and
pressing Juncture; and it was not to be expected that the People who accustomed
themselves to every thing with time, would inure themselves to bear with a
presumptive Heir of the Crown, set up in favor of a Religion that is a mortal
Enemy both to the Peace and Religion of the Realm.

I intend not here to set down the process of the supposititious Birth of the
Prince of Wales, nor do I think it necessary. I shall only make some
reflections on it, all Europe knows, or ought to know, that King William and
Queen Mary were the last who entertained this supposition. It is manifestly
known to the World, that the report was Universally spread throughout England
and all Europe, from the time that there was any talk of the Queen's being with
Child, of her Vow to our Lady of Loretto, of the rich Presents that she sent
thither, of the Bath whither she went to prepare her self, for pregnancy, of
the King's journey to the Bath to visit the Queen, of the rumor that was
spread abroad, immediately after that, of the Queen's being with Child. Not
only all the Protestants, but all the Catholics of good, sense, who gave no
great credit to the Miracles of our Lady, looked upon all as a prelude to the
Comedy that was to be Acted. All England is witness, that during all the time
that the Queen was with Child the City of London, and Whitehall were full of
Satyrs and Lampoons in Verse and in Prose, like rude Serpents they flew about,
not sparing the Queen's Petticoats; her pregnancy was ridiculed. And it is also
known that not only the Mobile, but all Persons of the greatest Note in the
Kingdom had the same suspicion.

My second Reflection is, that the Prince had all reason imaginable to conceive
a suspicion of this Birth, in consideration of the quality of the witnesses who
were summoned to attest it. It is very well known, that neither Princess Ann of
Denmark, nor any of the Friends of the Present King and Queen, nor King James'
Enemies were called to be by; and it is as well known, that the Bishops were
put in the Tower some days after. It is known that the Queen was brought to Bed
when she thought fit, and that she went, for that end, to St. James's House; it
is known that she made two reckonings within the compass of a Month, and there
was good reason to suspect that she took an advantage from it, to take the most
agreeable Measures for the management of the intrigue. When there is but one
reckoning, all things requisite are not always in readiness, against the named
time, for an Action of that nature. It is Universally known, that King James
and his Queen were informed of all the reports that were spread abroad, that
the Queen's being with Child was a sham, and consequently they were obliged to
use all imaginable precaution, to Work an assurance in Peoples minds that it
was genuin; they would not do it by any means; they increased the suspicion by
this neglect. Seeing there are so great reasons to call it into question, could
his Present Majesty be blamed for endeavoring to be well informed of the
Affair, for requiring that the business should be examined in Parliament? He
does not at all affirm that the Prince of Wales was supposititious, he only
demands an assurance of his Birth. There is nothing more just and natural. At
that time his Majesty had not as yet seen the depositions which James II.
caused to be taken thereupon; but if he had seen them, they were not capable of
affording him any assurance; for first, there were none almost found amongst
the Witnesses, but such as were suspected Persons, Officers, Pensioners, and
the Kings Domestic Servants; Secondly, all that the Queen Dowager, the most
part of the Lords and Ladies said, may be true, and yet the Child that was Born
not be Born of the Queen; for the Assistants who are at the Beds Feet, and in a
Corner of the Chamber, know not what is laid in the Bed, nor whence it came
which is taken out of it. In the last place, the depositions, that were taken
in the Kings presence, are for that very reason altogether invalid, and
insufficient. This is a ground good enough for what the Prince says in his
Declaration, which is the most plain and the most modest imaginable, That there
are great Presumptions that oblige us to believe, that these Evil Counselors
(for promoting their own pernicious designs, and for gaining of time to execute
them) spread a report, that the Queen was delivered of a Son, that during this
pretended bigness of the Queen, as well as in the circumstance of the Birth,
and the methods that were used for the management of it, there appeared so many
just and visible suspicions, that the pretended Prince of Wales was not brought
into the World by the Queen. There could no less be said upon so important a
subject. King James ought to justify himself from this in the face of the
World; are not Princes to take care of their Reputation? Is it not this that
secures them? How could King James think to be free from being insulted over by
a Nation which looked upon him as a Master of Intrigue and Audacity and as an
unnatural Father and Prince. And there is no Prince in the World against whom
we can more reasonably conceive this suspicion, he who runs a risque of losing
three Crowns, and at last did really lose them, for his Religion, does in
effect show that he had it, and that he was not like his Predecessor who had
none, but likewise the same thing gives us to understand, that he could venture
all other things for the sake of his Religion; for Men of the World who dare
run a risque of losing their Crowns, to compass their ends, may very well
venture their Reputation, the Blood of their Subjects and all things else to
satisfy their own humor. Indeed the rest of his Conduct made it appear, that
he was capable of sacrificing all, even to his conscience, for the sake of his
Religion. His Majesty's moderation having sufficiently appeared in his Conduct
in the forementioned Passages, there follows, some instances of His Majesty's
Justice, in his late expedition, who, as has been said, Acted first, as the
Presumptive Heir of the Crown, at least under the Title of his Royal Consort
and that in this quality, he justly provi^ed for the security of the Kingdom,
which was to descend to him one day. He hindered the subversion of the Laws and
Religion and justly, though it had been in opposition to his own Father, if
James II. had been such. I have proved, that a Son and Heir of a Kingdom, is
obliged, by his own interest, by that of the People, and by what he owes to God
to oppose a Father who brings the Realm to imminent ruin, and reduces the
Religion to a State of Desolation. Secondly, his present Majesty did bear the
Character of an Enemy, not to King James, not to the Nation, but to the Tools
his Father-in-Law made use of for the overthrow of Religion and the Laws. He
passed not into the Kingdom forcibly, as the General of the Dutch Army. He
entered in his own Name, to Declare War against the Enemies of the Kingdom and
of the Protestant Religion, who had raised an Army for the subversion of the
Laws and of the Church. Thus by the Laws of a just War, if ever there was one
such, he could summon his Enemies, to lay down their Arms, to yield themselves
for avoiding the Effusion of Blood; he could demand assistance and Military Aid
from all those who loved their Liberty and Religion. When a King is become the
Enemy of the State, of the Laws and of God, there is nothing then owing to him,
and James II. was such a one.

We come to another thing, viz. That which King William III. did at his first
Arrival in England, His design being lawful and just, viz. for setting up a
Standard for Liberty, and Declaring War against the Enemies of Religion and of
the Laws, he was obliged to do whatever tended to that end. It was no
Usurpation of the Royal Authority. It is a circumstance, the nature of which
does depend on the ground on which the Expedition was founded; and therefore,
upon the plainest reason we may see who is in the right and who is in the
wrong, in this matter: As to the Refusal of the Mayor and the Clergy of Exeter,
to execute the Prince's Orders, for acknowledging him and opening their
Churches, this is of no advantage to the contrary Party, nor does contribute
any wise, either to the Honor, or Disgrace of the Magistrates and Clergy of
that City; but this reflects on James II. for that Reservedness was an effect
of the dreadful consternation that they were in, and which was occasioned by
the Calamities that King James had brought upon that and other Countries in the
West, after the Duke of Monmouth's defeat. The Trees and the Ways were as yet
generally covered with the dead Bodies of those poor Creatures, who were made
Sacrifices to the most cruel Rage that ever was exercised. It was judged
sufficient, that the Magistrates and the Canons of Exeter were held under that
Fear, for so soon as they saw themselves secure by the Arrival of the Princes
Forces, they expressed their joy by such transcendent marks, that evidenced the
transport they were in, yet they did not cease too pray to God for King James,
till the Convention gave order concerning it. The Prince of Orange did not Act
as a King, at his first Arrival. We have not heard that he seized any part of
the Royal Revenue; and it is not but that he had just cause enough so to do.
For those, who managed the King, and tyranized over the Kingdom, did convert
the same to pernicious Uses, for the oppression of Liberty and Religion; he
might very well, without Injustice, take it out of their hands. There follows
now a Narrative of what the Lords Hallifax, Nottingham and Godolphin said to
the Prince, in Pursuance of the Commission that they had from James II. and of
the Answer they received; and it amounts (...) this, The King Declares to the
Prince that (...) consents to the calling of a Free Parliament, and said, he
had appointed Lords Commissioners to adjust and regulate, with the Prince, all
those Points that were necessary, as well for the Free Election of Members to
serve in Parliament, as for the security of the next Sessions. The Prince does
propose such Conditions as were most equitable, and most necessary for his own,
and the Public Safety. The Prince demands, that the Papists beput out of Places
of Trust, and that they be disarmed, there could not have been security enough
for himself and his Friends, if the Papists had continued in Offices, and in
Arms, with their Sword in their hands. He requires, that all the Proclamations,
in which his Friends had been Declared Rebels, should be revoked and anulled.
How could a Free Parliament have been called, and what Equity could the Prince
have expected from the same, if all the Peers and Gentlemen who had Declared
for him had been excluded from sitting in Parliament as being Rebels? He
requires, that all those of his side, who had been taken, should be set at
liberty. How could he provide for the security of the Laws and Religion, so
long as those who had come over to their Deliverers side, were to be treated as
Criminals? and if they had been really chargeable, was it ever required of a
Prince who has his Sword in his Hand, that he should condemn himself and give
his consent, that those who adhered to him should be treated as Traitors? The
Prince Demands, that for the security of the City of London, that the Custody
and Government of the Tower should be committed to the said City. It had been
ill, that in so nice a juncture, King James had remained Master of the Tower,
to be in a capacity to destroy the City of London, and to reduce it to Ashes,
so soon as ever she should attempt to favor the vigorous Resolutions of a
Parliament. If (...) Prince (...) ^^^manded that the Tower should be put into
his own possession it had been unjust, but since his intentions were to take
such Measures, and use such means as tended to the security of the People's
Liberties, it was absolutely necessary to secure all those Places of Strength,
which were made use of for destroying the Liberty of the Subject. The Prince
desired the King to withdraw from London, during the holding of the Parliament,
or that, if he inclined to stay there, it might also be allowed, that the
Prince should be there, with an equal Number of Guards; a very just Demand. The
Prince was not obliged to leave King James in a Capacity of Exercising an
Absolute Power over the English, as well as the Scotch Parliament: whilst he
abide at London with his Guards, which would not have failed to convey to the
Tower, all such Members who should presume to Declare themselves to be of an
Opinion, that crossed the King's Interest and Intentions: King James and the
Prince were at that time, as two Parties at Law, in a Suit that was to be heard
and determined in Parliament, and of which the Parliament was the only
competent Judge; and consequently, it was necessary and equitable, that the
Parliament should enjoy an entire liberty: This could not be unless he did
overthrow or permit the Prince to be near to stand by his Friends, as the King
was desirous to defend his own. The Prince requires, that both the Armies
should March 40 Miles from London. The Prince could make no Demand more
equitable; to the end that the Parliament might be left in full Liberty. It was
not requisite, that all King James's Forces should have Encamped round about
Westminster, and that the said King with his Sword in his hand, should have
forced the Parliament to Condemn the Prince of Orange, and all his Friends as
Guilty of High Treason, to be cut in pieces. In the last place, the Prince of
Orange does Demand, That to prevent the descent of the French, Portsinouth
might be put into the hands of a Person, who might be trusted both by the
Prince and by the King. It was one of the most just and most necessary
precautions in the World. It is unknown to none, that King James had
Intelligence with the French, with a design, by their Assistance, utterly to
subvert Religion, Liberty and Property. The World was sufficiently informed,
that after the Report was spread of the Prince's Expedition, it was several
times deliberated upon in Council, if they should receive the French Forces. It
was known that the Papists did mightily Press King James to consent thereunto,
and that the said King did only refuse it, by reason of the fear he had of a
general revolt of the Kingdom. Had he not been very prudent to leave in the
said King's hand, during the sitting of the Parliament, the Principal Port of
the Kingdom, that was open to receive Strangers with whom it is very well
known, that he had conspired for the Ruin of the Prince and of the Kingdom?

It was very impertinently said (by a certain Foreign Scribler, speaking of the
Prince) his Principality of Orange as a Title, had not justified his raising of
an Army to reduce the King of England with in due limits. Was it not extremely
needful to give this Publie Advertisement, and this very advantageous
precaution in this Matter? Without it, there would have been some sort of
Folks, without all doubt, who would have said, why had not William of Nassan a
Right to dispute the Crown of England with King James, seeing he was already
Prince of Orange before? Does not the Principality of Orange give a very good
Title to the English Crown? This Author wanted an occasion, to make a Defense,
by the by, for the King of France, for the ill Services he has done his present
Majesty in that Principality; and therefore he was obliged to bring in the
Principality of Orange in this place, only for this end, that he might have the
occasion to say, that William Henry of Nassau, was justly deprived of his
Principality, because it belonged to the House of Longueville, which descended
from that of Chaalons, whereas the House of Nassau had only kept it by mere
Usurpation. The French Court was resolved too late, to do Justice in this
Affair, to the House of Longueville. Henry IV; Lewis XIII. and Lewis XIV.
himself were very backward in rendering to their Subjects and to their
Servants, that which appertained to them, and in accomodating the differences
that have been depending amongst them. The truth is, if this pitiful Scribler
had been Wise, he would not have touched upon this Point, and would not have
recalled into Men's Minds, such Ideas, which cannot take place without causing
Horror and a just Indignation. To restore to the House of Longueville a
Possession that so justly belonged to them, it was not necessary to lay it
desolate, as they did, to demolish and raze the Castles, to level the Walls
with the ground, to Plunder the Town several times, to quarter an Army at
discretion, in a small subjected Country, and which never made any Resistance,
to Imprison the principal Inhabitants of that small State, and to commit
against them the utmost Violences. It is not to Orange only that his Majesty
has found Pretenders. In Burgundy in the Franch county, and every where else,
where King William had Possessions and Lands, there were not wanting Houses of
Longueville, in favor of which the Lands of a Prince were seized, with which
the Usurpers had nothing to do, and by such base Artifices as have begot the
hearty Concern of all Princes, they opposed William of Nassau, on all occasions
when he could not defend himself without ever declaring War against him. These
are Instances of a base and unworthy Revenge for two Kings to take. For the
English King was in League with Lewis to Abandon his Son-in-Law to Rapin and
Desolation. This is one of the Obligations that the Son-in-Law has to his
Father-in Law, and for which public Fame bears him upon her Wings for a
stupendous Example of Ingratitude. The Prince has already sustained damage
enough in his Principality of Orange and Lands of Burgundy by his
Father-in-Law's good Offices. But I cannot say but he will demand new Costs and
Charges at the Hands of the most Christian King. We shall see, if he can hold
out to be as easily Victorious over William III. King of England, as he laid
desolate the Possessions of William of Nassau BURGER of the Hague, for so the
Prince was called at Paris. This Burger of the Hague begins now to strike
Terror in the Grand Seignior of Versailles, who has been so terrible to many,
and I am very apt to think that his fear will not prove to be in vain, and that
the mighty Mounsieur shall not escape so.

The same Author tells us, that we must show standing Laws that allow a Son, as
the next Heir to the Crown, to make himself his Father-in-Laws Judge, to invade
his Kingdom with a Fleet of five hundred Ships: Indeed this Orator would not
have done amiss to have spared his Breath, to have reserved his Rhetoric and
his Eloquence to Answer the Demands that William of Nassau, in all likelihood
will make, 'ere it be long, to Lewis XIV. for if it should so happen, that he
prove the stronger, one day he has very good reason to call him to an account,
and ask him, by what Laws he invaded and retained Lorain, and possessed himself
of Strasburg in the time of Peace; by what Laws he laid the principality of
Orange Desolate, and treated the same as a place subjected to him by an
absolute Conquest, why he reduced the Palatinate, and the Towns and Villages on
the Rhine to Ashes, treating it as a Country destined by the most Savage
Proscription, to perpetual Desolation, and why he seizes the Possessions of
every one, and keeps Faith with none?

This insolent Author repeats the Case of the De Wits and imputes the
Misfortunes that befell them and others to King William, whom he alleges to
have managed the Multitude for the accomplishment of his Designs. But was it
during the Years of his Minority, or after they were past, that he gained the
Multitude? Did he Court that small People? Did he require any thing of them?
Did he complain to them of the wrongs that had been done to him? Was there one
Man of that People, to whom he was personally known, or with whom he had the
least Conversation imaginable? As for the then deposed Magistrates if they were
Established by Law, they were laid aside by Law; This is done by the order of
the States of Holland, who are the Sovereign Governors of the Province. This
was to put a stop to the Rage of the People, who being reduced to the brink of
Destruction, seized on the Magistrates, right or wrong. There were no other
means left of dispelling that Mist, but by changing the Governors. And, to be
short, this business was not carried on by a sudden Enterprise, but was
managed with a great deal of Prudence. All the Magistrates who were rejected,
were Enemies to the Prince, who being invested with the Office of General
Stadtholder, and placed at the Helm of the Government, was obliged to put in
such Magistrates as were on his own side, otherwise they had torn the
Commonwealth by their contrary Methods, and the State would have been thereby
infested with such Divisions that would have exposed it to unavoidable Ruin.
As for the Elections in their Cities; The Prince in managing them used no
force, made no use of the settled Army, he Besieged no Town, Imprisoned no
Person by his own Authority. When there was a design of putting into Offices
such Persons as could not have that Correspondence with him that was necessary
amongst the Governors of a Commonwealth, He only made use of the Authority of
the States, and of the Court of Judicatory, according to the Laws and Rights by
which he held his Office and his Character, great were. The Cries and
Lamentations (says the same Author) for the Ships that were destroyed, which
he had disposed of, without the Consent of the City of Amsterdam, to which they
did belong. He means the Fleet, that was cast away, returning from the Sound,
in the Month of November, Anno. 1683. this Man has impudence enough to impute
to the Prince, the Shipwreck of all the Vessels, that have been lost by Stormy
Weather, since the Year, 1672. and to think him answerable for all the Works of
Heaven. If the City of Amsterdam had not advised the sending out of that Fleet,
his Consent could not have been necessary: When the charge of a Naval Force is
computed and agreed upon by the States, it may be disposed of by the Admirals
and the Admiralities, according to their own Prudence, with the Suffrages of
the major part of the Counsel, for the good of the Commonwealth, provided they
do not engage in a War without their consent. If there was no good
understanding, at that time, betwixt the City of Amsterdam and the Prince, that
was the result of the Intrigues of France, which by a Diabolical Artifice,
sowed Divisions in the Cities and Members of the States. The violent Suspicions
(he goes on) though he frequently gave of making himself the Master of those,
whose Minister he only was. He never gave cause to such violent Suspicions, but
it was the Instruments of the French King who raised them; for they were
continually employed to diffuse Jealousies through the State, against the
Prince. There was none of his most innocent Actions that they did not
misrepresent. In their Judgment, it was Criminal for him to maintain his own
Rights, against those who had a design to Invade them. They had made so great a
Progress, before the Year, 1672. by this Conduct and by the Jealousies they had
kindled in Men's Minds, against the House of Orange, that there was no Defense
left against their Practices. It is false that the Prince had given a Suspicion
of any Intention to make himself the Supreme Governor of the United Provinces.
On the contrary, he generally rejected all the occasions that were offered him
to accept of that Dignity. The King of France made him an Offer of Holland,
with full Sovereign Power, and he refused it, Anno. 1672. During the
Consternation that these Countries were in, by reason of the French Army, the
City of Amsterdam, more then ordinary jealous of her Liberty, consented to
bestow on the Prince both the Rights and Title of Earl of Holland. The Prince
would by no means accept of it. The States of Geldre, having signified their
Intentions to make him Duke of that Province he refused the offer, and referred
himself to the Opinion of the other Provinces. The Low Countries have great
reason sure to complain of the Prince's Government, since the Year, 1671. He
found a Commonwealth oppressed under the Yoke of a Foreign Power, having it is
Bowels torn to pieces, destitute of Arms, destitute of Forts, without Friends
and without Allies; and he accomplished his design by the most wise Conduct
imaginable, taking Possession of their Hearts beating back the Common Enemy by
his Courage, engaging all Europe in a Joint Alliance (which crushed all the
French Designs) Engaging the English Interest and causing the Treaty of Peace
to be concluded at Breda. He defended his Nation against all the pernicious
Intrigues of the French Counsels; he by his wise Conduct, restored Trade to
it is former Splendour, and made it again to flourish. It is now in the highest
Esteem that ever any Commonwealth was in. He was Umpire of the most Important
Peace, that has been concluded these hundred Years past; which was made betwixt
the two Crowns. These are the great disorders that the Prince of Orange
committed in the Republic, and the truth is, they are very great disorders in
respect of France, whose purpose is to reduce all her Neighbors into Confusion
and Servitude for her own ends.

Now it is worth the knowing who this Famous Author is. He is one whom France
has kept in Holland as a Spy and as an Incendiary. He has not been idle,
during his Abode there, he has not so much as omitted the most impertinent
Occurrences, that never passed the Frontiers of the State before; and which
were only the talk of the Mobile. Such is the application of the Words of the
Prophet Esaias, to the Birth of the Prince of Wales. Before she was in pain she
brought forth, before she Traveled, she was delivered of a Man Child. See what
he imputes to the Prince as a Crime; and calls it a profanation of Holy
Scripture, to uphold his Pretenses against the Prince of Wales. He also
justifies King James from the Accusation that is brought against him in the
Prince's Declaration, for having had a Design to suppress the Religion and
overthrow the Laws of the Land. He thinks, in a moment, to possess the Minds of
Men with a Prejudice against the Prince; as if his Expedi^^^n could not have
been undertaken for the Preservation of Religion, as not being of the English
persuasion, but a Presbyterian. He is obliged (says he) according to the
Calvinstical Doctrine to believe, that all Ministers have equal Authority, that
Episcopacy is an unlucky Pillar of Papal and Antichristian Tyranny. The
Presbyterians destroyed the English Church, banished the Prelates, and
abolished the Liturgy during the Commonwealth, and behold a Presbyterian and
an Army of Calvinists, who pass into England, to deliver the English Church,
which they have always looked upon as Professing a false Religion. Upon this
Subject the Author shows, what an able Man and great Divine he is, he
multiplies Words and idle Reflections. We answer him in a Word, that the
English Church never Condemned the Presbyterians on this side of the Sea, and
never beheld their Religion as false. She has only remonstrated the
Extravagancies of the English Presbyterians, and possibly i^ that, she is not
much in the wrong. The Presbyterians, on this side the Sea, in like manner,
never Condemn Episcopacy as an Appurtenance of Antichristianism. The difference
in Point of Government never hindered the English Protestants, and those in
these Parts, from being ready to afford one another mutual Assistance, as being
of the same Religion. Queen Elizabeth helped the Dutch and French Protestants.
King James did the same, and which is more, he sent his Divines and Bishops to
the Synod of Dort, which was otherwise all composed of Presbyterians, that
action alone is an undoubted proof of the Communion that the Bishops and
Presbyterians maintained amongst themselves. If the English Bishops have
Assisted the Presbyterians on this side the Sea, as their Brethren, when they
were like to be oppressed, why may not the Presbyterians here, with very good
reason, go and assist the English Church, which they have always looked upon to
be a true Protestant Church.

Again, this Author endeavors to prove first that the Late King of England, in
his suspending the Penal Laws, had no other end but the Establishment of a
perfect Tranquillity in his Kingdom, taking from his Subjects all occasion of
Persecuting one another upon the account of Religion. This is the Old Song, but
all those, who speak so are not in hopes to persuade others, nor are they
themselves persuaded of the Truth of this allegation. They know very well, and
all the World is sensible of it, that King James did extremely hate the
Presbyterians, Independants and Anabaptists, looking upon them as the Authors
of his Father's death and as his own Enemies. It is very well known, that
during all the time that he was Duke of York, he did cruelly Persecute them, to
do the English Church a Pleasure, thinking to be so much a gainer thereby, as
to do afterward whatever he pleased. It was not then in Favor of the Non
Conformists his Sworn Enemies, that he intended to repeal the Penal Laws; it is
notoriously known, that it was never in his thoughts to take them away, but for
the sake of the Roman Catholics, and that he included other Dissenters for no
other end, but to palliate his designs. It is beyond all dispute, King James
II. of England was a great Enemy of Persecution: He made his inclinations
manifest, whilst he was as yet Duke of York; possibly it cannot be denied, but
that that King had a very great Zeal for his own Religion, for this Author does
him that great Honor as to avouch it. He had consequently a passionate desire
to Establish it in England. Can this be denied? if he acknowledge it, (for he
must be destitute both of common sense and honor to deny it) he must also own,
that all his Actions tended to that end, if all his Actions tended to that end
with better reason, so important a one did, such as was the suspension of the
Penal Laws. Can he deny it, or can any Person do it for him? It is therefore
plain, that he had a design of Establishing his own Religion. He had therefore
a design to destroy all others, and consequently, to ruin the English Church,
the Presbyterians and the Independants; for it is known by the whole World,
that the Popish Religion never looks upon her self to be Established till once
she has made her Way through the Ruins of all other Religions.

Secondly, This Author endeavors to prove, that the Prince only fought a
pretense against his Father-in-Law. Because (says he) he reproaches him for
having suspended then Penal Laws, in Favor of the Roman Catholics, and has not
considered him as having also suspended them in behalf of the Presbyterians and
other Sectaries, as if it were possible for him to have transgressed the Limits
of his Power with respect to the one and not to the other. He calls this an
unreasonable distinction, etc. All this is nothing else but a piece of affected
malice and ignorance. This mighty Lawyer ought to know, that the Penal Laws
were only enacted against the Papists. The Oaths, if there were nothing else,
do sufficiently attest this. They were made against those who believe the Pope
to be the Head of the Church; that there is another Jurisdiction within the
Realm then that of the King; that there is such a thing as Transubstantiation,
and that the Invocation of Saints is no Idolatry. There are no Protestants who
believe there things. It is not against them, that the Penal Laws and the Oaths
were made; but if the Penal Laws, some few Years ago, were extended to the
Presbyterians, that was done by evil designs of James Duke of York, who did sow
Divisions betwixt the two Parties; and therefore the Prince ought to have taken
it in good part, that he did relax then, as to the Presbyterians, because that
is consonant to the purport and true meaning of the Penal Laws, and he ought to
have taken it in ill part, that the same Favor was allowed to the Roman
Catholics, because that is contrary to the express Decisions of the Law. All
the Penal Laws were made to serve as a Bulwark, not only for the English
Church, but for all Protestants, in general; and therefore all Protestants of
all sides, set themselves against the Declaration of Liberty of Conscience in
general, because they saw very well whither that did tend. Besides, the
Addresses, by which this Author would prove, that the Presbyterians ^^ok'd upon
the suspension of the Penal Laws, as an obligation that they owed to the King,
were nothing else but cunning Artifices, and Suppositions for the most part, or
made by three or four Quakers, Independants or Papists who presented those
Addresses without the consent of their Respective Bodies, in whose name they
yet pretended to speak. This we know by good hands, and we have derived the
Account we have had hereof, from the very Fountain; and it appeared
sufficiently by the Unanimous concurrence of those Communities (on whom the
said Addresses were Fathered) with the Prince of Orange. The Author concludes
this Reflection with two confiderations. The first is a mighty Elogy, on the
Roman Religion, which he commends by reason of its Antiquity and Extent, by
it is Sanctity and the Saints it has given to England. The other consideration
is of the Power that the Church of England allows the King, in Spiritual
Causes; whence he concludes, that the Church of England would be very
unreasonable, if it were of the Opinion, that that Power could be restrained
without Cause, in respect of that, which is, of all things, most grateful to
the World, which is, to Allow the Free Exercise of their Religion to those of
his Subjects, who, with himself, are of the most Ancient Religion of all that
maintain the Adoration of Jesus Christ. That is to say, in a Word, that if the
King has Power to dispense with the Penal Laws, with respect to New Sects, he
ought, in all reason, to have the same Power, with respect to the Ancient
Religion that is professed by himself. This Consequence is denied. If the King
of England has Power in Spiritual Causes, it i^ not an Arbitrary Power, is
bounded by the Laws, but the Laws do not forbid a Toleration of the
Presbyterians, but they forbid a Toleration of the Popish Religion, because
that so Ancient a Religion, and which is so far spread through the World, and
is so holy, is a common Enemy of all other Religions, whether true or false.
Those other Religions which give, may also receive Toleration; but who is
obliged to grant a Toleration to the Popish Religion which Tolerates none,
which destines all those to the Fire and Sword, who do not submit themselves to
it.

The Author puts an end to this part of his Defense of King James, touching his
Religion, by taking a review of the Church of England; he turns it on every
side and finds it safe and sound, without so much as Spot or Wrinkle. She was
the same under the Catholic King that she was under the Protestant Kings. She
had her Bishops, her Cathedral Churches, her Parochial Churches, her
Ecclesiastical Revenues. The King built very near twenty Chapels at his own
Charge. And this is that for which he makes all this Cry. Thus our Gentleman
concludes, that it is an imposition upon the World, and a manifest token of
want of sense, to call that a Subversion of the Religion that was established
by Law. Certainly the People of England were very far in the wrong, that they
had not patience, till King James brought their Religion to the same Issue, as
Lewis did the reformed in France. It is true, that King James established the
Popish Service in all the Cities and Buroughs within the Realm, where there
were Papists. It is true, that the Jesuits were so bold as to open Schools up
and down. It is true, that by this time, London was provided with Monks of all
Orders. It is true, that the Jesuits remained in the Court, and that Father
Peter's was the Head of the English Church, by virtue of the entire Influence
that he had on the King, and the precedence that he had at the Council Board.
It is true, that the principal Offices of State were taken out of the Hands of
Protestants, and given either to Papists, or to those who had no Religion at
all. It is true, that the Earls of Clarenden and Rochester the King's
Brothers-in-Law, lost their Places of Trust, for refusing to change their
Religion. It is true, that the most part of the Judges of the King's Bench were
Papists. It is true, that the Justices of the Peace in the Country, were not a
few of them, Roman Catholics. It is true, that the Papists were possessed of
Magdalen College in Oxford. It is true, that the Archbishopric of York being
vacant, was designed for a Jesuit, or some Priest. It is true, that the Offices
in the Militia, the Government of Counties, and the Lieutenant ship of Ireland,
the Town and Fort of Portsmouth, and all the places of strength on the
Seacoasts were in the hands of Papists. It is true, that when any one presumed
to speak publicly of Religion, he was put from his Pulpit, if not from his
Benefice. It is true, that when the Bishops refused to read the King's
Declaration of Liberty of Conscience to Roman Catholics, under the Name of
Dissenters, they were sent to the Tower. But to what purpose is all this? they
were alive still, they Preached, they had Pulpits and Churches, whereas in
France there was no such thing to be seen: I, but there was always reason to
believe, that King James who was so true a Friend to Lewis XIV, and zealously
bent on the same courses; in agreement with him, would in time, push on things
to such an issue, (to take effect in his own or his Successors days, whom he
was setting up) as has already fallen out in France. They were afraid of it, I
say, and they had reason, for the Popish Religion is a most insatiable Monster,
an implacable Enemy: If it be allowed but room for one foot, it will quickly
usurp an entire Possession of all. It makes profession of admitting no
Partnership, and of suffering no Rivals. The English had forgot this Truth, I
know not how, and suffered a Popish Prince to ascend the Throne. The Cause of
James II. his Misfortunes is to be looked for in the conduct of the French
King. It is he, and he only that was the Cause thereof. The English must of
necessity have been very fast asleep, not to awaken at the Cries of the
infinite Numbers of miserable Creatures, who went to carry their Afflictions
and their Complaints to the Ears of the English Nation, and who without
speaking, did pathetically express the meaning and weight of this important
Advice, Learn to have a care of Tyrants and Kings that are possessed by Jesuits.

The defense for King James, is destined against King William Prince of Orange.
The Religion established by Law was entire, and therefore his present Majesty
(as the Man reasons) could have no just cause for passing into England.
Besides, the Author endeavors to strengthen his Argument, by the measures His
Majesty took in Holland (a Country where he had signalized himself more
frequently than in England) where he made it be blown about (as this man says)
that his Father in Law was about to suspend the Penal Laws. There are certainly
Penal Laws in Holland against the Roman Catholics, but it is as certain,
(says he) that the wisest Magistrates did judge, that it was the Interest of
the Republic to suspend their execution, especially, in the Province of
Holland, which is the most considerable amongst them. God be praised for it.
You may now at last take notice of a public confession that is express and in
print, That the Roman Catholics are not persecuted in Holland. Thus both Mr.
Arnauld and all the Apologists for the French Persecution, who were so bold as
to complain of the Persecutions that their Church suffered in the Low
Countries, are declared to be Slanderers. Note this well; for these Gentlemen
will say the contrary the very next day, because they always speak according to
their Interest; but here it is their Interest to confess the truth, that they
may be in a capacity to conclude, that the City of Amsterdam, that of Rotterdam
and that of Harlem had Power to suspend the Penal Laws; that a King, who is a
Sovereign Prince, can do as much as a particular City; That if the Dutch,
without betraying their Religion, might do this, we have no reason to complain
of a Catholic, who was willing to show the same gentleness to those of his own
Religion, as a Protestant Commonwealth does. It is necessary, that King
William himself be concerned in the Proof. He had a very great Number of
Catholics in his Guards, and likewise amongst his Domestic Servants. It is
not then an Argument of Religion (says he) that he does charge it as a Crime,
upon his Father-in-Law, that being himself a Catholic, he did suffer the
Catholic Religion to be exercised within his Dominions. Our Author is not ill
to please, his Premises are false throughout, and his Conclusion is very bad.
He supposes that the Prince of Orange would answer thus, that his Father-in-Law
permitted the Exercise of the Roman Religion in England, as it is in Holland;
this is false; Mijn Here Fagel's Letter was Penned to show the contrary to King
James. The Prince does agree, that such Penal Laws should be repealed which
might endanger the Lives of the Priests, and might ensnare the Conscience. He
does allow, that the Papists be tolerated in England, as they are in Holland.
He does again suppose falsely, that King James had granted nothing to the
English Papists, but what the Dutch had granted to the Romish Religion, in
their Countries. It is Impudence without Example, to affirm this. It is
notoriously known that the toleration of Papists in Holland is not established
by any Law, nor by any Decree suspending the Laws. It is well known, that the
Papists have not entered into any Office of Justice and of the Government of the
State; they are only admitted into Military Employs; but King James was for
receiving them into all the Offices of the Kingdom, and not only for suspending
the Execution of the Penal Laws by a tacit Toleration of Religion, as it is in
Holland, but by an express Cessation of the Laws themselves. In the third Place
he does falsely suppose, that the King of England has the same Power with
respect to Religion, that the States of Holland have in their Country: This is
not so; the States of Holland are Sovereign and Absolute in their Provinces,
without limitation; for it is they who make Laws, but the King of England makes
no Laws but with the joint Assent and Authority of Parliament, and can change
nothing in such as concern Religion, any more than he can do in other Laws,
without the Parliament. Lastly, He is infinitely mistaken, when he compares the
Quality of the Toleration of the Popish Religion, that is admitted in Holland,
to that which he would have established in England, because, in Holland, the
Sovereign Authority is Protestant, and, in England, the Sovereign Authority was
Popish. There is a very great difference betwixt having Popish Subjects and
Servants, and having Popish Masters. The States of Holland are very well
content to have Popish Subjects, and the Prince will admit Popish Servants, but
they would not have Masters of that Religion. This was designed to be done in
England; Their Great Master was a Papist, and that Master endeavored that all
others should become so: And so it does not follow, from the Prince's Goodness,
in admitting of Papists amongst his Servants, that he ought to suffer, that his
Father-in-Law should commit the Offices and Places of Trust within the Kingdom
into the hands of Papists.

The words also of Popery and Papists, used in his present Majesty's
Declaration, are not pleasing to our Opponent. That Man ought to have known,
that those Words are used in the English Laws and the Public Records of the
Kingdom, when they speak of the Roman Religion and of those who profess it; as
in France we are called the pretended Reformed, in the Edicts and Public
Ordinances; this Name is no more honorable for us than that of Papists for
them who call themselves Catholics. But he likewise takes exception at this
Expression, To introduce Popery into three Kingdoms. On which he spends a great
Article, to prove, that nothing can be worse expressed; that the business is
not about introducing the Catholic Religion into three Kingdoms, where it
always was, and where it is still. And here he falls on Controversy, to prove,
that the Roman Religion is the Ancient Religion, that ours is an Innovation,
that is, without Mission and without Miracles. Must he not be very destitute of
Judgment, to show himself so mightily pedantick, on a Subject that is purely
politic? Is it not hereby very manifest, that he loves to leave the Point, and
take occasion of one Word, upon which he may exercise his talent, by making
thereupon a commonplace? To answer in good earnest Reflections that are so
impertinent, would argue one to be Master of as little sense as he is who makes
them.

The Grievances of the Prince and of the English, which they owed to James II.
had not only a respect to the Violation of the Laws of the Land, but to the
Subversion of Religion. Yet our Author has so much insisted on the point, and
spent so much breath on the head of Religion, in such a declamatory method, and
with such vigorous efforts, that he has left very little more to say in the
justification of his Hero, as to Affairs of State; and therefore he has but one
word concerning it, and only touches upon one of the Articles that the Prince
has expressed in his Declaration, and that is, that the Liberty that King James
gave of placing Popish Judges on the Bench, reduced the Estates and Fortunes of
the Subjects to an uncertainty that was extremely irksom, because the Sentences
pronounced by the Judges, who were not legal, are reputed to be null and void,
though they were never so just. Thus those who lose the Suit, seeing themselves
lie under the sentence of incompetent Judges, will be sure not to let slip the
first opportunity that shall present it self for their relief against that
Judgment, which would bring the Estates and Fortunes of private persons into an
eternal uncertainty. In opposition to this, our Author pretends to plead;
endeavoring to make it appear, that though the King should make a Judge
illegally, the Judge should nevertheless have a legal authority to give
judgment, and that the Sentence that is pronounced by him is without all
question valid and binding; for confirmation of which, he cites the Law
Barbarius Philippus, by which it appeared, that a Slave having obtained the
Pretorship by surprise, it was judged, that his Determinations were not to be
questioned. It belongs to the English properly to make answer to this. The Law
Barbarius Philippus is a Rule of Prudence, which neither amounts to a Natural
Right nor a Necessary Law. Naturally, Acts done by a Subject who is incapable
of bearing certain Characters, are invalid. All the Ordinances given by a
Tyrant and Usurper are null and void, as soon as ever the Tyrant is put from
the Helm. If a Turk should usurp the Papal Chair, or turn Priest, all the Oaths
that should be administered by him would be manifestly void. In like manner, all
the Sentences given by one who is incapable of being a Judge, and whom the Law
bars from sitting on the Bench, are naturally of no force. If the Sovereign,
in consideration of the consequence, and to avoid trouble, is pleased to
continue them, it is in his power so to do, and they shall bind; but it is
absolutely necessary, that the pleasure of the Sovereign intervene, in this
case, for giving force to such Judgments. The Law Barbarius makes this easily
appear: If the English had any Law, that could give a validity to Judgments and
Decrees of a Judge, though he were made so contrary to the Laws; it is true, that
the Sentences given by Popish Judges might remain in force: but it is so far
from being so, that on the contrary, it is manifestly true, the English have
Laws, according to which every Sentence past by Judges appointed against Law,
ought to be revised. We are not to spend all our thoughts on these smaller
matters, and neglect so many Grievances and Complaints of the Nations, against
the Government of James II. Is it nothing, for example, that he usurped a power
of dispensing with the Laws? Is it nothing, that he made himself an Absolute
Sovereign, and exercised Arbitrary Power? Of what use are the Laws, if it be in
the Prince's power to suspend them, by hindering their execution whenever he
pleases, and acting directly contrary to what the Laws ordain? If it were thus,
I would rather now choose to live at Paris, or Constantinople, than at London,
and be subject to Lewis XIV, or Mahomet, than to the Government of a King of
England. The Authority of the Judges of the King's Bench, who were generally of
opinion, that the Dispensing Power was annexed to the Crown, is not sufficient.
For it is well known who those Judges were, that most of them were Papists, and
by some means or other, those that were not, were brought over to join with the
rest. Can it be thought, that a few ill Men, who betrayed their Country, and
sold their Liberties, should be the Sovereign Disposers of the Interest of such
a Vast Number of People? Is it nothing, that the King of England, prevailing
over the weakness of the Kingdom of Scotland, had a considerable success, in
the design of making himself Absolute Sovereign, having in his Declarations
used a Style that is more Despotick than that of the Grand Seignior, affecting
to insert therein, almost in every Period, the Terms, (We Will, We Command,) of
(Full Power,) of (Absolute Power?) Have we not seen this with our Eyes? Is it
nothing, that all the Charters and Privileges were taken from the English
Cities and Corporations, and particularly from the City of London, by horrible
Violences, and unjust Procedures, to the end that the King might be in a
capacity to fill up the vacancies of Offices and Places of Trust, with
Court-Slaves, and Enemies of the Protestant Religion? Is it nothing, that the
Bishops, who are Peers of the Realm, were imprisoned, against all sort of Law,
only because they were so bold as to make a most humble Address to the King, by
way of Remonstrance, against his Ordinance? Where are there any Monarchical
States, in which it is not permitted to make such Remonstrances to their
Sovereign? Is it nothing to threaten all the Judges of the Kingdom, with the
loss of their Places, and actually to deprive them thereof, upon their not
consenting to repeal a fundamental Law of the Land? Is it nothing to deprive
the Lords and the Prime Officers of State of their respective Places of Trust,
because they refused to give their consent to the thing? Is this any thing else
but to shed the Blood of the whole Kingdom by Apostate Judges and Slaves to the
Court, as the Prince complains in his Declaration? Is it nothing to have
obstructed the free Elections of Members to serve in Parliament, by depriving
them of all manner of Liberty, and making them to depend on the Court, by so
many Cabals, so many Violences and Injustices? All these Articles deserve to be
considered somewhat more than that of the Invalidity of Judgments given by
Popish Judges. It must needs be, that in all these Points, this great Advocate,
who is so profuse of Words and Reflections, found nothing to say, in favor of
his Hero, and against the Prince. For he that speaks so much elsewhere, would
not otherwise have been silent in this matter. After this, take his word for
it, and believe him when he tells you, that, if any thing deserves reprehension
in the King's Conduct, it was so inconsiderable, that Posterity will be
astonished, that there are Christians found, in these Ages, who are so
barbarous, as upon that occasion, to give so ill treatment to so good a King,
whom all Histories will own to have possessed very Royal Qualities. And in the
sequel, he attributes a Great Heart and a Great Soul to him. This Author
differs very much from himself, or from one of his Friends, who writ the Letter
of M. to M. upon the Affairs of the Times; for instead of ascribing to him
Royal Qualities therein, whilst they manifest their discontent and murmuring,
they treat him as a Man who in his conduct was destitute both of Sense and
Prudence, and as one, who has done just so much as was necessary to destroy
himself. That Great Prince seemed to have neither Heart nor Head, in all that
Affair. We know well enough what is believed of him, and what has been said of
him, in Paris, since they have enjoyed his presence. It is certain, that so
many as have known him, whether Friends or Enemies, do all agree, that instead
of Royal Qualities, he was endowed with an Extreme Fierceness, with a very
little Spirit, and a Heart in a degree below mediocrity. But if he were the
most considerable Person in the World, it is very certain, that he abused his
power, and this is enough to justify the English Nation. If he had had no
other Quality, but that of a declared Papist, it were enough to make him
incapable to Reign in England. For it is unspeakable folly to allege, that a
Popish Prince can be King of England, a Kingdom that is altogether Protestant,
and in which, according to the most impartial calculation, those Papists who
live there, are nothing in comparison. The English Nation have abdicated this
Error as well as the powerful Cause of it. It was not possible for her to be
kept in it for any long time. There were in France a Million of Protestants,
and that party was in a condition of making head against the other, when it was
declared to Henry IV. that the King of France must of necessity be a Catholic.

From the same infected Source do spring two great Articles, to prove, that the
Free Parliament, about which the Prince made so great a Noise in his
Declaration, and which was the great Hinge of the Motions of the Kingdom, is as
great a Chimera, as a Mountain without a Valley, considering the condition into
which the Prince had reduced the Nation by his Invasion. All this effusion of
Words may be reduced to two Arguments: The first, That to make a Parliament
free, the King must of necessity, have at least, as great Liberty as the
Members of Parliament, that he may be in a capacity to propose to, and demand
of them whatever he pleases. This Article may be very well questioned, for the
Definition of a Parliament does not consist in a liberty that the King has to
demand and to propose. He has always enough, and oftentimes he loses a great
deal. The nature of a free Parliament lies in this, that the Members thereof
have been freely elected by the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, and where the
said Members may speak their Opinions, even in opposition to the King's
pleasure, without danger. It was a long time since there were such Parliaments
in England. For it is known, in what manner those were treated, who durst
oppose the King's Will; But let us suppose what he says, that the nature of a
free Parliament does require, that the King have a perfect Liberty, as
aforesaid. Who hindered this Liberty? If James II. upon the Prince's arrival in
Exeter, had, of his own accord, given his consent to the calling of a free
Parliament, there might have been sufficient assurance given, as of a thing
most certain, that he might have had all manner of freedom, to propose, to
speak and to demand of the Parliament, whatever he pleased; Who would have
barred him from this? He had his Guards, he had his Army, consisting of about
40000 Men, against ten or twelve thousand, whom the Prince had taken with him.
It is certain, that the Army would have proved faithful to him, and not one
person would have joined with the Prince, against him, if, at that instant, the
King had called a free Parliament: But God, who intended to Ruin him, did
leave him to be blinded and made obstinate, by Popish Counsels, so as not to
consent to the sitting of a free Parliament. The Papists had reason to give him
such Counsel; but the King was very much in the wrong to take it: The Papists
had reason; for a free Parliament had ruined them, as it did the King in the
issue, and reduced them to a worse condition than they were then in; but the
King had no reason to follow that counsel; for it is not to be doubted, but
that it was better for him, to Reign under the Restraint of the Laws, which
hindered the Establishment of his Religion, than not to Reign at all. That which
we allege, viz. That the King had nothing to fear, as to his Person and
Dignity, if he had called a free Parliament at the first, is not a bare
conjecture. There is no English Man but says it, and is ready to depose it upon
Oath. And, in my opinion, every one of them ought to know what he thinks; but
that which perverted the Army and provoked the People, is, that fierceness with
which the King rejected the Request which was presented to him, at London, at
that time, by Fifteen or Twenty Lords, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and which
was afterward backed with a more considerable number. Then it was seen, that
the Religion, Laws and Liberty of the Kingdom lay at stake, and that if the
King should get the better of the Prince, they were to expect the last
extremity of Rigor. And this made the face of things to change in a moment,
and did the Prince's business, without effusion of Blood. It is true, that at
last, the King (at a pinch) consented to the Calling of a Parliament, but it
was then too late; and they knew very well, that that was only to gain time;
yet though as late as it was, it is yet true, That if the King had stayed, his
Enemies could never have done any thing against him; the Parliament had taken
his part. This is soclear by the manner of the carriage of many of the Members
of the Convention, that he must be blind who cannot see it, or be very hard of
belief, not to acknowledge it. As for the King's Friends, they would have had
no liberty of speech, (says my Author) how dare he say so, seeing that in the
Convention, the King having left the Kingdom, and the Prince of Orange being in
the possession of his Army, and the House of Commons declaring against James
II. yet even then his Friends durst speak for him; It was proposed in a full
Assembly, to call him back. Many Lords-Spiritual and Temporal protested against
the Vacancy of the Throne, and with so little danger and disgrace, that some of
them were afterward made Members of the Privy Council. What could not the
Friends of James II. have said, if Himself had been present? It is past all
doubt, that they had carried it for him; or kept the Affairs of State in a most
equal Balance. If the Prince had had any design to do violence to the Members
of Parliament, would not the whole Nation and all the Forces thereunto
belonging, have joined together to oppose him, as a treacherous person, who
came to destroy their Liberty, after having so solemnly declared, He would
Maintain it? Could the Prince, with his 10 or 12000 Foreigners have made one
day's resistance? It is therefore certain, that neither the King nor his
Friends had any reason to be afraid, in that case.

The other Argument, by which this Man endeavors to prove, that the pretense
of a free Parliament is really a Chimera, is, because the Parliament could not
make Laws, without the King's consent. And if it be granted, that this
pretended free Parliament had met, the King would have opposed all their
Resolutions; He would have refused to pass the Bills. And the Parliament could
never have done any thing, at least could not but by force. Upon which account,
it would not have been a free Parliament, seeing the King could not have his
Liberty. It may also be (says our pious Author) that the Hand of God, which is
not shortened, was so gracious to that generous Prince, as to make him hearken
to their Threats, with the same Firmness of Resolution, with which St. Lew is
heard the Saracens, whose Prisoner he was, when a hundred drawn Swords ready to
dispatch him, could not shake him from his stedfastness, and oblige him to take
an Oath, the thoughts of which were more terrible to him. What is to be done on
such an occasion? Behold, this pretended free Parliament is arrested all on a
sudden; and all the fair fruits that were expected from it, become abortive.
The English ought to answer this. They know their own Laws, and we do not; but
according to the Light of good Sense and the Laws of Nature, we may make him
Answer, by two Things, that are very weighty. The first is, that we ought to
distinguish betwixt those Laws that are already made, and those Laws that are
only a making: That the Consent of the King of England is not necessary for the
Preservation of those Laws that are made. But there were Laws requiring the
Exclusion of all Papists from Offices and Places of Trust, as well Military as
Judiciary and Civil. There were Laws that prohibited, upon the Pain of Death,
the Priests, and especially the Monks, coming into the Kingdom. There were Laws
standing, that required the demolishing of the Romish Chapels, and hindering
all Public Exercise of the Popish Religion. There were Laws that declared
every Person of the Realm guilty of High Treason, who should keep
correspondence with the Court of Rome, and who should hide Priests and Monks.
There were Laws enough for the Security of the Protestant Religion. The
Parliament had nothing to do, but to put those Laws into strict Execution* The
King's consent was not necessary, for the enacting of new Laws for that
purpose. But seeing he has the executive Power of the Laws in his hands, what
is to be done, if the King will not put those Laws in execution? Then and in
that Case, it is evident that the Parliament might lawfully appoint some
Persons who should execute those Laws; for otherwise, for what end are Laws
made, if it be always in the Power of one individual Person to hinder their
Execution? It must be supposed, that those who made the Laws, were no Fools;
but certainly they had not been wise, if they had reserved no Power to
themselves, for the Execution of the Laws, whenever the King should refuse so
to do. It is not then necessary, that there should be new Laws to bear down
Popery, which showed her self bare faced. Neither were there any new Laws
necessary to oppose the King, and to declare him incapable of the Government.
For all the Laws, which before that Time, had been made against Popery, make it
manifest, with great Force and Necessity, that a King of England must be a
Protestant, that without doing any Violence to the Law, they might declare to
James II. that they could no otherwise consider him, but as a private Person.

But again, there is no Law expressed in so general and so precise terms, but
admits of an Exception of Cases of Necessity: And according to this Rule, we
are to understand the Laws of England, That the Parliament cannot make a Law
without the King. Let us suppose, that in a Kingdom, such as England is, where
the Estates have reserved to themselves one Part of the Sovereign Power, a King
goes about to alienate all, or any Part of the Realm, to bring in a foreign
Power, to abrogate the Ancient, to revoke all the Privileges of the People, to
harrass his Subjects with an Army, to cause to Murder all those who comply not
with his Pleasure, or all those whom he pleases so to treat: Will any one say,
that the Estates, or the Parliaments, who are the Trustees, Guarrantees and
Protectors of the Liberties of the People, have not a Power according to Law,
to issue forth such Orders, and to take such Measures as may hinder the
Violences committed by that Prince? and that for this Reason: The Parliament
can do nothing, without the King's confent; and therefore cannot oppose the
Violences done by him, for the King will never consent to it; I maintain, that
he that would argue thus, has utterly lost his Wits. In vain have Parliaments
reserved to themselves the Legislative Power, if they had no Authority to
exercise it. In vain have they preserved their Privileges, if they had no
Power for that Purpose. The Supreme Law does always interpret all other Laws,
and make exceptions therein; And that Law is, The Safety and Preservation of
the People; according to which Law, we ought to explain or limit that Law which
says, The Parliament can do nothing without the King's consent. When the King
and the People are opposite, the Parliament is Judge; But a Judge does not
stand in need of the Consent of either of the Parties to give force to the
Sentence that is pronounced. When the Parliament and the King are agreed, for
the Preservation of Religion and of the Society, in that Case alone it is, that
one can do nothing without the other. To make this Truth manifest, we need only
invert the Position, and say, the King can do nothing without the Parliament;
does it therefore follow, that if a Parliament is so headstrong as to render
all the Laws of no effect, and to ruin the Nation, a King of England may not
lawfully oppose them, and bring the Parliament within its due limits? He may do
it without all doubt; in like manner, a Parliament may lawfully provide for the
Security of the Nation, contrary to the King's Pleasure.

My Author goes back to the Prince's Declaration, alleging it to be filled
with sanguinary Orders. And what are those sanguinary Orders? They are such
Clauses of the Prince's Declaration, which appeared to him to carry the
greatest force in them. In one place, he calls those who have betrayed their
Religion, and subverted the Laws of their Country, Execrable Offenders, who
have justly deserved Death. In another place, He declares, that all Papists who
shall be found with Arms in their Hands, or concealed in their Houses, about
their Persons, or otherwise; or who shall be in any Civil or Military
Employment under any Pretense whatsoever, shall receive no Quarter from his
Army, but be treated as Highway Men, and Banditti by his Soldiers. In a third
place, the Prince does say, That they who shall take Arms under any Popish
Officer, and march under his Command, shall be considered as Accomplices in their
Crimes, and Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country. And lastly, William of
Nassaw says elsewhere, That those Magistrates, and other Persons who shall
refuse to assist him, and in Obedience to the Laws, to perform strictly
whatever he does require of them, etc. shall be looked upon as the Greatest
Offenders, and the most infamous of all Men, as Traitors to their Religion, to
their Laws and to their Country, and that he will not fail to treat them
accordingly.

The Truth is, we cannot tell, if this Man is yet in his right Wits, or rather,
if he is not one of those Bedlams who are tied, to prevent the Effects of their
Rage. Miserable Soul! Are these the Marks, by which the Cruelty or Clemency of
Princes is to be judged? Are they not rather Innocent Stratagems, by which they
strike Terror, that no ill may ensue? Is not preventing of Resistance a proper
means to hinder the Effusion of Blood? Is there any Necessity, that all such
Threatenings should be accomplished? How many Commanders and Generals have
threatened the Cities which they besieged, that they would abandon them to the
Fury of the Soldiers, if they would not surrender; to which nevertheless they
afterward proposed favorable Conditions for a Treaty? Let us trace the
Footsteps of this Prince; Are they marked with Blood? What Persons has he put
to death? Is there any Man who has lost so much as a Nail of his Finger? We
know, that the Papists that are in London, and particularly the French talk
with an unparalleled Insolence. The Parliament knows it; the King is informed
of it, and hinders the Severities of Justice from taking hold of the Offenders.
The Ambassadors of the Emperor and of the King of Spain see it; they
acknowledge it, they declare to His Majesty the grateful Sense they have of his
Clemency, and they inform their Masters of it. But, (it may be said) the Prince
ought not to have denounced those terrible Menaces: If it were so that he ought
not to have uttered those Threats, it would not have been the Effect of his
Cruelty. It is in Actions, and not in Words that Men look for Blood and
Cruelty. Besides that, the Prince had good reason to speak as he did, if he had
just cause to do what he did. If he was in the wrong upon the matter, he was to
be blamed in every Circumstance; but if he was justifiable in the main, he was
justifiable in the whole Affair. For these are the ordinary Measures taken by
Conquerors and Generals, in just Wars. They utter Threats, they impress Fear,
and strike with Terror; they likewise chastise those who yield not themselves
upon such Manifesto's. Those Traitors, who, in favor to the King, had betrayed
their Country, Religion and Laws, deserved to be called Execrable by the
Prince, and deserved all the Evils with which he threatened them, yet without
any design of their Accomplishment, as it appeared by the Event. He commanded
the Papists upon Pain of Death, to lay down their Arms. That had been good, if
after he had declared War against Popery, upon his entering the Kingdom, he had
suffered the Papists to meet together, and form a Body against him. He
declares, that it was neither strictly the Persons of Papists, nay, nor their
Religion that he had in his view, but that he was resolved to oppose their
Attempts by which they endeavored to destroy the Religion established by Law.
Must he not then have been permitted to deprive them of their Arms at least,
seeing he left them their Life, Property and Liberty of Conscience? The Man
complains loudly, that the Prince, in his Declaration, sounds his Order for the
Papists laying down their Arms, upon their Meeting about London and
Westminster, with a barbarous Design of making some attempt upon the said
Cities, either by Fire, or a Massacre, or by both together. He must certainly
be very much in the wrong, who suspects Papists and Popery of such Attempts;
they are very little acquainted with them. St. Bartholomew's Massacre, and many
others committed in France: The Murders a hundred times attempted upon the
person of Queen Elizabeth, and committed upon those of Henry the Third and
Henry the Fourth: The Assassination of William Prince of Orange: The Gunpowder
Plot for blowing up the Two Houses of Parliament in the beginning of the Reign
of James the First: The Burning of London: The Assassination of Justice
Godfrey: The Death of the Earl of Essex by a Rasour; And that of King Charles
the Second by Poison, with a Hundred other Enterprises of this nature, make it
appear, that we commit an outrageous violence against Popery, if we believe,
that she is capable of inspiring the blackest Designs.

Now, by this time, the Man who has opposed the current of this present
Narrative, thus far begins to vomit torrents of Choler, and accumulates
Injuries upon Outrages.

The Wretch is a Monstrous Exception out of every Rule, and particularly, out
of this One, That Men without Judgment are ordinarily endowed with a good
Memory; He talks like a Madman, without Judgment, and also without Memory. He
has forgot where, and the person for whom he speaks. He speaks in France, and
he speaks for James the Second. It is a mark of great judgment to look for
Cruelty out of France, and to accuse a Foreign Prince thereof, whilst he lives
under the most cruel Government that has been in Europe for these many Ages. A
Government under which a Thousand Cruelties have been committed upon the
Protestants to make them abjure their Religion. They abandoned them, their
Honor and their Life, to the Insolence of the Soldiers. They tormented them by
night and day; they burnt, they racked, they tortured them. The resolutions of
many were shaken by the cruel torments that were used. They massacred, and
burnt and tore many in pieces alive. They left infinite numbers of People to
perish in frightful Prisons, and in unspeakable Miseries. They snatched the
Children from their Mothers, the Husbands from their Wives, the Wives from
their Husbands, Friends from Friends, to send them away to perish in the
American Islands, in a direful Exile, and horrible Miseries. When King William
shall have done so much against the English Catholics, we will agree that they
abdicate the Notion of his Royal Clemency. A Government moreover of whose
Cruelty Foreign Nations have been sensible, which has not spared either the
Honor, the Possessions or the Lives of their Allies and Neighbors, which has
reduced into Ashes the most Beautiful Cities of Flanders and Italy, and which
carries Horror and Desolation whithersoever she carries her Arms. These are the
Men who accuse our Princes of Severity. Get you gone then, you Infamous Man!
Go, and read Lectures of Clemency to your own Masters, before you charge ours
with Cruelty. Take notice also for whom it is that you speak. You speak for a
Prince who alone has spilt more Blood, by the hand of the Executioner, than
Twenty of his Ancestors have done together. After the defeat of the Duke of
Monmouth, he sent a Monster of Injustice and Cruelty into the West of England.
He caused to Hang and Quarter more than two thousand persons in those Counties.
An Example of horrible Cruelty, and which possibly cannot be paralleled in
History. In the most Criminal Rebellions, the Heads are punished, and the
Multitude is pardoned. But he was for cutting off both Leaders and People, and
burying them under the same ruins. You speak for a Prince who is suspected to
have his hands stained with his Brother's Blood, and to have dipped them in that
of the Earl of Essex. You ought to have let these Ideas of Horror sleep, and
engage those who wish him well, not to awaken them, and expose them to the view
of England.

This Infamous Libeller acts the Prophet too, and has found by an Astrological
Scheme of his own, that the Prosperity of His Majesty of King William will not
last long; but the Event without doubt will give this Prophet the Lie; God, by
the continuance of his Favors and Blessings, will justify the Conduct of His
Anointed, and of His Servant, and make Him Victorious, in spite of all the
Efforts of Calumny, and the Machinations of his Enemies.

FINIS.

