DUALITAS: OR A Twofold Subject Displayed and Opened, conducible to Godliness,
and Peace. In Order, I. LEX LOQUENS, The Honor and Dignity of Magistracy, with
the Duties thereupon Depending, and Reverence thereunto Due.

II. DUORUM UNITAS, The Agreement of Magistracy and Ministry, at the Election
of the Honorable Magistrates of Edinburgh, and the opening of a Diocesian
Synod of the Reverend Clergy there.

By Will. Annand, M. A. One of the Ministers of that Ancient City, Sometime of
Universe. Coll. OXON.

JEREM. 31. 23. As yet they shall use this speech in the Land of Judah. and in
the Cities thereof, The Lord bless thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain
of Holiness. H^lar. de Synod. Aver^. Ar^a^. Vestrum est in Commune tract are,
ac providere at que agere ut quod nunc usque inviolabili Fide manetis Relig^^sa
Conscientia, Conservatis, and Teneatis quod Tenetis. Edinburgh, Printed by
George Swintoun and James Glen; and are to be Sold by Gideon Schaw: Anno DOM.
1674.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES CVRRIE, Lord Provost of the Ancient City of
EDINBVRGH. For Bailies William Johnston James Justice William Carmichael David
Swintoun Robert Baird L. Dean of Gild* James Southerland L. Thesaurer. And all
other Members of the Council, and Counselors of that City.


My Lords, and Honorable Patriots,
JUstice of old being Painted, according to her incorrupt Nature, a Beautiful
Virgin, Embelish'd with all Virtuous Array, Dragging and Smiting a Prisoner on
the Face, of a Deformed Aspect, named Injuria, may cause some to Represent this
my Adress in unfortunat Colors, with a Mien Compelling Censure; Judgment
being designed for punishing Misdemeanour: But such shall understand, that
unless Obedience be Culpable, my Dedication can have nothing of Iniquity.

My Lord, I appeal unto your self, if there be not here presented, what you
have so far Honored, as of old to Request a Copy, to which Motion I could name
them who Adhered; where still Declaration was made, (such was my Obligation)
that satisfaction should be given; but craved Time, expecting a demurr, might
procure a more beautiful Opportunity then to offer it in the dark.

The Hoped for Season (Right Honorable) is now; and the General Suffrage of
Authors, Electing Patrons (for countenancing Treatises) for Evicting Gratitude
in the Writer, and Attracting Veneration from the Reader, I make Address with
this my DU ALIT AS before the Body of this Populous City, in your Lordships
Person, and Venerable Council, whose Ingenuous Behavior in a Succession of
Years, toward all your own Called and Elected Ministry, and to my Self in
particular, forms already Imaginations of Candid Acceptance.

How empty soever it may seem to others, your Honors desire after it, to me,
makes it Ponderous. Ty^ng me withal in Gratitude, to wish your Bench
prosperous in its Worthies, and that your City, through the Vigilance of its
Watchmen in both Employs, may continually merit its Gray-hair'd and Ancient
Epithet, being futurely known for the Good Town, is the request of,

My Lord, and Right Honorable, yours in all Offices of Love and Duty, Will.
Annand.
From my Study, September. 15. 1674.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Friend,
THe Morosity of this Age can hardly allow, in probability of Discretion, to
Complement thee into a kind Conceit of what is here in thy hands; It Treating
of Magistracy and Ministry: a Theme that more loudly than ordinary Whisper,
Suggests somewhat diminishing Respect; Veneration to them being a Duty many
called Christian (not to say, thought Godly) has forgot: Yet if there be any
Bowels of Love to God or Man, Compassion to our Church, or Affection to our own
Interest, there is something here inducing to a Perusal.

It speaks of Judgment, and pleads for Justice, as the great Axis, upon which
the Wheels of thine ow^ ^ffairs must Successfully move: But as God, together
with these, is endowed with Mercy, so neither is there wanting here Documents
of Clemency and Tenderness, inflaming thee, if God-like, to Affability and
Meekness, without Sordid Sullenness, or Awkward Surliness, to review what is
offered at the request of thy Wellwisher: Otherwise to grant what is much
better, viz. Thy Prayers and good Wishes, to be directed by the Line of Verity,
and led through the Labyrinth of Error and Mistake; And as I never yet wished
thee the least evil, so shall I always endeavor thy greatest good. Farewell.

Will. Annand.

ERRATA.
Lex Loquens. Page 6. Line 19. r. shining. p. 23. l. 23. r. Fire. DV. P. 2. l.
2. r. Adapted. p: 21. l. 21. r. Princes and Priests. l. 22. 2 Cbron. 23. 7. p*
24. l. 7. r. Charnel.

LEX LOQUENS, OR, The HONOR and DIGNITY of MAGISTRACY, with the Duties
thereupon depending, and Reverence thereunto due: Preached in the High Church
of Edinburgh, October 4. 1664. the day of Electing the Magistrates of that
Honorable City, for the ensuing Year.
EZRAH VII. XXV. And thou, Ezrah, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine
hand, set Magistrates and Judges, which may judge all the people that are
beyond the River, all such as know the Laws of thy God, and teach ye them that
know them not.

And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let
judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or to
banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.


AT the first infusion of the Reasonable Soul into man, it was so Reasonable,
so Pure, so full of Beaming Light, directing to virtuous undertakings, that his
very Body was not under the Dominion of any, not to be brought, God himself
excepted; unto whom his Soul does willingly adhere, without so much as the
shadow of desiring another Authority for the rendering of that we call
Subjection. What was intended or was founded in that primeve Sovereignty Adam
was to have had over Eva, or both of them over their Sons or Daughters, sin
has eclipsed our Sun-like endowments, that we are not able perfectly to
discern: But evident it is, that man had at first dominion, by public decree,
only over Beasts of the Earth, Fishes of the Sea, Fowls of the Air, Genesis 1. 28.
That is, as we now understand it, over unreasonable Creatures; hinting that
where reason is perfected, there is proclaimed freedom, Dominion still hitting
and falling upon that person with the heavier or lighter stroke, where
unreasonableness is more or less in-dwelling, or any thing of the Bruit further
in, or faster rooted, as Experience shows in Children, Fools, or Madmen.

The Fall therefore, in different degrees, Bestializing Man, Almighty Wisdom in
all generations, selected the most virtuous, as Senior in parts, to ^ule over
those Younglings, more inclined to debaur'd; Yea has from this their Office,
styled them gods, who were not eminent in that God-like quality of Holiness,
but Fiery and Tyrannical, ruling over others as their creatures, for the
punishment of a people guilty of more atrocious crimes: And as men multiplied,
and Nations increased, so Rulers, and Under-Rulers were propagated, to restrain
and curb persons more feral, wild, and unneighbourly, from infecting by their
bad behavior, the otherwise peaceable, reduc^ng them by inst^uction, by
correction, to a more goodly deportment; and by death it self, over-awing the
like unruliness, in the sad and passionat beholders.

Hence it was commendable in this Artaxerxes, or Ahasuerus, (for Ezrah's King,
and Esther's Husband, was one Man) that God having made him Emperor over an
hundred and twenty and seven Provinces, blessing him with a peaceable Reign,
and gifting him with the Land of Canaan, for the punishment of Isreal's sin, to
take care against the committing of more iniquity, by impowering a holy Jew, a
religious Scribe, a serious Devoto, a Gospel- Wiseman,, one that was known in
Mosaick-Law, who eying the Star of the promised return, acted peaceably,
religiously, and loyally under the Conqueror, whereby Conquering so the
Persian Monarch and his seven Counselors, that from them he received a
Commission, 1. For building of a Temple for the God of Heaven in Jerusalem,
that the people might learn Religion. 2. For setting Judges and Magistrates
over them, that they might learn Manners, ordaining the disobedient to have
judgment speedily executed upon him. etc. For all which Ezrah was so grateful
a Scribe, so godly a Physician, in curing the distempers of Church and State,
as to bless the God of Heaven, for putting such a thing as this in the Kings
heart, prayed for the King and his Sons therefore, his devotional affections
running equally as a mighty River, into the Fountains of Gods glory and man's
good.

For this last, Right Honorable, (our Temple through gra^e being builded) are
we met here, viz. for appointing Judges and Magistrates; and because your
selves have Authority from our great Artaxerxes, it is only my part, as one of
your unworthy Scribes, to mind you of what I know you have already purposed,
(i. e.) according to the wisdom of your God, which is in your hand, to set over
the people Magistrates and Judges, all such as know the Laws of our God, and to
teach them that know them not.

In order to which, according to the same Law, let us distinctly view, 1. The
notation, sense of the word, and the end of Magistracy, Set thou Magistrates
and Judges. 2. The necessity of the thing, and rule by which they are to be
chosen, after the wisdom of thy God. 3. The honor and respect with which the
Magistrate is to be noticed, and whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and
of the King, let judgment be speedily executed upon him, whether unto death,
or banishment, or confiscation of goods, or imprisonment.

SECT. I.
The Notation, Sense of the word, and End of Magistracy.
IT comes from the word Magister, to have the Mastery, Rule, or Government
over others, one placed in power, and lawfully empowered to coerce, prevent,
and punish disorders, in all wisdom. The sense of the word Magister being Magus
in the Persian Dialect, called Wise men in St. Matthew, such as the Greeks
called Philosophers, the French Druides, the Egyptians Prophets, the English
Wise men, or Cunning men, or Canny man in this Kingdom (vulgarly) that is one
Handy, and Dexterous in the pursuit of those offices, unto which their eminent
abilities in the eye of their Superiors, as a Commendamus did instate them, as
here, the wisdom of God in the hand of Ezrah, that is, his promptitude therein,
and readiness thereat, did prefer him in the observation of Artaxerxes, to this
high and eminent employ.

The word Shaphetin, radically signifies Judging; but that part of it, as to
men, which is translated Juridicos, such a Judgment as judiciously gives the
sense or being of the Law, called also Causidicos, such as determines or
pleads Causes betwixt men and men; Praesides, Presidents, a word intimating a
person invested with public Authority, for management of the Affairs of a
Commonwealth: a Judge or Magistrate, the Law and the People, being the three
essentials, giving life and const^tution to a Re-publick.

Of Magistrates some are Supreme, others subordinat; some are greater, as
having a greater charge, others lesser, according to the limits of their
Government, some such by Birth and Succession; Artaxerxes was the son of
Zerxes, others by Election, Suffrage, or by Vote, as Ezrah here, and now with
us. The first as the King, is compared to the Soul, as being that Spirit by
which a Nation is quickened, the latter to the Body or Members thereof, by
which motion is made to curb wickedness, and encourage goodness, and that
splendidly, because of which, there are who will have the word Magistrate to
proceed from Magis-and Ter, he performing a threefold office remarkably, 1. In
protecting all the people. 2. In praying for the whole people. 3. In punishing
disorders among the people. The Roman Magistrates were at first called Pretors,
as going before the people to espy and foresee perils; then Judges, from
discerning the sense, and expressing the meaning of the Law; then Consuls, from
consulting the peoples welfare; which again gives a threefold use of
Magistracy.

Hence they ar^ called, 1. Rulers, from regulating the people, that they grow,
or run not crooked o^ uneven in their manners. 2. Ancients, as being older,
that is wiser then others, governing by gray-hair'd experience, by prudential
advertance, their Subjects who are supposed to be more young, that is, rash,
tender and headstrong. 3. Elders, as having both Antiquity writ on their
Persons, and Gravity on their Faces, in opposition to those youthful and
frisking glances, they are to banish by more severe behavior; from this notion
comes the word Alderman, in our Neighbor-kingdom, and great City, which
represents but the sense of our word Baily, a title lent us from our ancient
Allies the French, signifying Puissance, Command, or Authority infused into him
for executing the Law, in his place and stead under whom they are Bailies: And
your ordinary Additament Sir, is but Senior, having respect to his venerable
age, years, and countenance, not that a Youth may not be a Magistrate, for
Consulatus est praemium virtutis, said the great Italian in his sound
Politics; Government is the reward to virtue, not of years, he being Senior,
he being Alderman, who is old, stayed, learned, and grave in his carriage and
conversation. 4. Governors, a metaphor snatched from the Pilots exercise, a
City being as a Ship, the Magistrates thereof intended for safe conducting both
Cargo and Vessel to the designed Port of peace and prosperity; therefore were
the Athenian Judges the day of Election sworn thus: I will give sentence
according to the Laws and Decrees of the people of Athens, I will not take
gifts for Judgment, I am not younger then thirty, I will hear both Parties,
the Accuser and Defendant alike, I will pass Judgment aright in the thing
prosecuted by Jupiter, Neptune, and all the gods.

They are called also High Hills, Princes, Leaders, Powers, Gods, consulting
about things to come, judging about things present, governing for the time
allotted, according to the known Law. The Prefect of Rome under King Romulus,
had the charge of the City only, yet afterward his Dominion extended to an
hundredth miles about it, exercising his Prefectory Prepositorship, or
Provostry, for so I may call it, according to the Idiome of the word, as doing,
as going, as speaking before the people, for example, for conduct, for caveat,
that nothing should be done wickedly, undertaken rashly, or uttered
indiscreetly, against the b^nefit of that Body under inspection. So Samuel was
Magist^atus, that is Magnus Magistratus, shinely, brightly, being truly
feared, and highly approved of the people, 1 Samuel 12. 3.

It was said by a great man, that nothing was more difficult then to govern
well; and such as are apt but to the contemplation, how much more they that are
called to the exercise of Magistracy, shall find it more then ceremonious to be
a Ruler? For conform to Artaxerxes, the end of that call is, for, 1. Judging.
2. Teaching. 3. Punishing of the people: of which in order.

1. Judging, insinuating clearness of understanding. This word Judices, or
Judges, is from Jus dicere, speaking audibly what the Law inwardly has
conceived, his eye directing, diving into the most dark recesses of a Statute,
for clearing up the iniquity or innocence of a cause, depending before his
Bench, or standing at his Bar, not torturing, or stretching the joints the^eof
upon the Rock of subtilty, but wisely to respect the meaning and ultimat scope
of the appointed rule, which is never to oppress.

What Sinews and Arteries are unto the Natural Body, forming for upright
walking, that Judgment is to the Politic Bulk of a Society, moving for
discerning betwixt the clean and the unclean, in Ezekiels style, c. 44.
Ocularly, as it were pointing at their several natures, for embracing the one,
and spurning at the other, and to discern between good and bad in Solomon's
wish, 1 King. 3. Dogmatically by an authoritative sentence; unto which in that
critical case of the Harlots, an eager and sharp prying into the Law of Nature,
dissipated all foggy complaints, solidly discovered the true Mother, by an
unusual command of dividing the child, procuring a reverend fear unto his own
Regal person, all inferring from this acute discovery, that there was no
bemisting of his unde^standing.

For completing of man's judgment, or perfecting of justice, Philosophers
required these three things, 1. Memory, 2. Intelligence. 3. Observation of
providence; and if we can remember the import of these, it will much irradiat
our understandings for giving Judgment in any case.

For 1. Memory is a repository for storing up Registers of former, or past
actings, that as from a Bank they may be provided for ex tempore assaults. Or
again, that Justice be not perverted, when at last it may be casu^lly impeded,
but executed. So Gamaliel secured the lives of the Apostles against the
Councils resolution, Acts 5. from calling to mind the unprosperous
insurrections of Theudas and Judas. So David at last executed judgment on Joab
and Shimei, proving at length too strong for any son of Belial, 1 Kings 2. And
Cesar's not reading the Letter, that discovered his own intended murder by a
miscreant crew of Conspirators, given him before he went to the Senate, may
compel a Magistrate in tumults, into a sagacious inspection of any informatory
Epistle, given in his approach to Court or Council, or in earnest, in the most
serene tranquillity of the calmest debate.

That check the oppressed, yet loyal Machetas gave Philip of Macedon, passing
(through inadvertence) an unjust sentence, may cause a Justitiary to have both
his eyes open, in deciding Causes: It was this, beholding the King drowsy, and
more then half asleep, while the Pleaders pleaded, condemned him in a certain
sum, upon which Machetas with a loud voice appealed from him; this enraged and
thoroughly awaked the King, demanding to whom? To your self, Sir, said he, when
you are perfectly awake: This made the ingenuous Prince blush, who hearing the
Cause attentively again, gave true judgment, himself paying to the other Party
the debt he had unjustly ordered the Appealer to discharge. The same Prince in
a hurry being complained unto by a poor oppressed Woman, told her, He was not
at leisure; she boldly enough replied, Then be not at leisure to be King: The
shamefaced Worthy, first gave her justice, and frequently after that heard all
complaints himself. The remembrance of which and such other passages, how
competently, as to the memory, would they qualify a Judge?

The 2. Intelligence is a pondering upon, and searching as far as possible,
into the nature and circumstance of things present and before them, the
Complainers Grievance, and the Plaintiffs Replies, being not always writ in
Text Hand, craft, and cousenage will dim the Letters; and to make them appear
fine, they will (it may be) by the Parties be drawn forth in small Characters:
To this how excellent is a quick and piercing eye, to know each Comma, for
keeping sense and right reading, from the breath, eye, countenance of the most
audacious, arrive at the full Point or period of exact sentence, and may
triumph in the conquest over falsehood, yea perhaps preventing perjury? Besides
this, darkness, the unusualness of the case, may jumble a Judge, if not more
then ordinary ready to apprehend what to do. I have often wondered at that
Sentence of the Areopagi, before whom a Lady was accused for killing her
Husband and Son, who had dispatched a Son of hers by a former Husband: here
there was cause to condemn, and some cause to have compassion, in securing
life; in deep meditation, they ordered the Woman and her Accuser to appear
before them, some hundreds of years after that, declaring thereby, they would
not absolve, nor could not condemn, leaving the case to the determination of
the gods, the Law of the true God not being known, and the poor Madam, tempted
to such a passion, by so treacherous a deed.

Magistrates are Heads, and excessively fatal will it prove to the least
Precinct, to be moved by an eyeless, that is a Headless Head, success not being
so betrothed to each blind man, as she was to that famous Bohemian Zisca, who
fought several Battles with one eye, and some with never a one, yet still
conquered the Papal Armies: But also observe, his victories proceeded from the
bright Lamp of his beaming understanding, or rather Sun of clear Judgment,
upon the information of the Enemies Array, the Eye of the Body being but the
Casement, through which the vivacious Soul emits her light: And a wise man will
be wise in a dark Room, and see clearly what to do though his eyelids be
closed. A disjoynted Pilot will not secure a Vessel, and a rash, inadvertent,
and inconsiderat person, Nature her self has made unapt for a Judges Employ.

Pharaoh will have men of activity set over his Cattle, Genesis 47. not Sir
Dull-man, who can neither judge of the Weather, nor Pasture, nor condition, nor
case of the Beast. And finding Joseph discreet and wise, he made him Ruler over
all his House. Solomon craved wisdom to go in and out Kinglike, both to begin
business, and industriously to end them; yea end them so, as being prepared for
a fresh Sally, without transport, perplexity, or amazement. For when in
Symbols, we see an Asses Head affixed, or joined to a Humane Body, by the
Masters of that Art, we are to understand, a Doltish, Blocked, Dull, and
Heavy-pated Ruler.

James the third of this Ancient Kingdom, presented himself in a Medal, under a
Crown, as a Hen brooding over her Chickens, with this Device, Non Dormit qui
Custodit, Magistrates are not sleepy, though asleep, keeping their Subjects
warm, and spying dangers within their Circle, contriving methods of deliverance
and escapes to those under their wings, in excessive colds, or apparent
hazards. This made Solomon in a dream to act the Wise man, beautifying his
Throne, grandizing his Peasants, making the Boot a Nobleman, and the Nobleman
a King, himself as it were a god, by peace, wealth, and Religion, all issuing
from a sublimated foresight of, and careful plodding upon, the weight of his
Affairs, even in the visions of the night.

A Judge, as he should set himself to know Wisdom and Folly, beholding not only
the Noonday of Righteousness of a person, in full and ample Declamations of
his innocence; but also the Twilight, or Starlight of another in his
incongruous, or incoherent defenses: Never failing, if better cannot be, to
light the Candle of his own perception, by Interrogatories and Demurs, making
Scrutiny into the darkest Crevice, and blindest Corner of a petulant Accuser,
detecting his malevolence in the pursuit, and his revenge in clamouring for a
Sentence. In which Festus was an unjust Judge, for leaving Paul bound, to
procure to himself the favor of malicious Jews, Acts 24. And whoever follows
him, affronteth the Guards that attend them. A Magistrate being therefore
encompassed with Partisans, and Halberts, that all may know he is purposed
truly to discern the face of all Affairs, and immediately both ready to punish
Malversation, and protect the Regular in their well principled behavior.

The 3. Observation of Providence is, when by a Cluster of antecedent Affairs,
compared with the present, in a prudent way of Arguing, Conclusions are drawn
touching what may afterward occur. Absaloms Murder being pardoned, gave life
to a more unnatural Rebellion, and since no man did, the unreasonable Mu^e
hanged the disloyal Traitor. This is not to reflect upon David, but, my Lord,
to mind you and your Honorable Assistants, that very often it is no favor to
let the smallest sinner go free, from what has been seen, a Reproof, a pair of
Stocks, one hours uneasy Lodging, or a lash with a Whip, may save both the
expense and shame of a Halter.

I am prone to think, that Moses severity against Dathan and Abiram, had this
in its eye, the people having often murmured, and apt to complain, but until
then never offered to attatch the Priesthood, apprehending therefore there
might still be in the Camp encroachments made upon the Sacred Office, he cursed
them from the common death of all men (if I may call it a curse) to deter
hereafter Sacrilegious thoughts from the bosoms of any, how holy soever, and
remove them from attempting to touch that Holy Ground of the Lords Priesthood.
Upon the same Bottom it may be conjectured Peter founded his strictness upon
Sacrilegious Annanias, that none after him (upon their peril) should presume to
make offer of somewhat to the Lords service with both hands willingly, yet
sordidly to clinch their finger for detaining a part, he saying in that
bloodless slaughter, to Annanias Sons, Give all unto, or say you give but half
unto the Lords House, that is, for the use of his Servants, and his Temple.

But Sacrilege is none of my Province, this is proper, that it is good to be
warry,. And as upon one of your Tolbooths or Newgate, there is written,
Justitia alit Pacem, Peace is Daughter unto Justice, so Justice, this night in
a small degree, may procure great peace, some years from the offender, whereas
Impunity rankleth to a greater disgrace, and the old Proverb for a Judges
Chair, may be a Motto, Foolish pity spoils a City.

If these things from Sacred and Humane Authorities were heeded every where, in
Courts of Judicature, called Christian, how universally disposed should all
Judges be to perform what is the next end of Ezrah's installing Judges for, and
that is,

2. Teaching, inducing a care of propagating, and countenancing of Religion:
This the Persian King Dichotomizes, branching it into two Forms, or Classes, 1.
Such as know the Law of the Lord; and, 2. Such as know it not. There had been
before liberty given to all the Priests, Levits, and the People, to go up to
Jerusalem, it might then be supposed, in regard of the Captivity, the Law was
either in whole, or in part forgotten, or which is more charitably judged, that
the Jews did know the Law, whereas Strangers of other Nations might go with
Ezrah, or be in Canaan, and so being Heathen, or their Religion being mixed
with Heathenism, might not be perfect in the Law of the Lord; and both these he
was to teach.

Ezrah was a ready Scribe in the Law of Moses, having it, as we say, upon his
finger ends, for which eminent endowment, is he by his now Sovereign made
Archbishop, or if that offend, the great Superintendent of the Kingdom of
Israel, and also as a Civilian has. Authority, to appoint Judges, a favor
shown him by the Bounty-Royal of a Prince, and such as Ezrah not only
courteously, but thankfully accepts: yet now there are some that would condemn
him for neglecting his Priestly Office, in receiving a Commission for setting
up Magistrates and Judges; but this is all we shall say, that they that
condemns Churchmen for this duplicate Authority, are not so ready Scribes in
the Book of the Law, as he was; for if they were, they would with him
understand both Law and Church, and people would be bettered by those Judges he
set up, or then Almighty GOD had never in his Law so joined Magistrate and
Minister together. Nay, their Necessity, Nature, Reason, Experience, or all,
moved that from Tully, when he said, that if any thought that the Attick
Re-publick can be well governed without the Coucil of the Areopagites, he may
as well say that the world may be governed without the providence of the gods,
(i. e.) Churchmens Courts. The Civil ^ffice being no more impeded by his Judges
teaching, then his Spiritual Office was by his ordaining Judges obstructed,
both Priesthood and Princedom here uniting, for dignifying each other, as from
the beginning has been, and as yet it does, and shall in Christ, whose Laws
never divorced, what his Father had in all Generations joined together.

There is a twofold teach^ng, 1. Regal. 2. Sacerdotale. And again, 1. Private.
2. Public. And again, 1. By Countenancing it before others, 2. Performing it
in their own persons.

A Magistrate may, and ought to teach all these first ways, A Levit, or a
Priest, is to teach all the last ways. And he who has seen a Quarter Sessions,
a public Assize, a Judges condemning speech, has heard a glowing Sermon. Not
now to be in a crowd, let us eye Magistratical Teaching, and that is done.

1. Regally, or Authoritatively. Kings have taught, and yet may, and ought to
teach, by their Orders, by their Laws, allotting such and such a Circuit to
the Cure of such, or such a Levite, and how David, Solomon, Jehoshaphat,
Hezekiah, taught the people in statuting the courses of the Levites, composing
Prayers and Psalms for the people, instituting days of Humiliation, and in
benign providence, appointing times for Gratulation, and how they saw their
Subjects, whether Clergy, or Laity, perform these things, is so conspicuous,
that it were impertinent to prove it by particulars.

2. Privately, and Conscionably; there is indeed a time for all things, and the
Season does Season, that is, gives a Holy and Savoury Relish to things at one
time, which at another hour would be culpwble and censurable, and therefore
disgustfull and unpleasant. Thus Solomon publicly helped to Consecrat the
Temple; and ou^ late Solomon King James, gave (shall I call them?) two Sermons,
one in hopes of a Victory over the Spanish Fleet, in 88. then invading England,
and another in thanksgiving for its overthrow. But in ordinary, David will walk
in the midst of his house, and cut off the liar from from his presence, and who
walks in a perfect way shall serve him, Psalm. 101. And after he had blessed
the people in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, he returned to bless his own house
also, 2 Samuel 6. It is becoming a holy Magistrate, as opportunity offers, to
teach Humility, Modesty, Charity, Piety, casting out Vice, and sweetly alluring
inclinations for virtuous Education.

In a City there is some Rich, they may be proud, some Poor, they may be
unjust, some Covetous, they may oppress, some Wicked, they may be envious, some
Idle, they may be unruly: Now as these are known to one in place, a wholesome
Sermon for Heaven, for Affability, for Honesty, for Liberality, for Clemency,
for Industry, may be exceeding taking. One says, that there comes to a City, I.
Luxury and Excels. 2. Superfluity and Fullness, after a stuffed Panch comes 3.
Contumely and Reproach, and then to remove all comes the 4. the Adversary and
Ruin. Another being questioned what City was strongest? Replied, that where
were maniest good men, this is added to make firm, not to weaken, to enlarge,
not to diminish the Judges Authority; for if man would study to be quiet, do
his own business, Teach all within his own Circle, Family, School, Chamber,
Lodging, the Magistrates shall have less to do, in Genoa Superba it self, and
shall be parallel to that City esteemed by Zeno the best governed, the Citizens
in it obeying the Magistrates, and the Magistrates obeying the Law; And a
Magistrates private Teaching will mightily ope^at thereunto. Some such thing was
intended among some Ancient People, who sung their Laws, to keep the people
still in mind of that by which they were to be governed. Shall we think
Cornelius did not thus teach his Band? nor Boaz his Family? or the great
Counselors, Na^hanael and Nicodemus? If Job the poor, was Joabab the Prince,
how shall we think that that King did not Teach? And was not Solomon a Preacher
in Jerusalem? In a Regal way seeing the Law purely taught, in a private way
ordering his Family according to the Law of Royalty, decently, to the
admiration of that wise Sheba Queen, and example of all Pious, Godly, and
Future Magistrates: who by having an Ascent (I may be under stood) whereby to
go up to the House of the Lord, may teach their Servants, their Subjects, to
obey the Law taught therein, 1 King. 10.

2. Countenancing it before others. This is the pro^uct of Solomon's Ascent, and
in this did more then Patrizare: yet was David glad when some told him that it
was time to go to the House of the Lord, the T^umpet sounding to the Sacrifice.
Let interest speak what it will, the example of Magistrates has sway upon
others, for learning Godliness, and though Trade and Business may be pleaded,
to hinder Pulpit-attendance, yet its not to be forgot, they are to be at
leisure for Magistracy. I shall be bold to add this more, that sloth or
negligence of those in Authority, shall be requited and revenged, the
dutifulness of the Preacher, in supporting that Devoyr awe and reverence his
Hearers are to pay to the Honorable Office of Magistracy, shall not at last
have p^osperous success, but somewhat contrary, where the Almighty beholds
that Governor not countenance the Doctrines of Love and Fear unto himself.

To give Laws against Blaspheming God, to punish the pro^haner of the Name of
God, to Imprison, to Scourge, to put to Death such as break the Commands of
God, to discharge Vice with a severe eye, as contrary to the Nature of God, and
to look ascue with a slighting contempt upon a Minister of God, is one of the
most indecent, incongruous acts a Magistrate can perform, it signifying
carelessness how his proper work should succeed; for therefore is Magistracy
and Ministry appointed as Powers ordained of God, and has Swords in their
hand, to exhort obedience to the Law of God, and to punish them that do evil,
to be a terror to evil workers, and encour^ger of them do well, for this one
thing, Gods Glory, with this one difference, that the Minister is, or may be
called a Servant of God, the Magistrate a god: now an earthly god to vilify a
Servant of the God of Heaven sent to Earth to aid him in his Domination,
^avours of Folly, of Envy, both which are Man-like, Devil-like, not God-like
Qualities. When Israel joined themselves to Baal-peor, an Idol of the Moabites,
whose Image on an Altar, showed what Shem and Japhet could not look upon; it
seems the Elders of the people so far forgot their gravity, as to conduct and
guide their Wards thither for Devotion, therefore were their Heads hung up
before the Lord, and before the Sun, Numb. 25. by other Elders that had not
offered up their Modesty to that impure Priapus: but by discountenancing
Idolatry, taught some of the people higher Lessons of the Deity, and such as
kept them within compass of the Law, and preserved the Honor themselves had
first received over them. The other favoring Image Worship, destroying that
respect their places gave them, and in time still will so fester, that they
shall be held as base as the Earth, when for their contempt of the Worship of
God, which is the highway of shame, they shall be set up as Beacons, for men
who are called gods, to walk more respectfully toward those who are Gods
Ambassadors.

It was to teach the people Piety, that the Heathen Sages advised their Nobles,
Princes, Judges, 1. To build Temples to the gods, and 2. Their own Houses to be
near Temples, that Underlings beholding the Cedars of a Land to love and
reverence Heaven, they also in their low estate might be induced to eye the
Firmament, that success might be the issue of their Trades, and by the hands of
their Nobles be supplied in such things as they wanted by motions of pity
coming from above. Keeping up by this Polit-religious practice, both Honor to
their fancied gods, and Popular Veneration to themselves and Families. Th^s may
be enforced from the light in Belshazzars Candlestick: In vilifying but the
Vessels of the House of the Lord (who were Servants but in a low degree) call
them our Communion Cups, for his Darling Concu^ines, say they drank Healths in
them, yet his Mean, Mcne, thou art weighed in the Balance, and found light,
may show the event of such actings, as whispers, but disgrace to those
Ministers, who Ministers but with, and by, such Vessels. But what shall we say,
as he was found light who did it, they are usually the lightest persons, and
most wanton yet, who are most inclined to such disdaining behavior, and their
sin, when sought after, shall be found sufficiently heavy.

Good and great Joshua, a chief Magistrate indeed, commanding both Sun and
Moon, choosed to live in the Tribe of Ephraim, and was buried in the Mount
thereof: The Tribe which God had chosen, to erect his Tabernacle therein; and
there also but a few miles distant, was his High Priest Eleazar buried: And it
had been pity, that the first Prince, the first Priest, and the first House
God had in the Holy Land, should have been very far asunder. That that House,
and those Monuments, might teach and convince the necessity for Magistracy and
Ministry in God, to be always near to other, that the people might
indust^iously strive with God in his Temple, for upholding of the same respect
in either, pleading with their Neighbors to prove Conservators of the same
union, expressing their gratitude to God for them, by obeying, and respecting
both, frequenting Gods House by their example. Artaxerxes was surnamed
Longi-manus, or Long-hand, and by conduct can draw in the furthest off to hear.
Ezrah signifies help, and by Doctrine can p^rswade the most obstinat to obey.
This shall he find, who is in power, if he protect the honor of Gods Sanctuary
with his Sword, that is, by his attending therein, and honoring him that
serves, for the same ends he has Sword put into his hands for.

From this, sure, came that old principle, that a bono Principe, etc. a City is
rather prosperous by a good Prince, then by good Laws; this last, without the
former, being but as Paper Bullets, creating a noise, but doing no execution;
the first being a speaking, moving Law, toward Instruction and Sanctity, by
Demonstration, whereas the other are but as Mathematical Lines, showing after
what manner some has spent their time for our learning, and having no Master
but our selves, either we come short of Skill, or arrive at it with difficulty,
whereas Exemplarly teaching makes us perfect with ease and delight in the most
necessary speculations of God, our Neighbors and our Selves. When Joshua died,
the people had the same Laws they had in his life, but he that says they had
the same Manners, never understood the Book of Judges; this one instance may
serve for all, without opening the Graves of the good and bad Kings of
Jerusalem and Samaria, to make it unquestionable what Henry ^ Emperor, when
demanded why he would wear plain and course Cloth, or Stuff, answered, Non
Corporis sed Animi. A Magistrate was not to be Finer, but much Better then his
Subjects, and to go before them in goodness and virtue, which persuades more
cheerfully to Serene behavior, especially if correction be applied to lewd and
barbarous undertakings, to such, a Pillory and a Whipping Post, is a Desk for a
Catechism, and a Pulpit for Edification. But this leads us to the last end of
Magistracy, which is,

3. Punishing. This is Teaching with a witness, or as we call it, with a
Ce^tification, it setting home the lesson upon him that will not learn it by
heart. After this sort, with Briers and Thorns, Gideon taught the men of
Succoth, Judges 8. that is, Good Manners, Civil Answers, and Courteous
Hospitality. Some are Blind, and will not see the Law, others Deaf, and will
not hear the Law; others Lame, and will not work the Law; others are Wanton,
and will scoff at (...) Law: Now the Judges Office is, to let all of these feel
(...) Law. The Almighty gave his Statutes in Mount Sinai in Thunder, and such
who are indifferent of hearing the sound, may change their behavior, when
informed there is therein a killing or deadly Bolt. If Judges make Judgments
wanting Bolts, whereby to chastise Malefice, at the last may be taught, that
such counterfei^ing of Laws, is^ but mocking of God, and his Sword shall strike
at him, who thus abuses the very end of his Commission, by powder Squibs, and
Rockets.

The Magistrates are said to bear Swords, Romans 13. and he bears it in vain, if
he only prove an Animat Cavalier on Horseback (as the Image on a Half Crown,)
or George a Horseback on the Medal, whose Sword has neither Point, nor Edge,
to draw Blood, only lifted up, as threatening to kill the Dragon, yet never so
much as ruffles the hair of his skin. Whereas, in vain, in the Apostles sense,
stands in opposition to the wickeds carelessness that he should fear, and for
excitation of the Judges diligence, that he should not be slack.

The Roman Tribuns had before them carried, as by Officers or Sergeants,
certain bundles of Rods, with an Axe wrapped up in them, to let all see their
promptness, in S^ibbing disorders, that their City might rather have seemed a
School for Manners, then a City of Trade, or Arms. Such was not Laish, or
Cesarea Philippi: for in it, there was no Magistrate to put them to shame for
any thing, Judge. 18. there being therein nothing to be ashamed at; wherefore
God, as ashamed of them, removed them by F^re and Smoke, he purposing to be
revenged at last upon Beast-like Men, and Drone-like Governors.

It is the Motto of Guild Hall, or Council-house of Zant; or to come nea^er, I
suppose in imitation of it, that of Glasgow in this Kingdom, Hie locus Odit,
Amat, Punit, Conservat, Honorat,
Nequitiam, Pacem, Crimina, Jura, probos.
As if Courts were designed only (as they are not for any other thing, then) to
hate Wickedness, love Peace, punish Faults, preserve Privileges, and to honor
Good Men. In which sense, let not the gates of Hell, that is, the Wit, or Craft
of Hell (for Judges of old sat in the gates of the City) prevail, (shall I now
say?) against the Gates, that is, against the Magistrates of this Honorable
Burgh? by Impunity, Negligence, or Oversight. The Society of the Vicious being
truly Contagious, and as Pestilential Air, infecteth others, to shut them up,
may adapt for a Cure, making them Chrip their Miserere, and those that pass by,
saying, Amen, to their Lord have mercy upon us.

And now we are upon the Threshold of your Archives, ready to open your Arcana
Imperii, (i. e.) your Charter-chest: for now Artaxerxes and You, are to
consider how to execute Judgment, how long the Offender should lie in Prison,
how close his Prison should be, how long, or how far he should be banished,
whether this, or that Fact be Capital, or no, or Fineable. How much, or what
part of his Goods should be Confiscat, or no: But this is Hercules Club, and I
cannot weild it; it is Apelles Table, I shall mar the Draught: leaving it
therefore to him and you, I say only this, that our great King James had
somewhat he now and then called King-Craft, and this none was to learn but
himself and his Son: This point is Magistrate-Craft, I presume not to have
skill in it, yet I hold it part of my Craft to show you, that when you are
about this, and have determined upon it, that God would have you do it, 1.
Courageously. 2. Nature would have you do it Mercifully. 3. The Kingdom and
City would have you do it Legally. And 4. Artaxerxes would have you do it
Speedily.

1. Courageously. He is Gods Representative: and in this particular, ought to
fear no man, but with a holy Audacity, say to the Malefactor, as Joshua to
Achan, God shall trouble thee this day, for troubling us. He was often bid from
God and Man, be strong, (Josh. 1.) and of a good courage. In your Election,
morally, let your Officers proclaim at the Council-door, what the Officers of
the Jews published at joining Battle in History, What man is there that is
fearful and faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his house, Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
For what has Clinas, I mean the Coward, in him, deserving to be chosen for
wearing of a Sword? unless it be to cause Melancholy retire from a beholders
eye: Whereas Justice is so grave a thing, that it ought not to be perverted by
fear and trembling. A god to be a Coward, is improper, but to be Might^ is a
due and comely decency, making pathway for the Wheels of Ju^tice's Chariot,
that she may ride, as in the Chariots of Amminadab, a Prince of the Tribe of
Judah, who first entered in into the Red Sea, after it was dried up, not
fearing the fall of the Waters, with undaunted swiftness.

The Highest Severest Athenian Court, was that of the Areopagi, they sat on a
Rock, dedicated unto (and it is thought had the Statue of) Mars their god of
War; they Judged usu^lly in the dark, that they might not regard the Speaker,
but the thing spoken, awarding off terror that could any way arise from any
adjudged, and only fearing God. The Famous Moor in his Utopia, cannot fancy a
Magistrate in his head, until he has freed him both of Haughtiness and Fear;
and i^ such an one be in any place chosen, who has these, it shall be said of
them what Severus in Herodian said of the Cohortes Urbanas in Rome, that they
were Magis Pompae, quam Virtutis Administras, rather Images or Pictures, then
Men or Magistrates, Fear eclip^ing Reason, and blunting the edge, if it break
not the point of Justice Sword.

2. Mercifully. This is one property so eminent, so essential to God, that but
for this, the world had fallen about man's ears; neither delights he in a
afflicting man, Lam. 3. 33. It indeed carries away the Palm among all Gods
work, yet is he also so just, that I doubt if Ancus Martius first found out the
punishment of Fetters, Prisons, Stocks, etc. as some writes, for keeping men in
good tune, since I find a Kings Bench, (i. e.) the Kings Prison in the days of
Joseph, Genesis 39. yet are there so great out-breakings in that heart which is
our own, that we ought by pity, to put our selves in the Prisoners place,
though out of necessity he be made to grind in the Prison, for his undutiful
actings.

It was a fine saying of that Gamaliel of the Church of England, Reverend D.
Hammond, as I have heard, who in a peculiar request, being denied by the late
Usurper, the Doctor said, He perceived the Tyrant to have Guts, but no Bowels.
The like may be said of him who has no sorrow, no natural feeling of his
Prisoners condition, it being given as a Maxim, that toward God, man should
have the heart of a Father; toward his Neighbor, the heart of a Mother; only
to himself, the heart of a Judge, harsh and severe. The Hebrews say, that God
dwelt in his Tabernacle all days, since the beginning, appointing but one day
for Judgment, giving all other for Clemency and Mercy. It is probable, that
from this Topic of Compassion, comes that English custom, in calling a
Bloodless Assize a White one, or a Maiden one; and with the Justices of Peace,
there is joy, and to my Lord the Judge, there are presents and gifts, mercy
here and there in all, rejoicing over Judgment in the High Sheriff remarkably.

3. Legally. A Ruler is Officially, Lex Loquens, a speaking Law, not
Doctrinally only, but also the Applicatory part thereof, applying the Rule of
the Law to the Back, to the Head of the offender, which absolutely discharges
any passing over the Verge, or unraveling the Hem of the Law: imposing
moderation, while the punishment is infl^cted, divorcing passion on si^ster, or
by-accounts: For all Pilats Ceremonious washing, he was an unjust Judge, the
witnesses against our Savior ought to have been cast, they not agreeing in
their Testimony, Mark 14.

He is Pater, Pastor, Medicus: a Father, and therefore Courage is fit; a
Shepherd, therefore Compassion is proper, especially to those that are heavy. A
Physician, therefore Rules are necessary; in Receipts a Drahm too much through
inadvertence, or a double Dose, in wild adventures, is disgraceful. It is true
there are faults take men in a su^prize, as sudden heats and colds, others are
pestilential and infectious, others, as consumptions, seem hereditary. The
State Mediciner is not so tied to the Rules of the Law, but sometimes Prudence
will mitigate the same, and often he will Article with the Law, not for laying
down its Commission, for punish^ng altogether, but will for its giving a
greater or lesser Censure, providing^ that that little one keep the Body
Politic in a due and calm temper; if not, with the Emperor Ferdinand, our
Magistrates Motto is, Fiat Justi^ia, Let the Law be executed, fearing the guilt
of that other Emperor, Balbinus his device be charged upon him, Bonis no^et
qui malis parcit, He damnifieth good men, who indulgeth wicked men.

4. Speedily. This is Artaxerxes Symbol, Let Judgment be speedily executed
upon him; the want of this Foot-manship in holy Writ, seems to be the only
fault o^ the unjust Judge, he only appears ca^eless, and indifferent in the
execution of what came before him, for when he sentenced, for ought we find, it
was confo^m to the merit of the cause; and so will God, whose representative
Governors are, avenge his own elect speedily, after, or when they have cried
day and night unto him; Luke 18. But Ha^k! This Rule is not so headstrong, as
to run a Gallop, before the cause be searched, found, and the truth of it be
searched by the Law, and sealed by its Signature. God came down to try Sodom,
before he came to execution. And- speedily here stands in opposition both to
rashness, and dullness; wherefore Alexander the Great, was great in this, that
in hearing Causes, he closed still one ear, keeping that for the other Party,
that until both were heard, the Complainer had but half his hearing.

When all Offices worthy of the Purple, or Scarlet Robe are performed, and the
fire of Truth unquestionably falling upon the black Tinder of Impure actings,
to delay the execution of the Sentence, is to be Grandchild to the Unjust
Judge, a tedious demurr being contrary to the institution of the Rule. Or if
there must be a delay, it is Magistrate-craft, and that belongs to your selves.

SECT. II.
The Rule by which Magistrates are to be chosen.
TO speak of the necessity of Magistrates, and enforce it with discerning
Arguments, were equally to lose time, as to evict at large the expediency of
the Suns light, and Moons brightness. The custom of five days Rant and Liberty
to Debauch given in Persia, at the Interval of Kings and Rulers, riotously
opened the dullest understanding, for serious Resolves perpetuating the
Instalment of Judges, for Justice and Judgment; the first, for punishing the
Guilty, the latter, for acquitting the Innocent: Such now being the condition
of all places, that for sin by wrath, and through unpeaceableness by lust,
Israel Gods own Land, the Temple his own House, and Jerusalem his own City,
must have overseers under him, or it shall perish; yea Babel would be more
confounded, and Samaria more idolatrous, had it not a Rule some way or other to
order that confusion, and preserve it from destruction, to manage that
Idolatry, that (as each one pleased) it might not be his will worship. For 300.
years Rome had not many, yet some Laws, and those chiefly relating to Martial
Affairs: but afterward the Athenian Tables were the Rules of Justice, and the
Balance in which the due weight of Affairs were pondered.

Therefore Artaxerxes, whose name carries in it both Strength and War, having
obtained peace, knowing a Magistrate to be Atlas Civitatis, the chief support of
any Country, without whom the Rabble of a Market could not avoid Tumult,
civilized Nations having Aediles Cereales, Overseers thereof, ordained Ezrah,
which signifies Assistance, or Help, to Cull out such by name, assigning them
particular Jurisdictions, as the Lot, or Circuit of their Charge; here one
City, and there many Villages: And the Rule by which he was to choose them, was
according to the Law of his God, Charitably conjecturing this to be done by
him. Ezrah choosed for Judges, I. Able men, 2. Fearers of God. 3. Lovers of
Truth. 4. Haters of Covetousness, Exodus 18. 21.

1. Men of Ability. Whether you descend to the gifts of the Mind, in Activity
and Strength of Judgment, or if you fix upon the Joints of the Body, in a
Nimbleness for Action, or whether you lodge within the House, in a fair
competent Estate, and comely Affluence, I care not, for such things as these
are to be understood according to the Port, a Ruler is chosen for. The want of
any one of these, diminishing from the splendour, or casting some refuse upon a
Judges Robe. And the enjoying of all these, is adequat to that harmless Pomp,
ought to be viewed, by the eye-gazing^ people, for (they being much taken by
sight) if somewhat more then ordinary be not perceived, the Divine Institution
of Authority, as by some secret Magical Spel, shall want its due Respect and
Veneration.

Thus David was of a goodly Countenance, and a comely Youth,* Saul has been a
man of a Noble Mien and Carriage: And Davi^ went on and grew great, 2 Samuel 5.
Above all things get, this day, Able, that is, Wise Rulers, without which, all
Law, all Reason from Law, will be Mank and Lame. For if there be not in the
Officers, Internal Principles of Active Prudence, to Consult, Determine,
Discuss and Dispatch Affai^s, by strong Apprehension, contingency of Events,
and Experimental Observation of past Occurrences, both Error and Terror shall
Invade the City.

2. Men fearing God. Why are Judges called gods? But that the people may fear
them, and for the upholding of that same fear in themselves, toward him whose
name they bear. For no sooner did Adam that great Magistrate (receiving Homage
of the Creatures, they taking from him a name) rebel from fearing the Lord, but
he stood in fear of himself, and of a little cold Air, of a small Serpent, of a
Fiery Angel, etc. The Majesty of Gods Word, which he is still to eye^ the
Deformity of Vice, which he is still to punish; the Preservation of the City
from the Judgments wickedness shall procure, the Convulsions, Shakings of the
strongest founded Bodies, which ungodliness shall cause, we presume shall plead
(the fear of God being set up in the High Place of this Ancient and Honorable
Metropolis) before your voicing, for the fearers of his Name to be voted for,
for retaining that old Epithet of your City, and making it truly the Good Town.

Be it Sound, Be it Fond, what Interpreters of Dreams pretend is foreseen in
them, that a person Dreaming of being a Magistrate, Ominats Care, Vexation and
Trouble, I shall not Dispute; this is sure, that neither the Wealth, Honor,
nor Glory Solomon brought Israel, could after his Death secure him from the
name of an Oppressor. And that Poor Wise Man, that defended his City, was
basely slighted by ingrate Citizens, Eccles. 9. 15. Avouching that the true
fear of God, is the only sure Card that a Magistrate can expect to win either
Honor that is lasting, Peace that is inward, or Comfort that is spiritual from.

Edward the 6. Englands Josiah, gave in a Medal a Sphere surmounted with a
Crown, a right hand issuing from a Cloud, holding the Glob, fixed by a Chain,
with this Symbol, Nil sine Deo, God is all in all; informing, that whosoever
have Government, must reflect, that Heaven has the chief Regiment, and if its
Hand support not (which Fear only keeps st^dfast) he will suffer the Kingdom or
City to fall into shivers, as a broken Vessel, not to be regarded, be the Laws
never so sharp and severe: Piety in the Heart only sanctifying the Rod in the
Hand of the Politic Father, for amending his stubborn Son, and removing guilt
from the place by his due execution, Genesis 20. 7.

3. Men loving Truth. That is, so to search and sift out the Truth, that from a
heap of Dust they may seek, until they find, not accounting the Inquest
burdensome, one grain of solid Verity being worth much Incustry and sweat. The
love of Fire will make men seek for it from the Concussions of two Flints, from
two opposite and strong Foreheads, and fiery Contentions: An exi^t Surveyer
will fetch Sparks of Equity shall give light to a whole Tribe, yea beautify a
Nation. With the two Harlots it was only an Aye, and a No, without either
Witnesses, or Circumstance to find a Cheat, yet Solomon being a lover of truth,
fanned away the Chaff, and found that which made all Israel to fear him. To
alter a little what the Ancient Christian Hermes (St. Paul's Disciple) in his
Precept concerning Justice said. There are two Messengers, I might call them
Procurators before a Bar, one is Nuncius Iniquitatis, another, Aequitatis; one
bluntly or fully speaks the Truth, the other audaciously and pertly Gilds
Falsehood that it may pass for Truth. Now what God did at Sodom, the Judge must
endeavor to do at the Bench, (viz.) Search out the Truth of Sodoms Cry, Genesis
18. and know if that persons bawling have a true Cause, if the Law speak as
that Youngster asserteth; on the other side, if that pretended Malice be of
verity the other says his Adversary has against him, and i^ that be true,
that he fo^merly vowed Revenge upon some Disgust, is substantial for a Judge
that loves the Truth to be exercised in, and it shall occasion him to have
infin^t more joy, because better grounded, then the Egyptians had in their
Sacrifice to Mercury, feasting upon Figs and Honey, and zealously singing in
their own Language with hearts gladness, O the Truth is sweet!

This Job was excel^ent at, for the cause which he knew not he searched out,
being a Magistrate, if not a King in his own Country, supposed to be that Jobab
mentioned among the Kings of Edom, Genesis 36. 33. And in this one point David was
rash and faulty, in giving to Ziba a Nurcius Iniquitatis, false Informer, the
Lands of Mephibosheth, before he had searched if that Son of his old and dear
Friend and Brother, Jonathan, had been, (as he was not) in the Conspiracy with
Absalom, 2. Sam. 16.

4. Men hating Covetousness. It was the Emperor Hadrians usual Proverb, Non
mihi sed populo, I am to enrich the people, not my self. And the famous
Ptolomeus had rather his Subjects had Store then himself, saying, Their Riches
was his Plenty. And I find in another History then Scripture, that this same
Artaxerxes said, Regius est, etc. It was more King-like to give, then to take
from his people. And Jethro, whose name signifies Excellent, and finding out,
will have this Excellency, in that man appointed for bearing Rule among the
people.

His Office is to restrain prodigality from without, and Rein or Curb the
Covetous from Gripping within, he is therefore to stand between them, hating
the Covetous so much the more, as he is further from the Public Good then the
other. 1. From his base keeping. 2. From his dangerous receiving, that is, of
Bribes, or Gifts, for perverting Judgment and Law.

Both Greeks, Latins, and Hebrews, had their Aediles, Cereales, Overseers,
shall I call them Clerks of the Market? Overseers of the Corn, moderating the
price thereof, that the poor might be satisfied with Bread, breaking their
hunger, and filling their Bowels with a larger Loaf than Hucksters would allow
them for their Money. But to what purpose are these or any other Laws? If a
handful of Silver shall benumb their Arm, not to write down, fell for so much;
or so Tongue-tye them, that they cannot say, You grind the faces^ of the poor,
Isai. 3. 15.

When Alexander the Great had sent a richer Present to the Grave Phocion, then
to all Athens besides; because he seemed to be a just man, he refused the Gift,
saying, Let me continue to be what I seem to be. The like answer the Famous
Chancellor Moor of England, gave a Lady who had a Cause depending before him in
the Chancery-Court, upon the like occasion smiled^ saying, Gentle Eva, I Will
have no Apple. It was this made the Cretians of old, or Candiots now, to have
the Image of Jupiter without Ears, ho^ding it unsuitable that he who gave Laws
to others, should so much as hear another Whisper unto him: And others Painted
their Judges without hands, that nothing could be received, albeit Baseness
should make offer.

Yet since Virtue ought to be rewarded, and Gratitude loves to be seen, an
Honorable Pre^ent after the Final Sentence, may stand with this Law, and whose
Ox have I taken to blind mine eyes therewith, is a sufficient Salv^ for a
suspected Judge, 1 Samuel 12. 3. I know a good Conscience is joy enough, and
reward sufficient for just Decrees: But since Goodness God-like is
Communicative, an Apple upon the Judges Table out of the restored Orchard, is
an Ensign displaying Thankfulness to God and Man, God as the Cause, and the
Judge as the Inst^ument in his hand, for recovery of unjustly detained
Possessions; encouraging even Justice and Virtue it self, to go (...) in a
confident and upright progress. But to be too closs, and too proportionat here,
is not my Task either; this only I learn, that Fire shall consume the
Tabernacles of Bribery, Job 15. 34.

Right Honorable, you must answer at the last day singularly, for this days
choice, therefore take care that the pure Scarlet be not put upon them of
blemished lives, who will stain it by future Impieties. David was Cor, Lingua,
Calamus Primi Regis, the Heart, the Pen, the Tongue of the great King; that
sanctifying the Root of Magistracy, (that Saint being the Cornerstone, or
Stock of Judah's Princes) the least Twig or Stone thereof, might in future
times be Holy. Choose you such, who are like to Gods own heart, that being the
proper Medium for admitting them into the hearts of those for whom they are
chosen: But this brings us to the last Section.

SECT. III.
The Honor with which the Magistrates is to be noticed.
EVery Soul being ordained to be subject to the Higher Powers, that is, to the
Person Invested and Endowed in a right way with Power, pleads for Fear and
Honor under the New Testament; But, Curse not the gods, nor speak evil of the
Ruler, under the Law, with other Scriptures, Romans 13. 1. Exodus 22. 28.
Importing High Veneration and Respect, speak how Ezrah's Judges ought to be
Revered: And the multitude of Earth's Inhabitants, having their happiness from
under the Wings of Magistracy, Power having respect to the curbing of the
Vicious, and protecting the Innocent; Virtue has infinite Arguments prepared
for peoples yielding to an Authorized Judge: the four ordinary prescribed
Duties, 1. Of Honor. 2. Lov^. 3. Prayer. 4. Obedience.

1. Honor. This the very Sheath, yea Shadow of the Sword, the Romans
Birc^-Rods, the Magistrates White Stave, his Long Robe, constantly Commands as
due from all Beholders. There is an Honor, that is, a R^ve^ence we owe all
men, but the gods of men^ are doubly beaut^ fied with the Image of God, in
Governing Faculties, and transformed by a Politic Soul of life and Power, into
an higher degree of Manhood than ordinary Commons, therefore is Double Honor
to be told down, in ready and prompted respect, as the Egyptians, and Joseph's
Brethren, in, My Lord, and bowing down the head, Genesis 47. 18.

Tell me not this to be understood of Good Magistrates, Malversation as to Men,
not destroying the Prerogative of Authority: For, 1. Thunderbolts are of Gods
appointment, to frighten and to punish men, so also are Tyrannical Governors
designed as the harsh and untender Chi^urgeons, to search the putride Sores of
an unholy Commonwealth. 2. Who are the Good Men? or where are the Good Works?
or to come more closs to the Objection, who is the wicked Magistrate? For he
who watches the Garrison of his Charge best, and with greatest circum^pection,
and Fatherly depo^tment, and he who Draco-like, is most Severe in punishing to
death the least Debaurd, for lopping off Delinquency, shall be by the unruly,
Surnamed alike Tyrant. The Log from Jupiter in the Fable, was the worse
Magistrate; and Solomon in the Truth, was accounted by Malcontents, none of
the Wisest, because an Oppressor. 3. Saul had been forsaken of God, in the
Prophets certain knowledge, yet le^t the people should dishonor him, Samuel
^iveth him honor in their presence, and tells the people nothing of the
Divorce. Do the like for a petty Constable, in his own Hundred, and for a Baily
in his own Baily^ick, for a Justice in his own County, for a Ruler in his own
Verge, an^ for a Judge before the Members concerned in his Court: For it is his
due, and thy debt, Jure Divino, Romans 7.

Yet ought those of the Scarlet Gown to carry such an Affable Mien in the face
of their Conversation, as to live in the Affections of their People, a mean for
everlasting Honor, like Antonius Venerius, Duke of Venice, whose life in the
History of his Fellows, dignified with the Ducal Crown, speaks him to be of
excellent abilities for the Honor, being Ingenio ad Benevolentiam comparandam
accommodato, Industrious for procuring of good will in it. Morosity, Surliness,
Sawciness, or Disdainful Pride, being destructive to those Honorable Thinkings
the Virtuous themselves frame upon the Anvil of Sound Knowledge, for upholding,
as Nails, the curious Wainscot, or Ceiling of true Respect, toward all wearing
the Furred Long Robe.

2. Love. What the Pilot is to the Ship, what the Physician is to the Sick,
what the Father is to the Children, that is the Prefect, Provost, or Mayor to a
City, Acting by his Counsel, for the Security of the Vessel, for satisfying of
the Heart, and for providing not for the Son only, but the least Servant within
the Body Politic, David, while yet a Courtier, behaved himself wisely, and was
accepted of all the people, 1 Samuel 15. 8. He is in place of God, and that
godhead he is endowed with, prohibits the least inclination to Disrespect, or
Hatred; But as true love without bitterness, and real love wanting hypocrisy,
is duly to be offered up to God, for his own sake; so is it also to be
rendered to the Magistrate for Gods Names sake and Authority.

3. Prayer. Sound not the Triumph at the Electing of any men, so highly, as to
forget with Elias they are subject to the like passions with other men: They
are gods, it is true, but the gods you are this day to Elect, are made up of
Flesh, and therefore obnoxious to those Interests, by which the Circle of this
World, by Worldlings is moved; and if your Prayers hold not up the Hangings,
that God may be seen, both by the eye of Counselors now, and of Magistrates
who are to Confer about you afterward; Flesh may bemist their eyes, and
Judgment may be fore-stalled by a Whispe^er, for preventing whereof, fix your
eye upon that Green Carpet, that Velvet Cushion, in the words of the Psalmist,
The Lord hear (you) in the d^y of trouble, the Name of the God of Jacob d^^fend
you, send you help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen you out of Sion, Psalm.
20. 1. For our days are dangerous, and the times you know are perilous, etc.

If Prayers and Supplications must be made for all men, for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1. Sure for our own Native Prince, and for
them under him, whom we by Authority from him, place in Regiment over our
selves, are we to be doubly zealous, or then, where is he, that from this days
determination, can, or ought, to expect to lead a quiet and peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty? It being true of Governors, what in Divinity is
said of Ministers, Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God must give the
increase: It not being Paul's Studying, not Cephas Preaching, nor Apollo's
Oratory, that can convert the Soul, but the Spirit of God, in making use of
them for that end; So it is not Wise Men, Faithful Men, Good Laws, Solid
Counsel, Sound Advice, that will make your City prosperous, but the blessing of
God through your Prayers, upon their deliberate Resolves. If a Magistrate be a
god, then his Actings for our good, being Heavenly, must God-like, be the
return of our Prayers, or then, etc.

It is easy, it is ordinary, though it be undutiful, to be mustering, and
Talking of the many Faults of those in Public Places, whereas one way to have
them few, (viz.) making many Prayers for them, is omitted by many Sons of
Disobedience; and for this cause, I conjecture, Plato's Laws appointed Youth
and Childhood to be trained up in the customs, Laws, and Principles of their
Imaginary gods, that a Reverence might be held, not only to their Religious
service, but in Politic, though Divine manner, it might be presented to them
in their Court-Inquisition among men, in keeping Custom and Law together with
Religion.

4. Obey. This is the product of Love, Prayer, and Honor, the Final end, and
Ultimat scope of Government, and he that Writes one Motto of Pride upon his
Crown, Non obedio, I scorn to yield, as a rotten Branch is to be lopped off, by
the Bill or Axe of Authorized Power, and that speedily, (the season may require
it) whether it be to Death, Confiscation of Goods, or Imprisonment.

What ever superstition (yea robbing of God) may be pretended to be on one side
of the Tribute-money we owe Caesar, Obedience is still to be upon the other, or
then Experience will hold it for Counterfeit, and to be refused. It is the end
of the Law, that men obey, and the end of obedience is the Flourishing of a
City, and the end of a City is prosperity and peace.

In short, my Lord, and Right Honorable, the Great Alexander, being to possess
the Crown of his Ancestors by Bi^th, yet from what impulse, I know not, I care
not, he called his Princes and Nobles together, commanding them to choose a
King for themselves, and one whom they pleased, providing they would choose one
who was most obedient to God, most for the public good, most compassionat for
the poor, most for the defense of the weak, etc. They after mature
deliberation, choosed Himself, and he thereupon swear to do all that: I add, to
the other, List them, who will be most for your Cities Credit, Wealth,
Godliness and Honor. And your own Reputes in your going off, and falling back,
in the Minds and Tongues of your Numerous Inhabitants, who will immediately be
Curious to behold their New Mag^strates.

FINIS.
At this time there were Elected for MAGISTRATES,
Sir Andrew Ramsay Lord Provost. Bailies. William Reid. James Davidson John
Fullartoun George Drummond Robert Sandelands L. Dean of Gild. John Scot L.
Thesaurer, etc.

DUORUM UNITAS OR The Agreement of Magistracy and Ministry, Preached at the
Election of the Honorable Magistrates of Edinburgh, October 2. 1666. And at the
opening of a Diocesian Synod, of the Reverend Clergy there.
PSALM. LXXVII. Thou leddest thy people like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.
AMong the Diversity of Gifts, which the Author of every Perfect Donation,
gives unto Man; it is eminently seen, that Government of the World has a
principal part of his Wisdom and Liberality: Communicating to this and that
other Person, Rich Endowments, for that and this Affair, Employ, Trade or
Calling, for the beautifying that Corporation, He in his providence is
erecting; Hence flows that Impulse in youth, yea in childhood, for Wo^k, for
Books, for Speaking, Writing, for Arms, for Arts, we frequently do with
wonderbehold.

But as all motions must have a fixed Axis to move upon, and a Basis virtuating
the utmost point; so still has GOD elected from that Mass of people, them who
have in their spirits been adopted, even afar off, for Regiment and Rule: Some
from the Womb being of so servile a Nature, that the whole survey of their
Life, or Actings, their highest principle, is but a token of subjection, Nature
having made them of so knotty timber, no education can form them to a
capability of being Mercurial, whether for Wisdom or Eloquence. Whereas, others
are of so pure a grain, that the beaming souls beyond their years, are
discov^ring somewhat predictive of Honor and Grandour. R^mulus, Romes First
King and Founder, when a poor Shepherd, would sit and determine causes among
his fellows; they giving both Audience and Reverence to his Decisions. We read
that Phara^h, once putting his Crown upon the head of his adopted Grandson
Moses, when a Child, his little arms pulled it away, and his feet spurned at
it in scorn, ominous to that Egyptian Demonstration of his future not fearing
the wrath of the King. His killing the Egyptian, and saving the Hebrew, did
prognostic deliverance of the Jews from bondage; and by keeping of a Flock,
had thereby learned how to rule and govern Men, being thereby actually fitted
for that employ, unto which from the Cradle he had been inclinable.

Yet as none is Eminent in all Abilities, Moses was, though excellent at
Government, (whereof the Shepherds rod was the Ensign) yet not in Elocution: of
which his stammering, or slow-tongue is witness, Exodus 4. 10. To help him
therefore in his Government, a Brother Eloquent and of a flourishing, because
of a fluent style, is joined to him as a Colleague, that the one, profound in
judgment* may ponder what is to be done; the other in charming R^etorick, may
alu^e to perform what is deemed necessary in doing. And it being very usual to
express the facund and smooth guiding of the tongue by a hand. Oratory
persuading, that is, leading Her hearers to run in, and rest upon that purpose
She is pressing for, or painting out. The people are said to be led by the
hands of MOSES and AARON.

Hence it is, that the two Princes of Gods Israel diversified in Gifts, are
united in the End, for leading Israel like a flock: The great end was, for
obeying God, for him did Moses eye in all his meditation, and him did Aaron
respect in all his elocution; that he, not they, might get the Glory of their
united Industry and powerful Atchiefments: Whence it is not said, that Moses
and Aaron, but that God led His People like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron. His Head in Contrivance, His lips in Utterance, both as a Shepherds Rod,
or Commanders staff, inclining them, or beckonning toward them, to move in
that Path, wherein there was Profit, Security and Honor.

We call it a Drove of Oxen, a Herd of Dear, a Rout of Wolfes, but usually a
Flock of sheep, and so it is here, not that the people were always pe^ceable,
for they were sometimes as a Sounder of u^ruly swine, but because they were
governed, and cared-for as Sheep; and when straying, as by the Dog of some
Judgment, were they again brought into a better order by the Hands, that is,
by the Prudence, Conduct, and Wisdom of Moses and Aaron. The First being a
Noble Prince, the other a Holy Prelate, Sons of one Womb, Crowned, Consecrat
for this Employ Literally here, Morally for ever, still and In perpetuum while
time shall be no more. God Governing His Church by the Hands, that is, by the
Industry of Magistracy and Ministry.

I do not say the words divide themselves, (for I fear, and hate Division here,
bet^ixt those two) but branch themselves forth, betwixt Church and State: And
let us speak with all Humility of the one, and Reverently of the other,
Beginning with the State; For though Aaron be the Elder, yet Moses is the
greater Brother: therefore it is Moses and Aaron. Moses, the first Great
Magistrate over Gods United People, and in him there is a platform for all
people, loving union in the Choice of Magistrates, giving Ab incunabulis, from
the Milk, proper Doctrine for this day, Right Honorable, and Most Reverend, in
that, 1. His Body speaks Beauty, 2. His Name shows Duty. 3. His Endowments,
m^tives to pray for Equality.

1. His Body speaks Beauty. This heightened the Parental Affections his
Parents had for him, stirring up compassion, enlivened by Faith, exercised in
care, for saving of His life; that He was a goodly Child, Exodus 2. 2.
concluding forcibly from Faith and Sense, a Boy of such Vigourousness,
Comeliness, such infantile Manhood, was by Providence never designed for Food
to Fishes, such the Hebrew word Tob, senseth the Goodness, the Elegance, the
Shapelinesse of His F^ature: The Comeliness of His but new seen Aspect, the
Symetry and Proportion of His several parts, the exact joining of His several
Limbs with the pleasure of His Lovely Stature, (to speak of Him as a Man) his
Parents foresaw He was born to Command, and having its thought a particular
Revelation of this their Son, (a general promise being too general for them to
conclude a Deliverer from their family) They laid him (rather than cast him
out) in the Arms of Providence, by Faith, Heb. 11. 23. about the Kings Garden,
for Princely Education and Breeding, suitable to the Harmonious content they
took in beholding His divided Limbs, Argueing for Understanding of a R^fulgent
Soul, when Experience should hold up the Hangings, or withdraw the Curtains of
Infancy and Childhood.

Suffer Moses to suck the Teat or Pap of his Mother a while or to rest in the
Cradel, rocked by his Sister; Behold Israel now grown weary of wanting a King,
God provided them a Saul, a Goodly person, 1. Sam. 10. 23. and after him a
David, a comely Youth and of a good Countenance 1. Sam 16. 12. The Lord by
Express Law, discharged Deformity from his Altar, Levit. 21. and in significant
characters has he prohibited Monstrosity to approach the Judges Bench;
Dwarfishnesse, Crookedness, Blindness, Deafness, Umbrageing in any person,
some degree of Real slighting, Irreverence, and Contempt, especially when the
person so uneven is by choice Elected, for in cases of Successive Government
(though We say the crooked in Body is crooked also in manners) Providence is
therein to be obeyed; And even there what Reverence soever be due, Gratior est
pulchro, etc. Virtuous and Graceful Behavior, emerging from a Comely and
Court-like person, is more Enamouring. A proper Moses, marching before the Camp
of Israel will be preferred, before a penitent Zacheus, conducting the same
number of Jews, though it were to the Holy Land.

I find Great Alexander short of Stature, but he was born a Prince, and his
fine little Body was exceeding shapely, his Constitution fresh and active, and
this is also properness: Though Charles the Great, is recorded to have been
Facie pulihra, of a sweet Countenance, and a maj^stick Eye, and through out
Vniversa specie Augusta, of a taking presence is more propernesse, It is
granted, that a Saul may be dispossessed, and that Absalom as the Synamon tree,
may have his ba^k (i. e.) his outside, more worth then the whole Compositum.
That Agesilaus that famous Lawyer, Warrior, and oblidging Commander, though a
King in Sparta, had Forma parum probata, a crooked and lame Body, yet his
Father Archidamus was fined by the Ephori, for matching with a little woman,
foreseeing that a King (such was their Constitution, and Government)
proportionate to his Dame, would, or might prove among Kings but a Demi, to the
diminishing that Court Grandeur, those stately Laconians studied even in
stature to preserve.

The Army of Xerxes was vastly great, yet did he ^xcell all his Troops for Gate
and Person, being therein a King over them, by natural parts, as well as in
legal properties and rights. Antigonus Junior was Senior in this, that no
Painter could express the liveliness of his Countenance. This therefore may be
said, That in all Elections, for one to go in and out, before the Flock of a
Commonwealth, as Moses was chosen, being Goodly and being Godly, caeteris
paribus, they next to Moses in comeliness, is to be exalted, not as essential
to Regiment, but a Circumstance having great Influence in the judgment of God
and experience of Men, for keeping Magistracy in its Primitive Devoyr and
Ancient Respect.

The Beauty of Esther* and her excellent Feature, moved the King in a throng of
Beauties, to set the Crown upon her Head, Esther 2. 17 each emulating to be
Queen; Her inartificial, not painted visage, made more beautiful by an upright
Body, Courted Majesty to accost her, and sue for Favor at the Bar of her
^prightly Gifts. It is more then once said* that Samuel grew, 1 Sam^ 3. 9. and
it was thought fit to mark that, He being designed for a Judge in Israel. In a
City there are Sons of Belial, in a Body p^litick, there may be Mutinees and
Insuriections, Hau^htiness and Pride may lift up their horn: Some are self
willed, speaking evil of Dignities. How forcible to cha^tise such, to amend
such, to terrify such, will be the very Name, Shadow, much more the apperance
of ^uch a daring Person, I leave unto your wiser Judicatu^e to refl^ct upon,
and consider? minding you only of Solom^ns four things, Prove. 30. 3. which are
comely in going, A Lion, a Gray hound, a Hee-Goat, and a King, against whom
there is norising up. And that the nearer we come to Adam, the Son of GOD in
his perfection, and the greatest Magistrate under Heaven, the fitter are we for
Government: And by the noble ruins in decayed Nature, we may guess at the
first Glory of the Fabric, Samsons strength, Achitophels head, Absoloms
beauty, David's complexion, Saul's stature, and the nearer we choose to these,
the more will Authority be nobilitat, such a one, even while asleep, creats a
fear in others, animating for action, more or less in the Magistrates.

II. His Name shows Duty, Abigal argued from Nabal, the Name of her Churl,
to excuse Folly, and why not others from Moses, a nowne to persuade officially
unto Duty, in the Hebrew it is Mosche, a Name given him when a quarter old, and
that by Phara^h's Daughter (for that his Mother called him Joachim at his
Circumcision, I leave it with them reports it) pertinently enough, she being a
Kings Daughter, and in some sense a God-Mother, to Gods chief Minister of
State, holding him up thereby unto Baptism; I say Baptism, for, 1. We read of
no certain; nor other Name he had before this. 2. It is a Name from his being
preserved, and drawn forth from the water, and now shall I say to Pharaohs
Daughter, Understands thou what thou do? giveing him that Name because of an
Office, he is to do on the water, and in it, because she has preserved him by
drawing forth. For; 1. If many waters signify Many People, and, 2. If great
waters seem abounding Extremity; Moses is, and Magistrates are designed to be
Drawers forth; with this difference, that he Passively was drawn o^t, and he
and they afterward still to draw, 1. From Stated Oppression, 2. From
Destructive Confusion. Both being called, not only to higher Purposes, then to
be called great; but to Do and Act as by the pully of Pharaoh's Daughters hand,
that like oil upon the other Brothers head, descending to the lowest skirts of
Magistratick power for succouring all Oppressed, and all the Helpless.

3. His Endowments, motives you to Pray for an Equality, He was bred up, taught
in, and Diligently did he learn the Doctrine of the Egyptians their
Mathematical Sciences, their Phylosophie, their Hi^roglisicks, but that he
wrought his Miracles by Legerdemaine, or that he made his Brazen Serpent by the
Rules of Talismatical Tradition, (i. e.) a Figure under such and such a Planet,
or Star, with Conjurations, or Spells, etc. is not worth Refutation, si^ce h^
had express Law from Heaven for so doing, suffices us to know, 1. That he was
a Man of Knowledge, teaching you, Right Honorable, to choose a man of
Sagacity. 2. Of Prudence, denoting observancy. 3. Of Courage, stirring for
Magnanimity. 4. Of Holiness, teaching Piety, It may be profitable to preach the
same things, and I am sure it is seasonable, etc. Know therefore,

1. He had great Knowledge: A Magistrate to speak in the Language of the Times,
ought to be a Frigot of the first Rate, and draw deep, I press not the
Understanding of the seventy Languages with the Jews, but shall induce, to
avoid that reflection Antistines gave some Athenians, adviseing them to plow
their Ground no more with Horses, but Asses, and when told their unfitness, as
being never taught, Quid refert, said he? It Is all one for that, since you have
them Magistrates that were never taught the Art of Government; There being such
a necessity to punish, and at the same breath, an Expediency to be satisfied
with Repentance in men of equal condition, though it may be not of Humor,
Knowledge, of the Constitution of the Sinner in the Politic Physician, is as
necessary, as to the natural Mediciner.

Many Funerals are dishonorable to a Son of Hypocrates, a Physician,
evidencing either his mistake by inadvertance, that is of the Patients disease,
or ignorance of his Art, in the nature of his Simples or Compounds* A Magistrate
to be always lashing, always stocking burning, shows he has got judgment
but by rote: And is like that Schoolmaster, that knows no way to instruct his
Scholar, but that Orbilian, or Tyrannical way of scourging, which indeed is
one way, but to be left as the last way, and not to be gone into, if any other
way can do it.

Without much search, and without going to the Root, Fund, and Bottom of a
Cause, without looking this way, and that way, that is every way contrary to
Moses, a Judge may ^ill the Israelite, 2 Exodus 2. 12. By killing the Egyptian,
striving with the Hebrew, he showed the first fruits of his Commission to save
and free his Nation; But beholding two Hebrews to strive together, he processes
the Delinquent and sifts the cause; Wherefore smitest thou they Fellow? seeing
him do wrong, in grave judgment differencing betwixt Persons and Crimes,
accordingly purposing to discern to Death or Admonition.

Besides, if in place, Fear and Dread, for want of better knowledge be the
great End of Advance, when time wears out the Gown, Hatred and Disdain are the
usual Events of such Promotions, Love being the true bond of durable
Benevolence, which Love to God, and Justice, shall in a discerning head toward
Man, support ^is Dignity; or if blasted with Mal-co^tents in the spring of the
Resurrection of the Just, their Honor sh^l recover, putting on never-fading
flourishes of Glory and Renown.

II. He had great Courage, He feared not the wrath of the King, having once
shown publicly his commission, but brought and led Israel out from among them.
Heb. 11. 27. So long as it was a Pocket deed, he was cautious, and hid in the
sand the slain Egyptian, flying to Mid^an, waiting a fairer opportunity, that
more Affiction might advise his Contrymen to embrace his Mediation for
Liberating them from Pharaoh's thraldom: But when pronounced in the ears of the
People, and Pharaoh knew that God sent him, as that King Richard, he became a
Cor* de Lion: how low soever a man bears his sail, being once called upon by
the great Admiral, to come up hither, and ply toward the coa^t of Authority,
and Power for battering down Forts and Citad^ls, raised against Heavens
Dominon, in the tongue, heart and houses of the debauched, he will and ought to
bear up brav^ly sitting as on Mars hill, God before them, as so^e where the
Athenians had their godd^ss on a c^shon, cryi^g with Moses even the multitude
dancing about the Gold^n Calf, Who is on the Lords side, let him come unto me*
Ex 32. 26.

With the people, Dullness is often took for Circumspection, Lasi^ess for
Modesty, Rashness for Courage; and therefore Courage here is not to be
understood M^rtial Law, that a sm^l fault should reach to Death; Draco like,
punishing each triffle with extre^m Rigor, but here is only pressed a
Heroicisme in finding out Ca^ses, that the Rich oppress not, that the (...)
dash no^, that the Modest lose not, and that the Scorner triumph not, and that
the Sentenced threaten not, and all in a noble passion in^ffeasive and
irreproachful Boldness: then shall God say with that She-Magistrat Deborah, my
heart is toward the Governors of Israel (My heart is toward the Magistrates of
Edinburgh) Jud. 5. 9* I shall not altogether condemn Cotys a King in Thrace, he
might have good ground from the Constitution of his Subjects to ^ssert* when
once furious in passion, being told it was not Kingly, answered^ this passion
of mine keeps all my subjects c^lm F^r often coyness and sharpaess, not to say
s^verity is good.

Search all Histories, and there is but here a battle if any but such as were
fought by Kings and Magistrates whether in Israel, Greece, Baby^on, or Rome; and
their highest Honors flowed from their eminent hazarding themselves, for their
Countries Honor: such a time may this be, and your Scarlet G^wn may but shadow
Bloody Services, your Sword comman^ed from its velvet sheath, to lodge in the
breast of a declared F^e, the safety of your City, may consist in casting over
the W^ll; the head of some traitorous Sheba, there is valor to be regarded,
and valiantly to be debated for, Figure^ in that, when any of the People sinned
through Ignorance in Moses Law, and it had come to his knowledge, he was to
bring a kid of the Goats, or a Female without blemish, Levit. 4, 23. But when a
Ruler had so done, he was from the same flock, to bring without a blemish a
Male: A Magistrate being to be of a Masculine spirit, and nothing Femi^^ne to
(...) noticed by him, even toward God. How much more should he show Virility
even among m^n?

3. He had great Prudence, He discreetly fled, when he saw his Brethren did
disrespect him, as one, not designed to be a Deliverer of them, where he
stopped. And this is chiefly to be pondered upon, that a Magistrate is closely
to heed his own Province, if it be ordinarily bold or furious, or by a
particular malus Genius, inclined to Lust, Intemperance, Craftiness, or Theft,
or Silly, as the Inh^bitants of Silesia are said to be mostly Fools, that by
intuitive speculation, a malady, a Rupture may be foreseen, and by abundance of
Caution, make his people beware of lewd attempts. In this, a Wise man differing
from the Otherwise, that the one beholds the performance of evil in its Causes,
the other never believes it until it be done: the People thinking generally no
such thing was intended, which they behold frustrate; the Magistrate is to see
it done in its occasion, and one word of the Danger, by disappointing
opportunities of Mischief.

There are who finds in the vulgar no reason of their doing, no spirit to
discern, touching what is to be done. A Magistrate must walk Antipodes, to such
blind Bayards, and reason to discern, and dis^^rn to determine, and after
determining to be resolute. What more? the Coat Arm of Justice with an old
Herald, bea^^th Azure, charged with a pair of Balances Argent, the first
Bl^w, the other White, which is by interpretation Charity, Purity, Chastity,
with discretion and vigilance in Service, to the Justitiary, in weighing out
the Imports of Business, Challenges and Probations.

4. He had great Holiness, In this Moses was Exemplar, early refusing to be
called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, Rejoicing in the Affliction of Christ. If
holiness consist in a right understanding of God, and in a due worshipping of
God, Moses life is as a Myrrour, he consulting for, and desiring after, more
and mo^e Communion with, and knowledge of the Glory of God; an Enemy he was to
all Idolatry, and severe in punishing any Iniquity by Reproving, by Correcting
the Offender: all which wrought a two fold effect, 1. Care over the People, 2.
Prayer for the People he led. Which, the good King of France, Clodoveus, had in
his eye, who for a Honorarium on a solemn day, gave in a Medal two er^cted
elbowes and hands, elevated toward Heaven, supported by other two strong arms,
with this superscription, Tu^issimus. This gives Security, implying that
F^^vent Supplications, were preferable to all Industry, to all Arms, to all
Knowledge, for supposing the Possession of all these, yet with Moses, must the
M^gistrat go to the Mount to make Atonement for the sins of the People, even
when the Malefactor is put to death, and the deluded by him put to shame, Exodus
32. 30.

It is now ^easonable, for we are come to Prayer, t^ turn, Right Reverend, from
Moses Throne, to Aarons Altar, and behold his Employ in this affair of (...) of
the People as a Flock; But this would (...), if alone (...), of a dividing
Nature, and would speak two men, whereas our Text only speaks of different
Hands* such is the Union of this Moses and that ^aron, that they seem to be
acted but by one Soul, I mean the Spirit of Love, that is of God, performing
one and the same Office, as by a Right and Left hand. A Left hand, not in a
Sinister sense, but in an Inferior degree. This shall be further understood, if
you consider. 1. Their Nearness. 2. Their Dearness.

1. Their Nearness. They were both Sons of one Parent, both Children to Amrana
and Jochbed, Exodus 6. 20. only Aaron was the firstborn, being three years
Moses's Elder, Exodus 7. 7. Ministry and Magistracy (for so a little while, it
must be) since it is, Aaron and Moses, Exodus 6. 26. (Aaron being Senior, and
therefore Priest) ought Brotherly to behave toward each other, and we may
conjure the greatest Governor, the highest Ruler, when contemning the Priest,
in the words of God to Moses, Is not Aaron the Levit thy Brother? Exodus 4. 14.
Not but that Moses was a L^vit too, but Aaron is said to be the Levit, not only
for distinctions sake, from others of that Name, but futurely designing him as
Levit, for the Root of the Priesthood for ever. And so near has been the
Relation in all Countries, that they seldom parted by Law, and if by violence,
it was mischievous.

They were united in Adam, who was both King of the World, and Priest of the
^ongregation, His Commission for ruling is partly expressed, Have thou
Dominion; and partly (...) Wife and Children being from him; Authority for
Pr^^st-hood is seen in that History, ca^ brought o^ the f^uit of the ground, an
offering unto the Lord (...) Firstlings of his Flock; where wh^ c^n d^^bt, but
the F^ther of all, was Sacrificer for all, at the (...) of the World? as Noah
afterward was at the be^inn^ng of the New, his Sons and their Wives making up
(...) Corgregation here, consisting of good and bad; for here was a Him: And
Adam's ^ons, Wife and Daughters, being all the Congregation there, where bad
and good appeared, for there was a Cain. If with the Historian, there were two
Tables of Stone, upon which Adam writ, (Shall I say his Bible?) The Doctrine of
the Creation, Fall, Redemption of the world, for the Assembly, I know not; But
sure there was a peculiar place, the Congregation came too, and to that place
they brought their offerings, and that place, is also to be understood the
presence of the Lord, from which Cain fled, Genesis 4. 16.

The time would fail me to speak of that Mighty Prince Abraham, of Isaac, and
of Jacob, who were holy Priests, and n^ble Rulers upon Earth; and if Jo^ was
that Johab, King of Fdom Genesis 36 this holds good, that (...) and (...) are near
other, for that King* was (...) in the (...) his daily sacrifice. Of (...) we
might say many things, but let this (...) the other, yea and of the spoil
gotten in war so closely, was his Priesthood eyed. Heb. 7. 6. This Solomon
regarded so much, that his Regal Titles, are imperfect when sum'd up, if I the
Preacher was King of Israel, in Jerusalem, be ommitted, Eccles. 1. 12.

After the beginning of Time, men multiplying in the World, the first born, the
Elder Son after the Father, was ex Virtute, by privilege of Birthright, Priest
to the Family, and Master thereof. Numb. 3. 12. Hence Esau was called profane
for selling his Birthright, thereby regarding not his Priesthood, for which
chiefly the Birthright was then regarded, or at least one great cause, Genesis 25.
34.

At the Erection (so to speak) of the Egyptian Principality and reducing it to
a Kingdom, it was made fundamental, at the Instalment of Menes the first King,
to choose always, one from among the Priests; and if the Kingdom by conquest
happened to fall into the hands of an Invader, before he could be established,
he was necessitat to be consecrated Priest, and then concluded Lawful, when
both King and Priest: Their Nation being still upheld by Kings, Priests,
Warriors, and Tradesmen. Priests first in Jury, and afterward Kings, were both
^nointed with Oil, by Moses, by Samuel, by Nathan, etc. that is, by Prophets
and Seers, congruously enough, for as Oil they should hold and shine together,
being appointed to be uppermost and nearest God, not mixing themselves with the
Watery, Unsteady, and Fleety Multitude, of the Earthling, Worldly Vulgar; with
which, if once incorporate, both are diminished of their glory. From this has
proceeded, that some in Zeal, some in Despair, some Kings, for this, and the
other Cause, has laid down their Crowns, and put on the Mi^er, turning
Churchmen, as still Royal, how meanly soever they were attended: and some
Churchmen have again been Elected Kings as still being in a holy Employment,
not destroying their Sacred Ordination; Abbacyes being governed by Kings, and
Kingdoms, ruled by Bishops, so nearly are these two related. Nay the most noble
order of Knighthood, wants not a Bishop of its own Body, He of Winchester in
England ^eing ex Officio Prelate of the Ga^ter And Honi Soit Qut Mal. Y^ pense,
it proceeds from evil, to grudge now, that the Sovereign and Companions of the
Order should have what its first Founder concluded it could not want, viz. a
Venerable Churchman to bless the Royal Corporation: for what hinders a Bishop
from being among Knights and reckoned among them, since a Courtier owneth
Elijah to be, and reckons him among Lords. 1 King. 18.

There are pre^umptions, that Jethro was both Priest and Prince in M^dian,
Exodus 2. 16. serving (as Mel^hisedec at Salem) the true God, (...) some mixture
of Idolatry, which by Instruction being winnowed off by Moses, they worshipped
the true God t^g^ther, Exodus 18. 11. One ground of the Conj^cture, is from the
double signification of the word Cohen, sensing both a Priest, as we read it,
Exodus 18. 1. and a Prince, as it may be r^ad, giving occasion to observe that,
what is before said, so near of kin are these two, that in the most Holy Tongue
both a^e expressed by oneword and expr^ssion.

When Israel was in bondage, there was no sacrifice* the Egyptian^ w^^shipping
for gods, what was otherwise to be offered up: In which time* the Elder Brother
had the right, though not the liberty of sacrificing: But when to be brought
forth, the two Br^thers, Aaron and Moses* both L^vits, and (...), therefore
near unto GOD in that (...), is called to bring the people forth to hol^a F^ast
in the wi^derness. In which wild place, an Order is made, recalling the
uncertain way of the fi^^tbo^, and establi^shing for ever the Tribe of L^ve for
the Tabernac^e service, Number 3. 12. As so many Deacons, Sub dea^ons (...) the
uncle (...) from the (...), and service, as so many q^^sters, or s^nging-men,
to prophecy. on Harps and Organs, and all under Aar^n and his Sons, in all
their Generations^and Successions for evermore.

When God wanted a fixed house for the service of his Name, the Master thereof;
and after him the Elder Brother was Minister to the people: And according as
their abode was certain, or uncertain, so was the place of Sacrifice, unsure,
or determined. Abraham sacrificed here and there; so did Jacob, so did No^h; so
dib Job at his own house, so did Moses in the wilderness command the young men,
that is, the firstborn, of principal Families, Exodus 24. 5 At which time, for
a solemn farewell, there is a feast held before the Lord* the firstborn being
before holy to the Lord, was now promiscuously to wait upon him no more
throughout their Tribus: JEHOVA here, giving in all following Generations an
everlasting discharge of that Employ, an^ a ^hrea^, if they presumed upon
former custom so to approach, for his glory, at the drawing of the clo^th (s^
to speak) was like devouring fire, Exodus 24. 17.

The old being removing, a new Model of Church Government is ordained by
Heaven, Moses has order for the Tabernacles Erection, where the Lord will now
reside, not in the clo^d, that marched formerly before the camp, Exodus 25. 8.
Aaron and his Sons must be consecrated Priests for ever, to offer the daily
sacrifice with garments for glory and beauty. The Dominion of the Camp being
left to Moses. But how is this prefaced, even thus, Take unto thee Aaron thy
Brother, and his sons ^ith him, Exodus 28. 1. They, that is, Moses and Aaron,
being now to part, and to part for ever, in this affair of the Sanctuary; that
the one should not grumble, the other not envy; It is, Take unto thee thy
Brother: well the House is builded, Aaron to be short is consecrated, so Moses
finished the work, Exodus 40. 33. a wor^ which secluded himself from Sacrifice,
though a Levit, and because a Levite, is he to rejoice that his Brethren has
the Honor, and not another Tribe, that work, that gave his Elder Brother, an
Inheritance for ever of being the Lords Priest; therefore, in Brotherly
Affection let him be thankful, that his Elder Brother in this keeping his
place, as to be Priest, yet that he a Younger Brother consecrated this Elder
Brother for that High Office, The Consecration making him in honor to be
Elder, then his Eldest Brother. Gods Wisdom by this enterchanging Providence,
commanding a Brotherly Converse betwixt a Moses and an Aaron, in future ages:
For now it is Moses and Aaron, the one having the charge of the Camp and
Tabernacle, as to give Laws to both; the other of the Tab^rnacle, as to
officiat therein, according to these Laws; and both brethren, for a perpetual
Cement of these great Honors in the House of GOD.

We read of some to have wished to have seen Christ in the Flesh, Paul in the
Pulpit, etc. which many saw, and were not much affected; but to have seen these
two Brothers, at the foot of the Altar, Moses in his Robes, Aaron in his
Garments: To have heard that parting word from the first, that commissioned the
last. All the Congregation drawing near, standing before the Lord. I say, to
have seen this gathering, and these words a^thorizing, viz. Gounto the Altar,
etc. Lev 9. 7. that is, Go up to it, and offer, take infeftment of that for
ever; He ascending in his Priestly Garments, Moses retiring or standing still*
having liberty now only to look up, Aaron to go up: I say again, to have seen
Aaron make his first step, and first offering, and first blessing, the glory of
the Lord appearing; and all the people shouting, was no doubt a ravishing sight
to a native Egyptian: this word, Go unto the Altar; parted Magistracy and
Ministry for eve^, which before had been together, yet parted them not in the
sense before mentioned, but pleading for Unity, they having shaken hands to,
and again severed hands, for leading of the people. In testimony whereof, GOD
was consulted in Moses's Tent, or in some small Structure without the Camp. But
now the Glory filled the great Tabernacle, which we may call Moses's consulting
Room, and Aarons workhouse, and after it the Temple, the one in the midst of
the Camp, the other alm^st of the Land, that the Priest to all extrems might be
equally near for Counsel and Advice.

It may be fancied, that when Gambrivius, (a King over the Germains, about the
time of Joseph) invented the wearing of the Crown, first, for forming and
creating a more Reverend and King-like awe, in the hearts, by the Eyes of his
Subjects; his first appearance in that Diadem was no question beautiful, yet
short no doubt of this High Priests Miter, and the Glory of his appointed Robes
by GOD. This is not spoake to eclipse the Grandeur of that King, but to
difference Humane from Divine Institution: and here again is good agre^ment,
the King his Crown, the Priest his Miter, GOD by Providence and Continuance,
allowing both for greater Glory to, and for more servent Love, between either.

II. Their Dearness: Can it be imagined, that ever any man hated his own
honor, that understood it? was not the Priest hood precious think you to King
Melchisedec? And though Esau lost it, yet he valu^d it so dearly, that if blood
or tears could have availed, he h^d got it regained. Now after Aaron is
established, our respects must be shown to love it, not in general to have it:
For if Saul attempt to sacrifice, it shall ruin him, and if David think to
bring up the Ark but by the Levits, it shall displease the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 15.
13. And when their orderly walking pleased him; so dear were the Levit^ to
their King, that David, like a Levit is clothed with a Linen Ephod, hereby
honoring both himself and them, in being a King-like-Levite in a beautiful
Order, which he himself had tansgressed before; therefore the Lord made a
Breach then, and now a Covenant for peace.

Is not Aaron the Levite thy Brother? said the Lord to Moses, Behold, he comes
forth to meet thee, and when he sees thee, He will be glad in his heart: And
when he met him, he kissed him, Exodus 4. 14. And where shall love be, if not in
these two titles? Thou shall be to him in stead of GOD, and He shall be to thee
in stead of a Mouth, that is, Moses shall be to Aarona King, and Aaron to Moses,
a Lord Chancellor, Ex. 4. 16. Will not God love his Priest, and shall not the
Priest love his God? Call him Lucifer among the Sons of the Church, that
exalts himself above, or equal to any, who are called gods; let that Minister
be ashamed of his Office, that says not in this sense, Let GOD live, let
Magistracy flourish: and that God again blush at his Deity, that will not have
respect unto his Priest, his Preacher: for he having as Moses an impediment in
his speech, has given him as Aaron the Minister for an Orator, without whom
his lisping, his stammering Tongue, shall in the Tricks, Beh^viour* Jears and
Mocks of the Vain, of the more Serious be dismissed without State, Reverence
and Respect.

We have no certain Record, how or by what accident Moses had his slowness of
Speech, which he urged for an excuse against going to Pharaoh, Exodus 4. 10. But
that reason seems too ridiculous, which some Rabbis teach; that Pharaoh
putting his Crown on the Child Moses his head, who spurning it away, was by his
Magicians advised to dest^oy him; that Ominating, he should prove the overthrow
of the Kingdom, but his Daughter pleading Innocence and Childishness, Pharaoh
for a trial b^ought a Golden Apple, and one of Hot Iron* this last, the Child
putting to his Mouth, had the Nerves of his Tongue drawn in. It is certain that
he had an impedim^nt (...) his Speaking, and so his want of Elocution is
supplied by the Oratory and Fluency of Aaron: as Moses was, so all M^gistrats
are, and shall be found of no persuading u^terance, to dispat^h the Almighties
affairs, until as Colleagues they have their Preachers in their hand.

So dear were these two Levites, Moses and Aaron, that Moses getting a
Commission from GOD, to go to Pharaoh, and that Commission sealed in Cast down
thy Rod, etc. told the Miracle, and showed all to Aaron, who as High
Chancellor to King Moses, eloquently delivers Moses mind to the people, and
works the wonders before them, Exodus 4. 30, Each of them endearing other so
much, that both might be respected by the people: who seeing this, might say,
Moses could not want his Aaron, nor Aaron his Moses* m^re then a Man could want
the power of Conception; and that Conception want a Tongue for Expression, the
One readily aiding the Imperfections of the other, Moses's st^pping in his
spe^ch being not heeded, because he ha^ the Power to rule, Aarons's asisting to
Moses, not exposing him to Contempt, because he had the utterance, both for
this end, of leading forth the people.

In the matters concerning the Lord, and also of the King* they of Levies Tribe
were Overseers, 1. Chron. 26. 30. The Priest and the Judge in matters of Blood*
stroke and stroke, plea and plea; God thought it uncomely not to have his
Priest advised with, as well as the Judge, and a threatening upon him, who
neglected the Sentence given by the Priest, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. Equally as that of the
Judge. It is not good, if David want his Abiathar. And Zadock will be^ nay,
must be at Solomon's (Coronation, shall I call it?) Unction, It being proper,
usual for the Priest to crown the Prince. When can Aaron want his Moses? and
again, when can Moses want his Aaron, that is, the King his Priest? I mean
never, never; nay, not at Death: for before Aaron died, Moses by Command
stripped Aaron of his Garments, the Badge of his Priesthood, and put them upon
Eleazer his Son. And Aaron died, Numb. 20. 28: Moses and Eleazar (his Nephew,
now his Priest) come down from the Mount, a vacuum in the Priesthood to God, to
a Godly Moses, being even for an i^stant hated; And mark it, such whose
boldness, or who^^ sloathfulness, can come down to, that is, converse with the
people, to rule the Tabernacle, without a Son of Aaron, though he should talk
with God, shall have Saul's event, when he attempted to ^ffer a burnt-offering,
whereon his Ruin fearfully was bottomed; Samuel assuring him, he had done
fo^lishly: for, but for that, his Kingdom had been established for ever, all
other evils ^alling upon him, flowed from that attempt, made upon the Priestly
Function, 1 Samuel 13. Though he pleaded a nec^ssity, and was truly in an amazing
strait, 1 Samuel 13. 13. Samuel being absent, and the Philistines present.

Victory over all Adversaries, is not many miles distant, when the Sword of the
Lord and of Gideon enters the field together; yea, this freed the Kingdom from
Tyrrany, when Jehojadah the High Priest, was married to Jehoshabeath, King
I^h^tam^ Daughter, whose Heir and Prince (All others being slain) was s^cured
in the ^ouse of the Lord, by his Uncle the P^^^st, (...) a c^^veni^nt time,
^thalia was slain with the Sword: and h^w p^e^ty a sight, and P^ognostick of
future good to any but Traitors were it, to see that* which th^n was s^en viz.)
The King by a pillar of the house of the Lord, and the Priests round about him,
and the people rejoicing to see both? 2 King. 11. 19. This will enhance the
Dearne^s, when you may re^^em^er, that ordinarily the Jews kept within their
T^i^es, yet here for l^ve, Levi marries with the house of David and not far for
d^arness again, the Kings of Judah had their Palace so near the House of the
Lord and Temple, that there was b^t a st^p or a court betwixt them. And how
seemly was it to see the Pr^phet, the great Preacher Isai^h preach in the
Count, being by the Hebrews Grandchild to King ^m. Zia, and to have behold him
advising Figs, for the recovery of Hezekia, who according to the same Teachers,
was both his King and Son in Law, marrying his Daughter Hephzib^* s^mewhat is
in this also, that Churches, are often in Records, called Basilica (i. e.) the
Palaces of Kings: And the great Hermes of Egypt, was called Trismegistus (i.
e.) ter Maximus, thrice great, being the greatest Philosopher, Priest, and King
of his Age, and spoke about, if not before the time of Moses and Aaron, of the
Trinity, of a threefold world, of a threefold Knowledge, etc. Queen Elizabeth
in a progress rejoiced exceedingly to meet some Country Justices of the Peace,
each one having his Minister with him, concluding tha^ Co^ntry well governed.
But that of Scotlands Crown, by Fames Trumpet, should be known to all the
world, that in our late Rebellion, from Dunnotter Castle, then besiedged by the
English, the Wife of Mr. Granger, M^nister of Kineffe, secured b^th it, the
Scepter and the Sword under her husbands Pulpit He and She, now and then taki^g
them up to secure them from rust: and though great sums by Proclamation, were
offered for discovery, yet was the Pulpit its Sanctuary, until again it was
brought in calmer times before the Throne in Parliament. Of which single,
though National Act, let the pulpit of Kineffe boast: and again, let the Crown
glory, that no Money, no Sword, but a Pulpit, secured that Ancient, that Noble,
that unravished Crown from the head, not only of an Usurper, but of a Stranger,
who was not of the house, nor heir of Scotland.

O ^ had our Pulpit^ of late so far reg^rded themselves, as to have remembered
this their interest in the Court, and to its Master, the Ene^y had not casten
up so high a Tr^nch about both, to the batt^ring, defacing, and d^stroying of
both. But that God had left us a remenant, as a nail in a sure place they had
become as dung, Our King and Our Princes being (and reckoned) among the
Gentiles, Lam. 29. Our Taberna^le took away, and our Priests despised. v. 6.
etc. How much better the old and sober Egyptians, whose King in the morning
being to repair to the Temple and Sacrifice, after his Offering, the chief
Prelate told the People what virtues were in the King, what Religion toward the
gods; and after other such like Doctrine, all went about their affairs, and why
not? For, what could hinder prosperity and peace, when Kings respected
Churchmen, and Churchmen honored Kings, and both in sig^t of the People? R.
B. Let me say in the words of our Master, to that Question about Neighborhood
(lest we fall amongst Thieves) go and do ye likewise, Luke 10. 37. remembering
that in Rebellion Zadok and all the Levites chused to follow David, both in
Person and in Counsel, 2 Samuel 15. 29.

These two are not only lovely in their lives, but in their deaths, they are
not divided: for, look after the Monuments of Judahs Princes, see the
Sepulchers of the Sons of David, and you shall see in the throng, a Son of
Aaron, a Divine, chapla^nizing in Death to those dead Hero's, as if these
goodly Worthies were not honored sufficiently by their curious Dormitories,
until the dust of a Priest graced their sleep, they served the same God
Jehojadah did, they did much good to the Kingdom, so did Jehojadah, they died
as he, so did he as they; they lie in state, and lamented by the people; so
does he, and so was he, keeping the Churches privilege, always being near the
King, 2 Chapter 24. 16. whereas one King Jehojakim, is cast forth with the burial
of an Ass^, for despising the Lords Priests, c^v^a^ing all against
disrespecting of the Lords House, wherein by both, Honor unto both, is to be
upheld, or both will be contemned.

At Augustine the Monks first coming to England, the King of Kent, the first
Christian King Ethelbert, gave him liberty to build o^ repair Houses for
Christian Worship: in process of time, being made Archbishop of Canterbury, He
and the King; He the first Christian King in the world, He the first
Archbishop of B^itain, lived so in Honor and Love, and Plenty together, that
after leave given, the Bishop builded a Monastry, yet called Augustins, for a
burial-place to the Kings, and for the Archbishops of that See: Let none look
with an evil eye upon this n^ar^esse, but rather thank the Archbishop: for
until his time, and until this Act, the Kings themselves had no care for, nor
had, that is read of, any certain burial place, but afterward had, walled about
with the Reverend Clergy, forming a greater awe in those who presumed to tread
the ground where their Civil and Spiritual Guides lay by mutual consent: for,
question not the Kings pleasure therein, he giving it, as it is in the Charter,
D^o, in horem S. Petri, aliquam partem Terrae juris mei, etc. And being a Royal
Sepulcher, a Reverend Channel ground, Ex authoritate s^il. Apostolica, and hinc
ad aeternam-glor^am resuscit and a, etc. whence their bodies might arise
together to that heavenly glory, whereunto they by their Bishops were exhorted
all this about, Ann^ Dom. 6^0.

It is evident that God thus marshalling Moses and Aaron in their several
Offices, had c^re to protect the we^kest side, with strongest Walls and Bars:
for since Aaron the Elder Brother ha^ the Sword took out of his h^^d^y D^cree,
and in stead thereof, ge^ting a S^crifi^ing knife; yet observe it, that knife
is put into his hand by a (...) statu^e, and to the house of Aaron, wh^reas
Moses Sword, able in a great measure, to defend it self, is left in the hand of
Providence to fi^d out th^s and that Josu^h, th^s and that Sampson, this and
that Sam^^l. The unce^tainty whereof, creats genuinly a Reveren^e to the
certain and constant Priesthood, the only great secure way, the Sword has, a
Moses has, even now to keep it self long, in his, and his Sons hands for its
honorable bearing, As is visible all the days of Moses, Joshuah and the
Judges, where so^etimes in an Extraordinary way, the Judge is Priest, but at
the Unction of the Son of Jesse, the Regal Power being se^led in a Family, and
Thrones of Judgeme^t* set for the house of David, Psalm. 122. then it was,
Bless the Lord, O House of Isra^l; Bless the Lord, O house of Aaron, Bless the
Lord, O house of Levi, Psalm. 139. These running by Law assunder, yet together, I
mean, David and Aaron near each other, smiling and j^yning hands together, both
having the same enemies, the same smiles of Providence, they march parallel
together, until again as at the first, they meet in the first begotten of the
Father, in that Son of David, Jesus Christ, both King and Priest unto his
Church, and by Birthright, and Blood, that is in respect of his Humane Nature;
allieed both to Moses and Aaron, being a Branch of the two great Houses of
Judah and Levi. The Holy Virgin Mary, being of the House of David, and her
godly Cousin Elizabeth, of the Levitical Tribe: Thence it comes, that who o
despises one of those Loyal Levits, and rebelleth against any of these true
Princes, are proclaimed Enemies to both Families, united in the Cornerstone of
our blessed Savior. Upon which account it is, that Rebels and Traitors,
usually pretend both good to Church and State to be thought good Christians,
and also true Subjects.

Be wise therefore, O Kings, Be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, Take not too
much upon you, ye Sons of Levi; (...) Judges, when ascending the Judgment
Seat, become like Melchisedet, having neither Father nor Mother by
Impartiality, and let all Aarons Sons, as true L^vits in the case of the Golden
Calf, become like the Sons of that Priest, their Grandfather; Saying to their
Fathers and their Mothers, I have not seen them, when countenancing Rebellion,
Deuteronomy. 33. 9. For unless your Children use this Speech in the Land and Cities of
our Judah, The Lord bless thee, O Habitation of Justice, that is to you, R. H.
Your Council-house, Your Session-house, and M^untain of Holiness, that is, R.
R. Our Churches and Our Pulpits, Jer. 31. 23. Peace shall be far from us.

What is that Man's Name, and what is his Sons Name? that ever defaced the
Church, by pulling out but one stone, and not either his Eyes blinded with the
dust thereof, or his Arm crushed with the violence of the pluck? Where lives
he, and where was he born, that ever weighed the Sacred Anchor of the Churches
Authority, and at the same time kept the Ship of the State, from being driven
by contrary Tides, to his own Amazement, Disgrace or Ruin? And again, where is
that Priest, or how came he to prosper, that joined in a Conspiracy against his
David, and the Highway to the Temple did not mourn? For if once the Guard of
Love and Reverence be forced from the Hearts of Subjects, from their Princes,
it is not our Gowns that can give protection to our Bibles: and on the other
hand, Zerubbabel must have, and must not want his Josua, Hag. 1.

This, R. H. is not to compel you to respect your own Ministry, your care for
us, and love to us, being highly Eminent and Honorable: To requite which, and
fit all to conformable behavior to their Magistrates, Let us, R. R. eye our
Father Aaron, and in him we have every thing advisable. 1. His Name, giving
Instruction. 2. His Office, Direction. 3. His failings, Caution.

1. His Name offers Instruction. It was said, Nabal is his Name, and Folly is
with him, we say, Aaron is his Name, and Learning is with him: Some will have
it from the Hebrew, Aron, to signify an Ark or Chest; such an one as he
himself kept the Law in, and brought it out thence to teach it to the people:
Some from Haron, signifieing to cast or throw Darts, which Morally a Preacher
does, pierceing both the Ears and Hearts of the Teached, his Hearers: Some from
Har, a Mountain; it is all one. This we learn, that a Son of Aaron, should
Immoveably be fixed upon his Calling, having his Breast full of the Law, that
his peoples Hearts may be touched, as pricked, while he opens to them the
Scriptures.

Indeed the faithful Shepherd will in choice consider, what pastorage to lead
his Flock unto, to call up dead heresies, to improve not understood Texts, or
dark, and seemingly to us disjoynted Scriptures; as the manner was in our late
conspiracy, between Ruben and Corah in their Rebellion; as the shutting up of
the Gates of Abel against King David's Army, as David's flying up and down with
an ^rmy from Saul, (for he never fought him) and heating them into Treason
apparent, from Uzzahs being opposed, and thrust from the Temple, when a Leper:
Is to make a half penny-Box of their bosom, to contain some shreds, rather then
a chest to contain the whole Volumn of the Law. Magistrates are said to be
Heads, and the Ministry, to be the Eyes of the Church: And if her Eyes choose
not the good old, and true way of obedience to Higher Powers, (without which no
Subjection unto GOD) of love to all men, they may in time be blood-shot. And I
could wish, that our Clergy study and pray to be free of that infirmity, it
being the Nefarium Crimen of some that has been before us.

A Son of Aaron, is a Steward in the Palace of one greater then Moses, yet
under Moses; and if Food wholesome be not presented, he himself shall be
infected with the common, if not a worse disease; I will not grate your Ears
with Controversies, but it is clearer then Interest can cloud, that if Abiathar
prove disloyal, he may be removed from the Altar. The Key of the Wine-cellers
taken from him that offers bitter water, is such a piece of Justice, as must be
in a Kingdom, or it shall rave upon the bed of Fevers and Distempers: And some
more mad therein fly in the face of that unworthy Trustee, making him sick by
smiting. What event our late Rebellious Teaching had in Murder, Adultery,
Swearing, Drunkenness, and all kind of Riot, what contempt of the Gospel, and
of Gospel Ministry, that is, themselves, I leave to the iniquity of their own
Fasts and Causes of Humiliation they observed; God seeming to^take revenge upon
the Pulpit, for its treacherous extravagancies, in those days of Lying,
Conspiracy and Rebellion. But then, Brethren, shall we not be ashamed, when we
have respect to all GODS Commandments, then and not before, Shall we be truly
of the House of Aaron, and Blessed of the People.

There are some things in the Law, such as G^nealogies, these are wearisome,
unless modestly and without heat they be handled, they are profitlesse too;
There are some things like Law, or given out as Law, such as old wives fables,
minched Scriptures, such things as are in no Sacred Ark, but purely treasured
up by old Fabulous Tradition, such passages as are neither commended nor
disaproved in holy Writ. Rome makes use of ridiculous fancies of Visions and
Miracles, and some noticed so much that doubtful act of shutting the gates of
Abel upon Joab, that they preached therefrom, absolute field Disloyalty;
Neither of these we understand, yet this we do, that Aaron first sacrificed for
himself, then for the People, lifting up his hand the first day of his
Priesthood, Blessing the Congregation, Levit. 9. 22. This that we understand
let us do, letting the f^ble lie at the old wifs door where we found it, and
Genealogy in Gods Record (when it comes to contention) until he clear it and
not press the shutting up of Abels gates, until it be approved.

2. His Office gives Direction: He was appointed, 1. To instruct the People
from God, 2. To mediat for the People with God. After Abirams conspiracy, Moses
commanded Aaron to offer Incense, which he did, standing betwixt the Living and
the dead, and the Plague was stayed, Numb. 16. 48. The like yet should his Sons
do, saying spare thy People, O Lord, and give not they Heritage to spoil, and
again, That the Covenant with Levi of Life and Peace, might turn away many from
their iniquity, that the people seeking the Law from their mouth, might not
stumble out of the way Mal. 2. 6. In this Office observe, 1. His Station, 2.
His Modesty. 3. His Apparel.

1. His Station; He was by birth Moses Elder and so his Superior, but when
Priest, Moses goes foremost, Aaron peaceably coming behind, being content to
sit in any Chair, high or low, armed or not, which God sets in for him; He
is the Chief Churchman and is under Authority, receives orders from Moses,
delivering these again to Priests inferior unto himself. The Method God has
established in his Camp, or his Church, had never been Terrible as an Army with
Banners: And who so is for a parity, with Corah and Abiram, may molest the
Church, but themselves shall perish inevitably, Jud. II. And those Countries,
wherein Imparity is settled, if it can be settled: mark it. 1. If Moses be not
too much slighted. 2. Observe if the Church be very beautiful. 3. If the
Manners of the people be of a taking Behavior, for walking not successively,
not in that orderly March under Moses and Aaron, as instituted here in Gods
first National Church.

The Cedars of the Church were never alike high, No^h's Ark was of three
stories, Genesis 6. 16. and David had a chief Musician: yea, let us see that Church
in Scripture, that had a Parity, and it shall be from that we have already
called, a disjoynted, or not understood Text, Imparity being in the whole body
of Holy History so visible as it self: And notwithstanding of that frivolous
distinction Diotrophes makes, (angry because he has not the Pre-eminence)
that there was no Apostle over an Apostle, nor Disciple over a D^sciple, nor
Pastor over a Pastor; yet was Christ over the first, the second was over the
third, the third was over a fourth, that is the Deacon. At our Lords Ascension,
the Apostles indeed had none over them, nor needed they, 1. Having the
infallible Spirit to direct them for keeping rank. 2. Being to scatter, for
converting of the Nations and therefore Superior to Disciples, and Pastors, and
therefore the Reply is eas^e since there was Imparity established, there needed
no Imparity to be established.

The Romans had of old their Pontifices Majores, their Minor^s Pontifices: So
had the Jews, so had the old Christians, and these new Rabbys of Parity, were
known over their ^r^thren to be greatest Ad^rers of Imparity, being bound by
Prudence, and Necessity to uphold Imparity, to defend their Parity If not,
(...) confounded them at first, as it did at last: Why (...) first it
confounded the Authority of their Royal Moses, and because of that, themselves
could be in no good order. To prevent Insurrection again, let Moses be under
God, Aaron under Moses, Levits under Aaron, or the Glory of our Israel shall
depart by the breaking in of the plague of War to the destruction of Moses, and
all the Princes and all our Tribes, for what is Aaron, that you murmur against
him?

2. His Modesty is graceful, Not only content with his portion, but took
Reproofs without passion, Eloquent though he was with admirable Meekness, yea
to the silencing of Moses to see a Gospel Incendiary, to hear a Factious
Preacher rail at Moses, or at his Father in Law to his face, is a thing we
have heard of, and read of, but an action to be accursed, favoring not of that
Compassion, and Tenderness, with which to the basest of the people, public
reproofs are to be applied. Withal Luther advised a Minister, to forbear taking
three dogs after him to the pulpit, (viz.) Pride, Avarice, and Contention: let
me add, they are so far unfit to run after him to Church, that they are not
worthy to be suffered lick a dish in his kitchine, and therefore improper for a
Synod, or a Chapter House, John the Baptist's Reproof to Herod, and Nathans
censuring of David, was by some James`s and John`s in their thundering spirits,
made use of for upbrading Kings in public before their people, for geting the
privacy of both, the parable of the one, and incest of the other. Neither did
Micajah go forbid the Army to follow Achab, nor John the Soldiers to be
commanded by Herod nor went Nathan to the people proclaiming David's Adultery.
But pardon this Digression, we are to speak of the Sons of Aaron, not of Abiram.

3. His Apparel. I shall neither here act the Jew, nor the Superstitious; for as
no holiness is to be placed in Apparel, so let no profaneness be pitched
upon, because of a Coat. Yet there is (Let Ignorance, Wilf^lness, or Malice
say, wh^^ they will) something in a Church-mans habit. And though in the
Mystery, Aarons Habits typified Christ, yet in the History it represented the
High Priest to be himself.

Let us first see his Breast Plate, and it is of Judgment, Ex. 28. 15. putting
it one when he was to consult with GOD, and in it there is an order, a comely
Quadrat, teaching us judiciously to keep our ranks; The four-squardness
thereof, signifying the Satability and Firmness we should observe in that
Higher, in that Lower place we are set; Pride was anciently painted with three
Crowns, each having a proper Device, the first Transcendo, I am most excellent,
the next was, Non obedio, I will not be commanded, the third was, Perturbo, I
will Fight; But the Sons of Aaron must remember and vail their Bonn^ts, And do
as the Lord commanded them by the hands of Moses, Levit. 8. 36.

This may mind us of their Coats and Girdles, wherewith they were girded,
which the Lord commanded in his service, they were to use; the one being
Decency in Clothing and Unity, the other signified Readiness and Promptness
for Action. Do not imagine it to be curious, if I speak of Clerical habits, fit
to indicat a Churchman, and such may teach us, who of late years, denied in
this sense their Coat, and could hardly be known for Churchmen; even when
preaching, from somewhat that was seen, heard and done; Providence or Guilt not
giving them the heart to wear that upon their back, which they denied in their
Sermons, being Sons of Thunder and Lightning: And as touching, the Girdle, it
was discernable, the signification of it being fixedness and promptness, worn
by Aarons Sons for Truth, and about their Loins for chastity; and as Knowledge
grew by the appearance of Christ, it came up higher toward the Heart for Love,
where Christ wore it himself, Rev. 1. 13. I say, for the Girdle, the laying of
it aside, was but a presage of thrusting from them the virtue it signified,
running hither and thither, never fixing upon one thing, save in pulling down,
at which work in place of a Girdle, they moraly wore somewhat that caused
Sweat, (I might say, a Bloody Sweat) contrary to Law, Ezekiel. 44. 18.

I know, Inconstancy is laid to the charge of some of the Sons of Corah,
because forsooth, being once ensnared by Ruben's policy, to get the Government,
and Corah's Ambition, to get the Priesthood, freed themselves afterward by
leaving the Rebels, before they were swallowed, or as soon as they could, and
therefore admitted again to serve in the Temple, with their Coats and Girdles.
^o accuse such is equally rational, as to accuse a Jew Paul, for becoming a Jew
Christian, or a beguiled Man, accepting a Counter for a piece of true Gold,
afterward returns it for a Trick, or those simple hearted Israelites, who for
a time followed Absalom, and then returned to their Allegiance again. In the
mean time these Complainers were the greatest Changers, and Changelings in
their Age, with this difference perhaps, that whereas, some changed from good
to ill, and some from indifferency to naught: Their change was from good to
ill, from ill to worse, and so held on until Providence made their Folly to
appear to such who went on in changing with them, who confessing their Error,
are now by them constant in mischief, called Turn-coats.

Let this mind you of that Proverb of the three great Travels, and Labors in
the world. 1. Of a Woman in a Childbirth, which is great. 2. of a Magistrate
for a Cities good, which is greater. 3. Of a Minister for his peoples Benefit,
this is the greatest, in regard it may be most opposed by hands and tongues.
Yet go on, R. R. and prosper, many have labored in Sword and Fire, and would
have others do so, to eschew the Method such walked in, and let me advise you,
and (let none despise my youth) to labor in your own Vineyard. It is a fine
saying, that there are three things necessary for a Preacher. 1. Knowledge,
noted in the book sent to Ezekiel, 2 Eloquence, in the hot coal that purged
Isaiah. 3. ^olinesse of life, in the hand sent to Jeremiah wanting Utterance,
he is an Insant; Wanting Holiness, he is a Devil, whose great Employment is
going too and froe, making Division, and stirring up medlers in other men's
business, for strife and debate,

Aarons Linen garment, by some Moralizing, signified Purity, his Breeches
Chastity, his Shoulder-pieces, Strength, the Purple in his Robe, Patience, the
Scarlet, Love, the Blew, Heavens Contemplation, the Gold, Wisdom with
Discretion; the Miter, Devotion, and his Plate, Reverence to God, his Bells and
Pomgranats, Prayer and good Works.

Now how unsuteable is such clothing for the assisting at the making of a
golden Calf. How unfit is it in our Saviors eye to wash his Apostles feet (a
servile office) with his upper Garment (a Teachers Habit?) Let Us therefore
follow our Father in these his Perfections, leaving our virtue an Inheritance
to our Posterity, I mean his Sons. I might urge our Savior, whose name is writ
upon his Thigh, declaring he has a posterity by lawful ordination, begotten by
himself, whose White garments are not to be stained with the ink, or soil of
beastly conversation, and whose Girdle is not to be loosed by following each
fond principle or nice opinion, neglecting the greater matters of the Law. Let
therefore your Priestly Office, your Ministerial Habits, mind you of your
Pedigree, and endeavor Sempiternally to mind your Sacerdotal Descent.

To come to fancy: In Vtopia, the Prince is said to be known in the Streets by
nothing, but by a little sheave of corn carried before him, and the Bishop by a
^aper of wax, Imagination concluding, they ought to be known who are Guids, and
Lights to the people, and this use, except in our unhappy age, we may deduce
therefrom, that as in the Kingdom of Israel, their six Cities of Refuge
sheltred (...), from all ports, yet three of them were poss^ssed by the Levits,
in the little spot beyond Jordan, that the flo^k in the smalest Items of
danger, as knowing us their Shepherds afar off, might run for Gospel
Consolation, assuring themselves thereof, by venerable clothing.

There were three famous men and worthy in the Congregation, Moses, and he had
his Rod, Aaron: he (...) Samuel, and he had his Coat: clearing an expe^ienc^ of
some extern^l thing, signifying their Office and Calling.

But who has believed our Report? for though in this, we lift up our voice as
a Trumpet, we cannot persuade some otherwise resolved to confess this
irregular, That Churchmen should not be Church-like, and yet would be angry,
if the Bible were bound up in the fashion of a Song-book, or a Pulpi made in
the form of a Fiddle; yet themselves walk as Ministrels; that is, not as
Ministers in the Streets: But to such who refuses Aaron's, I shall only wish
them Adam's Girdle that a covering of Fig Leaves may conceal their shame, that
it be not exposed to the mockery of their Order, and Office in others, more
true and faithful to their Colors. For, 3. His failing^, gives Caution. It is
not intended to pry into each Punctilio of escape, whereof Aaron might be
guilty, leaving that Office to him, who accuses the Brethren: And even Moses,
spoke unadvisedly with his lips. But I shall mention such as were more
sc^ndalous, and to which he was provoked, 1. By Men. 2. B^ Woman.

1. By Men. This was occasioned by Moses absence, and it was a beastly mistake
for fearing the people; he melted Metal, and framed a Golden Calf, and gave to
Moses a leaden excuse for so doing; And I said (said he) Whosoever has any
Gold, let them break it off, and they gave it me; then I cast it into the Fire,
and there came out this calf, as if there had never come a graven Tool upon it,
but as the figured Calf had come by Chance, by Miracle, by he knew not which
way, Exodus 32. 24.

Indeed the Churches weakness in Moses's absence, when the Magistrate is not
present, has many dangerous Symptoms of a Decay, which should make both Moses
diligent in attending his Charge; and Aaron Courageous, if Rebellion it self
should divert a Magistrate, it is never well with the Temple of Jerusalem, when
the Gates of the City are not watched; not with the City, when the way to the
Temple mourns. Make this Question in the worst of times, Whom should the Priest
of the moct High GOD please? GOD or the People? If GOD, why then will he make a
Golden Calf to please them? if the People, why do ye call your selves Gods
Priests? In short, not desiring to rub old fores, and being obliged to protest
against future evils, we have too many Calves of the people made among us, and
therefore there is cause to fear the Wolves of the Evening for a punishment be
commissioned to devour, and destroy.

I have long ago half adored that Expression of a most Reverend Father, when
cast into the Furnace of popular fury, in our late War, in his own Funeral
Sermon, before Malice and the Axe had cut off his head, Nor shall I worship the
Imaginations, which the people are setting up, nor will I forsake the Temple
and the Truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboam's Calves, in Dan and in
Bethel, etc. But not to pursue the Metaphore, in hardest Seasons; let us have
recourse to Bethphage, a Village of Priests, signifying D^m^s Buc^ae,
Trumpeting, to encourage each other, and not be made to blush by frivolous,
because senseless Excuses, from fear of the People. For if we please Men, we
shall not be the Servants of Christ. But the second is more base, because it was,

2. By a Woman. Miriam Moses's Sister fell quite out with Moses's Wife, her
Sister in Law, and what in Gods Name had Aaron to do, to interest himself in
either, except to agree them? Yet this is somewhat Honorable, that he is not
the beginner of the plea; For it is said Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses,
because of the Ethiopian woman he had married; not the Ethiopia in Africa, but
a Country, bo^dering upon the Red Sea, and the same which is called Midian. It
was an old fault, if any, and newly riped up by Miriam, who being first named,
seems to have led on Aaron in a surprise, she being punished with Leprosy
for persevering: Aaron quickly repents, or was at first Cool in the business,
and therefore is not plagued.

Every man is free to conjecture the cause of the complaint, since it is
mantled about and covered, I am prone to think the two Ladys strove for place,
Miriam it may be was elder, and so would not lose her place though Aaron the
Elder Brother quite his; It may be she was Fairer and more Stately, but indeed
me thinks says Miriam, I being a prophetess, born within the Covenant of God,
should have place of a Midianitish Proselyte, etc. Yet whatever was the cause,
it was unluky, and neither by Moses nor Aaron, was the Campled for seven days,
Numb. 12. 15.

How closely could this to the shame of many of the Holy Order, and Sacred
Function be pressed, whose base Inadvertence, whose fetid, and sordid behavior,
has occasioned great bre^ches in our State and Church. Authority by taking
part with the home spoon quarrels of the other sex? Our Miriams could do little
excep^ scold, if Aarons did not join with them: But this is confusion, that
Aarons Sons should stir up Active, Furious, Superstitious, Ignorant Woman to
speak against Moses and Aaron, and that in things relating to the Tabernacle,
Pudet hac Opprobria nobis, etc. And what a miserable hinderance this has been
to the Camp? How Scandalous to our Religion? I leave to my Elders: Adding, that
our preaching work is a work, Angels would account themselves honored, if
authorized unto; But man, who is more Masculine; shall I say, more Divine, then
a Daughter of Evah must stay his hand; until he fight both against Moses and
Aaron, because of a Pick some Dame has took against his Brother, or his
Brothers Wife. Her Name had bitterness in it, for its Mara, and bitter was it
here to Aaron. It is (...) Star of Wormwood in the Firmament of our Nation, and
so much the more bitter, that this Example with her punishment does not edify.

Do not smile, if I once more suggest, what may be the ground of this Quarrel
(to pass other causes given as more unlike) It might be Mose's wife went too
too fine, and Miriam thinks Moses should not lead the people with his hands
only, but also with his Wifs Petti-coat: And may be Aaron concluds and assents,
She goes too too light, for one of her Age and Place, Though I will not make
Oath upon this, sure we are to invert the story; that the fine Clothes of the
Highpriests Relations, I mean, the Decency of any Habit in a Church Man's
Family is an Eyesore to many Prophetesses in the Land: And some Sons of Aaron
closes to the Motion, and with mock-finger, proves that a piece of good Cloth
(to pass Silk) is too rich for a Churchman, when the same Reformer will allow
it upon a Trades-mans back. But mark the progress of Sacrilege; This Age has
found a way to cure the prodigality of the Church, there being little left her
but Clothes, and that to some few; and these also many would have made Courser.
But, let me assure all Aarons Sons, that when the Coat is taken away, Miriam
and that other Saint will wear it on their own Backs. And for all the
Youngsters ranting, (for confirmation of his own Doctrine, of Church-mens grave
Clothing) he shall walk the streets in Querpo: and court them in a Bare-coat,
or pray without a Cushon.

Experience of these things ought to make the Priesthood wise, and not to
disturb the Flock, or complain against Moses for such trifling. And the shame
and Horror committed in such Rapes upon Aaron, ought to make us more warry in
our Carriage; Friendly in our Places, Charitable to our Brethren, more
Gratefully toward GOD; and more Loyally toward Moses; by whose Authority, the
Priest is yet kept from being absolutely naked, and more obediently toward
Aaron. The Corah like resisting of whom, I mean Church Officers, hinders the
Camp more then all the Amalekits or Papists that are about us; according to
that Proverb of our Neighbor Nation: Tell not me of the Turk and Pope, it is
my Neig^bour does me wrong, etc.

The Word of GOD is divided in two parts. One is, the Old Testament; that is,
the Word of Promise. The other is* the New Testament; that is, the Word of
Accomplishment. These two agrees in one, and holds forth Christ; Moses and
Aaron here leads the People. These two agrees in one, in God, who led them by
their hands. And in the Unity of these, the Felicity of the Flock consists*
being without these, like Sheep without one shepherd, scattered by some
Faction, or a dicontented Corah, or a Miriam. Therefore, Charles the ninth of
France, in a Medal, gave his Crown above two pillars; intertwisted with this
devise, Pietate and Justitia. It Is Church and State upholds my Crown. The Motto
then, or Devise of the Tables, this day hung forth, ought to be that of the
beloved Disciple; Let us love one another.

I say one another, for you the people, being the Flock, are not to tempt your
Shepherds, your Wardens, your Guids, your Mose's, your Aaron's, your Magistrates
and Ministers, with grumbling, though ye be led through the wilderness, and
want Bread and water. Complain not of these two: It is God, not they that has
the Gift of Riches, or of Poverty, that can straiten and enlarge your Quarters;
Give you food convenient, or no food; or, Make your Cup run over. Yet for
obtaining the best of his Blessings, the favorable Cloud of his Presence, to
keep you from the Destroyer, to preserve you from the Scorpion tongues of them
that hate you: And after all windings, turnings, changes and vicissitudes of
Providence, to arrive at the promised Land of future rest and glory. The
securest and most effectual mean, is ^earing Moses, and reverencing Aaron.

In that dreadful Conflagration at Rome, in the days of Commodus; when Templum
pacis, and the Vestal Fane were burned: The Sacred Virgins (brought till then
unseen) through the open holy street, Pal^as or their Palladium into the
Emperors Palace: That as its Divinity (as they esteemed) had secured Majesty;
So in distress, Authority might succor its Divinity, that both might live or
die together. Say the same of the Crown and Pulpit, that the people may
reverence both; and each of these Honor and prove Thankful to the other.

This double Solemnity, or Meeting of these two happy Constellations in the
Orb of your City, (a delightful sight) by your praying to GOD for them; and
communing with GOD about them, may be the Foundation of one years journey;
which may refresh you as the Flock was, when led to Elim, a City of Palm Trees,
to the number of threescore and ten. The number of our Lords Disciples, and
where there was Twelve wells of water, The number of the Tribes and of the
Apostles, that both by Law and Gospel, by Justice and Peace: you be much helped
forward in your way. And for your selves, look down, R. H. and say to the Sons
of Aaron, in whose meeting you are concerned, as Boaz to his R^ap^rs. The Lord
be with you. And you, R. R. Look up, and say to Moses and his Elders: In whose
electing, you have Interest, with them again. The Lord bless thee: And I say to
Both, to All, what the Levits said in the Temple, The Lord that made the
Heavens and the Earth, Bless you all out of Zion, Psalm, 134 3.

FINIS.
At this time there was Elected for Magistrates.
Sir Andrew Ramsay. Lord Provost. Walter Borthwick. Bailies. Thomas Murray.
Robert Baird. James Justice.
Francis Kinlo^h. L. Dean of Guild. James Currie. L. Treasurer.

